Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 4 September 2008 .
( The sitting was opened at 5 p.m. )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Proclamation of 23 August as European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism - Combating the trafficking of children ( written declarations ) : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Statement by the President
Yesterday another murder was committed by the terrorist organisation ETA .
A 46-year-old army sergeant-major , Luis Conde de la Cruz , was killed by a car bomb in northern Spain .
This was the third car bomb to explode in Spain within 24 hours .
Several people were injured in the three blasts , one of them seriously .
The European Parliament strongly condemns this act of terrorism and wishes to express its deep concern .
On behalf of the European Parliament , may I express my sincere condolences to the family and relatives of Sergeant-Major Conde and our solidarity with Spain , its authorities and especially the Spanish security forces .
I would also like to express our support and deep sympathy to those who were injured in the bomb blasts and to their families .
We must reiterate time and again in no uncertain terms that terrorism is a direct attack on freedom , human rights and democracy .
We cannot repeat often enough that there is no justification whatsoever for terrorism .
For this reason we must act together in our fight against terrorism , always respecting the rule of law and applying the full force of the law .
The European Union is a community based on solidarity .
An act of terrorism in a member country of the European Union is an attack on the entire European Union , on every single one of us .
I now ask you all to rise for a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence . )
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for this part-session as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 18 September 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Monday , Tuesday and Thursday :
No amendments
Wednesday :
The Liberal Group has requested an extension of the deadline for the tabling of joint motions for resolutions and amendments on the priorities of the European Parliament for the legislative and work programme of the Commission until 10 a.m. tomorrow - Tuesday , 23 September 2008 .
The vote is scheduled for Wednesday , 24 September 2008 .
( DE ) Mr President , last weekend the Irish press revealed that there may be a link between those who funded the ' no ' campaign in Ireland and the Washington Pentagon and the CIA .
That was a very interesting story , the reason given being a desire to stop Europe becoming too strong .
I wish to ask the President to investigate the matter .
We should also ask the Council - the Council and the Commission - to provide us with information about this at the next opportunity , for it would certainly be interesting to find out the truth behind this whole shady ' no ' campaign in Ireland that received EUR 1.2 million in funding .
I therefore ask the President to pursue this matter so that we obtain information and uncover the background to this story .

Mr President , on a point of order , this concerns the agenda on Thursday where we made a late request - I am sorry it was late - it is a proposal to change slightly the agenda for Thursday where currently there is a vote proposed for the social package resolution .
At the moment , individual groups have tabled their own separate resolutions .
With the best will in the world and good faith on all parts we tried to negotiate collectively a compromise resolution .
We have not managed to do that , so at the moment what is likely is individual resolutions will be voted and each resolution would be voted down , which would not give a very good message .
Therefore , collectively the majority of political groups thought it was a good idea if I just stood up and made the case that perhaps it would be tactful not to have a vote at all on the resolution .
This is not because it is not important : it is because it is important .
We did not want to give the wrong message and it was better to give no message following the debate that we had , very fully covering the various points , last time .
So the proposal , supported by a majority of groups , is that we do not have a vote this Thursday .
We shall give some more thought to this matter .
May I ask the groups to get together again and see whether a solution can be found .
In the meantime , we shall take note of what Philip Bushill-Matthews has said .
( The order of business was thus established .. )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( RO ) The first European Summit on Roma integration took place last week right here in Brussels .
The inclusion of this complex issue , that of the Roma , on the EU agenda is an idea which Romania has constantly supported , and I believe it should be welcomed .
The Council of Europe , which has been concerned with this issue since 1990 , remarked that the Roma constitute a genuine European minority .
Therefore , the Roma issue is a European , not a national one , and I believe that the European Commission should have the Parliament 's full support for its initiative .
I believe that the European Parliament should speak in favour of placing education at the very core of the European policy concerning the Roma , because the experience of recent years has proven education to be the surest way towards integration and towards the successful overcoming of obstacles both by the Roma and by their neighbours .
( HU ) Mr President , today we are witness to a gross infringement of the ban on market discrimination on the part of German and Austrian supermarket chains that are boycotting the Hungarian poultry farming and processing industry .
This involves the REWE , SPAR , METRO and Kaufland supermarkets , which are not taking delivery of Hungarian products in the wake of a boycott by an Austrian animal rights organisation .
Consequently , this has caused a loss of 2 billion forints to the Hungarian poultry sector .
They are using racial discrimination against Hungarian products , and thus violating the European Union 's competition laws .
Those affected will therefore turn to the European Court of Justice , since two of the Union 's fundamental principles are being violated : the ban on racial discrimination , and equality and freedom of competition . Thank you for your attention .

( BG ) Mr President , esteemed colleagues , a National Emergency Call 112 System will go into operation in Bulgaria as from 30 September 2008 in implementation of Directive 2002 / 22 / EC of the European Parliament and of the Council .
The system will be dialable from any point of the national territory and will guarantee fast and free access to this service .
The technical solution of the Bulgarian 112 system uses state-of-the-art technologies and allows calling line identification .
Detailed information on the setting up and functioning of the system has been provided by the Bulgarian Ministry of Emergency Situations to all Members of the European Parliament .
I would like to express gratitude for the postponement of the infringement procedure and for the assessment given to the Bulgarian Government by the European Commission for the setting up of the emergency call system .
I view this assessment as an expression of the care that the Community takes of the safety and health of European citizens .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , events over the last week have made it a particularly sad and difficult week for those for whom liberty and racism are important issues : six migrants from various African countries were killed by the Camorra in Italy , last Thursday ; originally they were accused of being pushers and criminals , but that was then discovered to be completely untrue .
A black youth was also beaten to death in Milan .
At the same time , there was an incredible response in the city of Cologne to the same issues , to the issues of racism and discrimination .
I feel that Europe currently has two very different faces .
I also feel that this Parliament should start to take a much more active stance on the issue of racism than it has in recent times , since in many countries - including mine - racism is making an extremely tragic comeback !
Thank you .
Every human being has equal dignity .
Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of the 4.6 million people in Ethiopia who are facing starvation because of acute food shortages .
This has come about because of drought .
The Ethiopian Government is saying that it is not a famine , but UNICEF is saying that there is famine in certain parts of the country and people are at acute risk of famine .
It is only happening in certain areas , and I believe that the international community and the EU must act quickly and try to supply about half a million tonnes of food if we are to avoid a complete famine .
I think this is a priority and , as the European Union is one of the biggest contributors to overseas development aid , I think it is absolutely essential that we do this immediately .
Mr President , let me just say that , as an Irish Member , I agree with the comments you have made about Libertas and the Irish referendum .
We fought for a ' yes ' campaign ; we were open and transparent about our funding .
Libertas told us one thing , and now we have discovered it is very different .
I want to encourage you and everybody to ensure that Libertas is far more open and transparent in terms of where exactly the money came from , because people want to know .
Mr President , while European Central Bank President , Jean Claude Trichet , has repeatedly expressed concern about inflation indexation of wages , he has failed to take into account the plight of workers , particularly the low-paid , struggling as the cost of living escalates .
And , while ensuring that interventions have a minimal inflationary impact , wage increases are needed for low-paid workers , who are now under severe pressure .
Curbing inflation across Europe cannot be boiled down to curbing legitimate wage demands .
While , of course , those on higher wages can afford to exercise wage moderation , the lower-paid are a different matter .
Domestic government and national central banks are best placed to respond to changing economic circumstances , and that is why I have always opposed measures that have undermined economic sovereignty .
Indeed , as a small state , Ireland is well aware that our economic situation is peripheral to the policy-making concerns of the ECB and that , therefore , the positions often adopted by the Bank are not always in the bests needs or interests of the Irish economy .
I too favour transparency in funding .
I also favour respect for democratic outcomes , and this body should note that all of the campaigns that fought and won the argument for a ' no ' vote , with the exception of one , have published full and frank accounts , and there is no question as regards the mechanisms of spending or the funds that those groups , including my own party , received .
Mr President , we vote tomorrow on a report that appears to limit the immunity of Europol officials , but is a smokescreen for future legislation that will actually extend this until after 2010 .
There is no debate .
The vote is merely a consultative exercise .
The decision will be made by the European Council .
Europol officials will be able to operate in Member States in a wide variety of capacities that will give them immunity for anything that they do and anything that they say in the course of their duties - a privilege not even enjoyed by the NKVD under Stalin 's ' Great Terror ' .
This will be an innovation in England , where no public official has immunity from prosecution .
Under the Lisbon Treaty , Member States ' parliaments will not be able to block the further extension of Europol 's powers , amended by Council decisions .
These are the first steps in the creation of a European Union police state .
( NL ) Mr President , I urge you to enter a formal protest to the Mayor of Cologne about his refusal last weekend to allow MEPs and other elected persons to express their views peacefully and attend a congress on an important social and political issue , namely the islamisation of Europe .
Leftist extremists physically attacked people , set fire to items of street furniture and brought the entire city centre to a standstill in their determination to prevent people from attending a peaceful congress .
Mayor Schramme not only declined to condemn this violence and intimidation , he applauded it and went as far as to imply that it was the people of Cologne who had spontaneously opposed the holding of a congress .
There were plenty of witnesses to this , and it is disgraceful that such things can still happen today in a country that calls itself a democracy , that people are forcibly prevented from speaking out .
Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of the travel ban imposed by Belarus , which prevents children affected by the Chernobyl nuclear disaster from travelling abroad .
Over 1 000 Irish families host these Belarusian children in their homes every summer and Christmas for rest and recuperation , which often includes medical assessment and , in some cases , treatment .
There is a bilateral agreement between Italy and Belarus , which means that Italy is not affected by the ban .
I know that the Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs is seeking an agreement with Belarus and I welcome the discussions that are taking place .
I would also underline the need for an EU-Belarus agreement .
Under the European neighbourhood policy , the EU will provide Belarus with financial aid to the tune of EUR 20 million for the period 2007-2010 .
The EU should make a reversal of the travel ban a condition for receipt of that funding .
An EU-Belarus agreement should also be created to allow Belarusian children to continue to travel to EU countries for rest and recuperation .
This would secure the rights of children to travel in the long term .
( ES ) Mr President , the United Nations regards trafficking in persons as incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human being ; nonetheless , every year over half a million people are victims of trafficking , of whom 80 % are women and girls , half are minors and the majority are prisoners of sexual exploitation .
Furthermore , a significant number of women who are victims of trafficking enter the European Union every year , according to the International Organization for Migration .
Tomorrow , 23 September , is the International Day Against the Sexual Exploitation and Trafficking of Women .
I believe it is a good opportunity for us in this Chamber to commit to enhancing all measures to combat this scourge which infringes the rights of so many people and in particular to combat the traffickers , and poverty , by providing improvements to increase educational and employment opportunities and by implementing awareness-raising strategies in the countries of destination with the aim of making the issue the topic of public debate .
( DE ) Mr President , as a trade unionist , I want to speak today about the tragic events at the shipyards in the Tuzla district of Istanbul .
In the last three years alone , more than 90 workers have lost their lives in Tuzla , victims of lethally harsh working conditions .
The most recent occurrence was a tragic accident on 11 August that I would describe as criminal .
Three temporary workers died while testing a lifeboat , and 16 workers were injured .
As the dinghy was being lowered from its ship , the lines snapped , and the workers were sent plummeting into the water .
The particularly tragic thing about this accident is that these tests are normally conducted with sandbags .
The workers were used as human sandbags , so to speak .
Workers who wanted to strike in protest at the calamitous safety arrangements were threatened by subcontracting companies with instant dismissal .
The Commission has already pointed out , in its progress report in 2006 , that the rights of workers and trade unions are inadequate in Turkey .
I therefore ask you to urge the Turkish authorities to treat trade unions as equal partners of industry and to act at long last to create humane working conditions and stricter safety guidelines for the Tuzla workforce in order to put an end to this appalling state of affairs .
Mr President , the foundation of the EU rests on the principle of representative democracy .
We as members of the European Parliament have a duty to make sure that Europe 's policies reflect the will of citizens .
Therefore I wish to express the wariness caused by the ever-increasing number of GMO authorisations , and when I do this I speak on behalf of the majority of the citizens of the European Union .
A Eurobarometer published in March of this year indicates that 58 % of Europeans are against GMOs .
Over a third of them consider that they are not being properly informed of the benefits and risk of GMO usage in agriculture .
These figures should worry us .
Instead , the Commission continues authorising an ever-increasing number of GMOs to enter the EU agricultural market .
The 8 September authorisation of another genetically-modified soya bean is but the latest example .
Esteemed colleagues , in consideration of these facts I suggest we ask the Commission to start an EU-wide information campaign on the risks and benefits that GMO represent to people and the environment .
A new assessment should follow .
Until the citizens of Europe are properly informed and express their position on this very sensitive subject , I am asking the Commission to stop authorising any new GMOs .
( DE ) Mr President , the main pillars of the EU - democracy , human rights , freedom and the rule of law - must be the basis of the new partnership agreement with Russia .
Russia 's conduct in Georgia has shown us again that it is not prepared to respect the rule of law and international agreements under Dmitry Medvedev either .
The six-point plan for Georgia calls for the restoration of the situation that obtained on 7 August .
This entails the withdrawal of the Russian forces to the lines they held prior to the outbreak of hostilities in South Ossetia , and not the deployment of an additional contingent of 3 800 troops .
Moreover , human rights are being trodden underfoot .
The situation of political prisoners is intolerable , as the case of Mikhail Khodorkovski demonstrates .
The same applies to non-compliance with the Energy Charter , by which Russia , as one of the signatories , should be bound .
( PL ) Mr President , pogroms of Christians , incited by Hindu fundamentalists , are taking place in India .
This is connected with the murder of a Hindu leader , a crime that the police blame on Maoists .
Christian settlements and schools are being set on fire .
The fundamentalist Hindus are blaming Christians for this murder , without just cause .
In Orissa over 40 000 Christians have taken refuge in the jungle .
About 15 000 are living in refugee camps under police protection .
More than 20 people have been murdered .
In the villages of Tangia and Rupagaon Christians were burnt to death in their houses .
At least 8 people were killed in the Kandhamal area .
At least 10 churches have been burnt down .
Archbishop Vincent Concessao of the Delhi diocese believes that more effective measures need to be taken to quell the violence .
The local authorities are not taking the steps required .
Hatred of Christianity should be countered in the same way as other extreme forms of intolerance .
( PT ) Mr President , António Guerreiro , Fernando González , Gerardo Hernández , Ramón Labañino and René González , five Cuban nationals who merely defended their homeland and their fellow countrymen to ensure that they ceased to be victims of terrorist acts promoted and organised by Miami-based groups , have been unjustly imprisoned in the United States since 12 September 1998 , almost 10 years ago .
During those ten years these five Cuban nationals have been subjected to countless unlawful situations , unacceptable and inhuman punishments , pressure , blackmail and violations of the most basic human rights , such as the US administration 's imposition of cruel obstacles and restrictions on visits by their families .
Elizabeth Palmeiros , Ramón Labañino 's wife , has been waiting over two years for a visa .
António Guerreiro has had no visits from his family for over a year and a half , and Fernando González has been in the same position for over a year .
The US authorities have prevented Adriana Perez from visiting her husband , Gerardo Hernández , since 12 September 1998 , while Olga Salanueva has been unable to visit her husband , René González , since August 2000 .
We demand justice , we demand the release of these five Cuban patriots .
Mr President , despite our wet Irish climate , major flooding was a relatively uncommon occurrence in the past .
Recently , destructive flooding has become a yearly , seasonal phenomenon .
A number of factors are implicated : building on flood plains , poor maintenance of drains etc .
But one important contributing factor - inappropriate plantation forestry - was encouraged by EU funding over the last couple of decades and for this reason deserves your close scrutiny .
These spruce tree plantations , especially when planted on upland areas , have significantly changed the drainage pattern of Irish river systems .
At the same time , the planting of native Irish trees and forests was largely neglected , because of the way the funds were organised in the past .
It is unfortunate that in the new Rural Development Programme , Ireland has chosen to exclude forestry from the scheme .
To starve native Irish forestry of funds at this critical time , when it needs to make a comeback , is a recipe for disaster , with increased flooding , water contamination , CO2 build-up and a continued loss of soil fertility .
There are token projects in the programme involving native species .
However , it cannot be denied that an opportunity to use the funds for native trees to mitigate against future flooding has been lost .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should not only advertise intercultural dialogue , but also protect it if it is attacked , especially if ethnic co-existence is corroded day by day within one of our neighbouring countries , a Member State of the Union .
There have already been and unfortunately may yet be sad consequences of the inflammatory , coarse statements by Ján Slota , president of one of the governing parties in Slovakia , and his games on the YouTube video website , calling on people to kill politicians in the Hungarian minority party in Slovakia , as well as , most recently , the statement by the Slovak education minister that he would ban the public use of Hungarian in Slovakia , and that the reason he supports the minority Hungarian Members of Parliament is that they participated in a forum in Budapest that upset members of the Hungarian Parliament .
The consequences of tolerating extreme statements and of incitement are already very much felt .
According to recent opinion polls , more than 60 % of 15-year-olds hate Hungarians most of all and agree with the astounding , inflammatory accusations coming from leading Slovak politicians over the years .
Hungarians , however , are starting to feel scared .
This is all happening now , while we open our arms wide , and think that the consequences will not happen , Parliament , the Commission and the Council are busy , and we celebrate the year of intercultural dialogue . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) An approximate 60 million European citizens , amounting to 15 % of the EU 's population , are at risk of poverty .
The following priorities have been identified for elimining poverty : a higher rate of employment , preventing school drop-out , eliminating child poverty , modernising social security , and eliminating discrimination .
Investment in education should be a priority .
Ensuring modern infrastructure for education and improving the professional training , payment and status of teaching staff are prerequisites for quality education .
Today , the average rate of school drop-out in the EU is over 16 % .
Many of the young people dropping out of school come from rural areas and are forced to stop attending school by their precarious financial state .
I urge the Member States to treat as a priority the development of educational infrastructure and the creation of employment , particularly in rural areas .
Better education guarantees a decent standard of living for the younger generation , thus improving the social and economic cohesion of the European Union .
The future of the EU depends on the strength , value and quality of present and future generations .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
On 15 September the founding meeting of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology was held in Budapest .
Hungary and Budapest , the city selected as the centre of the institution , have a great tradition in the field of scientific research .
Just think of the fact that 12 Nobel Prize winners were Hungarian scientists who participated actively in crucial inventions of the 20th century .
The most important tasks of the new institution are to promote and coordinate cooperation between European science centres and to create a network of universities , research institutions and private-sector players in innovation .
These goals coincide with the fundamental principle of the Lisbon Strategy , the concept of creating a knowledge-based society with the improvement of competitiveness , economic growth and the creation of jobs at the centre .
Mr President , please allow me to thank the decision makers for selecting Budapest in Hungary as the location for this important institution .
I am convinced that we will be good hosts to this institution .
I would like to draw your attention to the unprecedented political consensus reached on this matter in Hungary .
I honestly hope that the institution will promote success next year , which the European Union has declared as the year of creativity and innovation . Thank you for the floor .
Mr President , less than two weeks ago the European Court of Justice found that Ireland was in contravention of the Water Framework Directive in regard to some of its waste water treatment systems .
I must say that , personally , I am very pleased that the Commission is actively involved in trying to ensure clean drinking water in Ireland .
However , the EU Commission now has an opportunity to build on that good work .
It can do this by granting an extension to the Farm Waste Management Scheme .
The deadline for completion of works is December 2008 , but , because of exceptional circumstances , work will not be completed .
If the deadline is not extended , as I said , work will be incomplete and nobody will benefit .
Extending the scheme would be a win-win situation for water quality in Ireland , for the environment , for farmers and for Commission policy .
It would be a reasonable and sensible move by the Commission to extend the deadline in order to ensure compliance with the Nitrates Directive , and it would show joined-up thinking with regard to the implementation of EU policy .
( SK ) Slovakia , a Member State of the Union , has adopted the European Union 's value system , which means that it should also respect the principles of the cultural and linguistic diversity of the Community .
However , the recent survey by the Open Society Fund points to a dangerous increase in Slovak pupils ' hatred of the Hungarian minority and shows that more than 63 % are of the opinion that , in public , Hungarians should speak only Slovak , with use of the Hungarian language being limited to their homes .
The outrageous thing is that even the Minister for Education gave his full support to this view in parliament .
This is a startling situation .
The Minister 's position is unconstitutional and contradictory to Slovak legislation and the principles on which democratic Europe is based .
Since the coalition government of Mr Róbert Fico came to power , something has been wrong in Slovakia .
Anti-Hungarian , racist and xenophobic displays have been getting more numerous , chiefly due to Mr Ján Slota , the chairman of the ruling party .
The perplexing thing is that neither the prime minister nor the representatives of the coalition parties are protesting about this , nor are they condemning this damaging and dangerous trend .
( BG ) Mr President , esteemed colleagues , I would like to turn your attention to the latest in a series of scandals that have erupted in Bulgaria in connection with the EUR 49 million spent by the Ministry of Interior on the use of special surveillance means .
The expenditure would be justified if there was even a single criminal detected and convicted thanks to the use of listening and watching devices .
At the same time , Interior Ministry officials have always argued that they lack even rudimentary equipment to successfully prosecute criminals in Bulgaria .
It turns out that after enough money to pay for 15 reconnaissance planes has been spent , the only thing that Bulgarian policemen can say is to report that they were unable to see who planted a bomb in a clandestine brothel in the centre of the capital city .
The facts invite just one possible conclusion .
The Ministry of Interior , together with certain private companies , are ripping off Bulgarian taxpayers , they are robbing them systematically , and then on a huge scale .
The services that are supposed to prevent crime are used only for political and economic racketeering , and for squaring accounts with the opposition .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
In the years to come , the sustainable development of the European Union 's economies can only be realised if we strengthen the 23 million small and medium-sized enterprises in the Union , since they safeguard roughly 4 out of 5 jobs that have been created in the Union recently .
The European package of measures for small businesses , the ' Small Business Act ' , published by the Commission in June , acknowledges the central role played by small businesses in European economies and provides a general framework for the policy of the Union and the Member States .
This document proposes the adoption of new regulations in key areas such as simplified regulation of state aid and an increase in financial discipline .
However , European small businesses need more than merely the political will of the Commission , Parliament or even the Member States .
Small businesses need the new regulations to be drawn up quickly and applied effectively .
The European Parliament must assume a key role in accelerating this process . Thank you .
( HU ) Mr President , we are finding that extreme ideas and violent manifestations are spreading among people , social groups , ethnicities and not infrequently among peoples and nations .
There are political instruments for stopping them , and administrative and police instruments may be put into action .
However , politicians who think in the long term prefer to call for dialogue , not only political dialogue , which often leads to conflict , but also cultural dialogue .
In order for us to sustain dialogue with someone about culture , we must first know our own culture .
The essence of the year of intercultural dialogue is that we should get to know the different layers of society and the life and past of minorities , ethnic groups and nationalities , which may seem strange at first glance , not only among countries but also within a country .
The unity of a nation and good relations between peoples , ethnic groups and nations are assisted by this kind of familiarity , but a lack of it prevents this .
In the year of intercultural dialogue , I feel it is especially important for all European societies to maintain truly valuable dialogue between the majority and the minority , because it is only in this way that true relations can develop between the cultures of European countries .
It 's a European phenomenon that we have to handle at European level . Thank you very much .
( RO ) Together we decided that the European energy policy would aim at decreasing the EU 's energy dependence , guaranteeing the security of supply and the transparency of prices .
What we notice today is that the European gas market is characterised by considerable dynamism in all regards : energy policy , technical equipment , the gas business itself , and the transparency of prices , as pricing is a key component in the protection of European consumers .
In this context , the metering and billing of gas in relation to end consumers requires the development of appropriate standards allowing for a uniform calculation method , recognised throughout the EU , so that measuring will be transparent , i.e. fair , unbiased and accurate .
I call on the European Parliament today to take all the necessary measures to promote verification of the way in which gas is metered and billed , because we have found that in Romania gas transporters and distributors fail to meet these requirements : gas is metered in cubic meters and billed in kw / h , and citizens are unable to check their actual consumption , which is the result of a mathematical formula that are based on debatable parameters .
Mr President , there is widespread anger and fear amongst our citizens concerning the collapsing financial institutions globally and their potential impact on pensions , savings and jobs .
I am pleased that Commissioner McCreevy is here for the debate that is about to take place .
However , I believe that he must act swiftly with regard to what this Parliament is proposing - to rein in ' casino capitalism ' , which has driven us to the edge of the economic abyss .
Commissioner , if your commitment to neo-liberal ideology will not allow you to do so , then you should resign and allow someone else to be appointed who is prepared to face down the market buccaneers .
Strict , new regulation of the financial and banking sector is urgently needed and your championing so far of so-called ' light regulation ' , which is some cases has meant zero regulation , must be brought rapidly to an end .
Before I sit down , I would like to refer to the comments made by Miss McDonald of Sinn Féin , where she sought to justify their campaign against Lisbon and is now proclaiming that she wants economic sovereignty for Ireland in the midst of a global financial crisis .
I think it demonstrates the light-headed attitude of the ' no ' campaigners .
( PL ) The financial crisis means that the transparency of funds involved in alternative investments should also be an important issue for the European Parliament .
Increasing the transparency of companies with the use of legal instruments , especially as regards the relationship between hedge funds and private equity funds on the one hand and the companies in which these funds hold shares on the other , has become a priority .
The so-called codes of good practice could possibly serve as a model , but they cannot replace legislative measures in instances of bad behaviour .
It is essential to create a code of best practice as regards methods for re-establishing balance in the present management structure of companies .
The new legislation should also oblige hedge funds and private equity funds to declare and explain their investment policy and the related risks to both individual and institutional investors , as well as to insurance brokers and supervisory bodies .
( SK ) Allow me to express my grief and say a few words in remembrance of the recent tragic crash involving a Slovak bus that took place near the Croatian town of Gospič .
Fourteen human lives were extinguished and other persons were injured on their way to their holidays .
I should like to express my sympathy to the bereaved and , at the same time , to thank the Croatian side for its exemplary behaviour that softened the impact of the accident , and for looking after our citizens so well .
Croatia is repeatedly showing , by its ability to respond to problems and to solve them , that its future lies in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , on 26 September the EU celebrates its linguistic diversity .
The events focus on the idea that languages are bridges for culture , and that the learning of foreign languages and the ability to communicate across the language barrier should be encouraged .
These events and the Commission 's communications entirely neglect the need to maintain the teaching of Ancient Greek and Latin throughout Europe .
These classical languages are the source of many words and expressions in all the languages of Europe and beyond .
At the same time , the Green Paper on ' Migration and Mobility : challenges and opportunities for EU education systems ' is open for consultation .
The Green Paper refers to the role of Council Directive 77 / 486 / EEC on the education of the children of migrant workers , and takes a critical view of the piecemeal actions that have been taken over the past 30 years on the basis of that directive .
This is an opportunity to strengthen the teaching of the languages of European migrant workers .
( SK ) The third consecutive political crisis in Ukraine was probably the reason why the historic second EU-Ukraine Summit that took place in Paris at the beginning of September did not reach more ambitious conclusions concerning the Russia-Georgia conflict .
I appreciate that the European Union again declared its support for building civil society and for pro-democratic changes in Ukraine .
I also have a positive opinion on the agreement to begin a ' visa dialogue ' that should , in the long run , result in a visa-free regime between both sides , as well as on the fact that , in spite of the new political crisis , Ukraine 's road towards EU membership stays open .
Today no one has any doubt that the Orange Revolution changed the historical direction in which Ukraine was going .
Now Ukraine must show that it is stable and united .
This is its only chance to achieve a European perspective .
I am convinced that we can strengthen freedom at home only if we protect it outside the EU borders as well .
This is the reason why I will take part in the 11th session of the European Parliament 's delegation to Ukraine on 2 / 3 October 2008 in Kiev and Jalta .
I believe that the presence of representatives of the European Parliament in Ukraine will contribute towards calming the situation and towards political stability in Ukraine .
( ES ) Mr President , I wished only to add my voice to the condemnation of the terrorist attack or attacks , including a murder , that we have experienced in our country .
The Basque people have the misfortune of being the only country in the European Union which continues to experience terrorism , and that terrorism has been on-going for decades .
I personally come from a family which endured 40 years of exile - the same as the duration of Francoism - and if we learned anything at all it was that no political objective was worth the life of a single human being .
Finally I would like to say that all of us who believe in the Basque people 's right to decide are clear in our minds that the right to life is the most basic right of all .
Mr President , we are all very well aware that rising oil prices and gas prices are having a hugely negative effect on many sectors of our economy and on consumers .
I would like to draw attention to the impact this crisis is having on the farming sector , the fishing sector and small businesses .
High fuel costs have been passed on to the farmer at the present time : costs are escalating and farmers are not receiving an increase to cover that cost of high energy and gas prices .
The fuel crisis is undermining the growth of competitiveness in our small and medium-sized enterprises ; reducing the consumer purchasing power aggravates the situation and , Mr President , I dread to think what is going to happen this winter - many millions of people will be unable to afford to keep themselves warm .
We all saw what happened at the petrol stations when the price of oil was going up ; every day you went past a petrol station the price went up .
But , now that the price has come down , they have not been bringing it down nearly as far as it went up .
I think that they need to respond to that : they have made all their profits and it is time to pass on and bring in decent prices to the consumer .
( HU ) Mr President , Hungary has borders with itself , and lost 2 / 3 of her territory after the First World War .
The political representation of the Hungarians living in these areas , totalling more than 3 million in seven countries , has allowed their rights to be fought for over the last century using only peaceful means .
For six years , nearly 20 political organisations , within the framework of the forum for representatives from the Carpathian Basin , have debated peaceful opportunities for the enforcement of interests , and they continue to do so : identity , mother tongue , economic relations and autonomy .
I am also a member of this forum .
This year , we decided that we would open a joint lobbying office in Brussels in the interests of using the opportunities provided by the EU .
It is incomprehensible and unacceptable that the peaceful endeavours of the Hungarian communities are insulted with extreme epithets by politicians from some Member States of the EU , while they accuse the Hungarian minority living in their country of collective criminality and want to restrict the use of their mother tongue .
I would like to draw the attention of the European Parliament to these attacks , and to remind it again that community rights must be ensured for national minorities , and not for them to be accused of collective criminality .
The EU must assume a proactive , preventive role in this . Thank you .
( EL ) Mr President , the Commission wishes to help combat the problem of rising food prices in developing countries and intends to fund those countries to the tune of EUR 1 billion .

This will finance the purchase of seeds and other supplies to increase agricultural production , feed the population , cut inflation and reduce food prices .
It is politically and morally right that we should help developing countries , but we should be well advised to take a corresponding initiative to assist European farmers .
They have been hit just as hard by the increase in food prices and much else , because this money should be seen as savings from the reduction in costs under the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
I therefore propose that a large part of the EUR 1 billion should be used to assist European farmers who are facing a great many problems .
To conclude , let me express my serious concern over the proper use of money to be given to these countries ; the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries have no model for rural development , and no inspection system .
I fear that the money will be lost in the bureaucracy of international organisations without ultimately bringing any benefit .
That concludes the item .
Hedge funds and private equity - Transparency of institutional investors ( debate )
Now we move to a debate that was organised last month by the European Parliament with extraordinary prescience , anticipating the events of last week , perhaps - unlike others .
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , including recommendations to the Commission on hedge funds and private equity , and
the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , including recommendations to the Commission on transparency of institutional investors .
rapporteur . - Mr President , long before this crisis , the European Socialist Group and the European Socialist Party raised concerns over the tendencies on the financial markets for excessive debt , lack of transparency , taking high risks and paying too low prices , and making packages on leveraging which nobody could really understand or act on .
We therefore raised our concerns as if looking into a new financial bubble .
Nobody could tell when this would be , but we are now at the centre of the storm - the ' perfect storm ' , as somebody called it .
I feel very strongly that the debate this evening and tomorrow will be the most relevant debate in any parliament on financial markets anywhere in Europe or in the United States - debate and decisions in the sense that we are looking forward , trying to make better regulation than we have now and trying to take on a broad responsibility for doing the job as well as we can .
Now is the time to act .
We have seen what happened in the US , and , while someone said that it is not as bad in Europe as in the US , I can only say that HBOS , Northern Rock and many other such cases is enough to convince me to act .
We have seen the new prognoses for our economies , for our jobs , for our competition and for our investment capability : that is enough for me to act .
That is why I am proud to be telling Parliament today and tomorrow that the PSE Group has made a compromise , following tough negotiations - which is as it should be on such an important matter - with the ALDE and PPE-DE Groups .
We now have in front of us a balanced report which demands that the Commission present proposals on legislation and regulation for all financial actors , including hedge funds and private equity .
It is high time we did this , and I would remind Parliament that we are now asking for mandatory capital requirements for all financial institutions .
We are asking for an aligning of reward packages with longer-term outcomes in order to reflect losses as well as profits .
We are asking for full transparency for high-level executives ' and senior managers ' remuneration systems .
We are asking for disclosure of leverage / debt exposure , the source and amount of funds raised and identification of shareholders for all investment projects .
We are asking for an extension of the directive requiring that employees be informed and consulted during take-overs to include leveraged buy-outs by private equity , and we are asking for measures to ' avoid unreasonable asset stripping in target companies ' .
We are asking for actions to avoid excessive debt caused by leveraged buy-out , so that level of leverage is sustainable both for the private equity fund / firm and for the target company .
I would like to ask Mr McCreevy , the Commissioner responsible for this area , to respond very concretely to these proposals .
I know that they are new to him , but I insist on a timetable .
We have asked for a response before the end of the year , which is three months from now .
There may be details to discuss but , Commissioner , you also owe this Parliament a response , because we are not talking about a small minority , but a very broad majority within this Parliament .
I shall end by informing you that , as of four to five days ago , close to 90 000 people had signed a petition addressed to the European Parliament , the United States and world leaders , organised by the global internet movement Avaaz .
I am delivering that petition on its behalf to those recipients .
It reads : ' We urge you to take a lead in fixing the fundamental flaws and loopholes which made this global financial crisis possible , including basic problems of debt and risk , incentives and transparency .
We need you to work together to protect the public good by framing stronger rules for all parts of the global financial system .
Be bold , and we will support you . '
Commissioner , will you be bold , together with us , support us and deliver preliminary answers before the end of the year ?
I must insist , on behalf of all of us , on a positive response .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate is indeed taking place , if somewhat by chance , at exactly the right time .
My report to all intents and purposes addresses the other side of the coin .
Mr Rasmussen has had to deal in particular with the effects on the financial markets and the Committee on Legal Affairs with its expertise naturally concerned itself in particular with the aspects of company law and , where necessary , with the need to change European company law .
We are all shaken by the events of recent days .
The public , politicians and - I say this very clearly - the honest economy as well .
The problem we see in practice at the moment is that profits are being privatised , but losses are being nationalised .
It has almost become a joke in this saga that Mr Paulson , the US Finance Minister , who was himself once head of Goldman Sachs , now finds himself in the situation of having to take USD 700 billion in taxpayers ' money in order to eliminate and smooth out the havoc his own sector of industry has wreaked .
It is really sad .
There are more and more examples of the fact that in the public perception , the image of the conventional family enterprise taking care of its employees with its own liability , which it itself guarantees , is on the decline , while on the other hand , the impression continues to grow of us being partly governed at least in the economic sector by ineffectual top managers , by employees who are highly paid but who no longer bear any responsibility .
I think that the emerging impression of our system of market economy is appalling and that it is politically necessary for us to take the appropriate steps to restore order and thus actually remove this appalling impression .
The fact is that it affects not only the major investors , but now also small investors .
It affects every taxpayer and all those who are dependent on government funds because more and more billions in public money have to be used to repair the damage .
I admit - and the debate has clearly shown this , and it is also indisputable - that one aspect we initially had to address in particular - namely the hedge funds and private equity sector - is not a cause of the problems we are currently having to tackle .
Here too , however - and the debate in the House has clearly shown this , as have the hearings on both committees - there are obviously definite shortcomings in the areas of harmonisation and regulation .
It has rightly been stated that these sectors are also regulated by national regulations , some stronger , some weaker , according to the nations ' different traditions and according to which financial market regulations prevail there .
At the same time , however , it has also become clear that we need further harmonisation and adjustment at European level in order to ensure that these sectors , which have now reached absolutely critical dimensions , also do not represent any risk for the financial markets .
I would like to respond to just a few key words , which have already been addressed in the draft report - which incidentally had already been resolved in the Committee on Legal Affairs in June when nobody was talking about this crisis in which we currently find ourselves .
I am thinking of the terms ' stock lending ' and ' short selling ' .
We now hear that a range of important financial market regulators have banned this , and for good reason .
We did ask at the time , and are asking now , as well , that this at least be examined .
Consequences have to be drawn from this and legislative proposals must also be made if need be .
One of these is the issue of better identification of shareholders , issues of transparency , of the tightening of the regulations on transparency in view of the fact that enterprises as well as the managers of these enterprises ought to know to whom they actually belong in order that they , too , are able to act responsibly towards those who own them .
It also entails reasonable checks being made on certain risks when credit is granted to ensure that sensible , necessary consequences can also be drawn in order that giant levers cannot be moved by relatively small means , which ultimately create an impact that gets completely out of control and brings adversity in its wake for the general public and for others .
Incidentally , one piece of advice : in the meantime numerous proposals have been developed in the industry for practical codes , for voluntary regulation on how one should behave .
The mere fact that these regulations have been developed , even if they are still only voluntary at present , thus accounts for the fact that the industry itself evidently accepts the need for some regulation .
Hence it is entirely reasonable to take a look at , and think about , whether we are able to take action here as well .
Asset flipping is another matter to which we must attend .
Company law must tackle this issue because I am convinced that enterprises should not be able to be plundered .
We are expecting a concrete proposal from the Commission .
This is a report in accordance with Article 192 , to which the Commission must respond . We hope it will do so soon .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and in particular their rapporteurs , Mr Rasmussen and Mr Lehne , for the work done in the preparation of these two reports .


Few would have predicted one year ago that the situation in financial markets would be as serious as it is today .
And the effects of the crisis will continue to be felt for some time .
It started with reckless selling of mortgages in the United States , promoted by banks and others who did not care about lending standards because they could offload the loans to others through securitisation .
Credit-rating agencies then gave respectability to these high-risk products by assigning low credit-default risk to them .
Financial institutions around the world bought up these products without , it seems , doing any serious risk assessment of their own .
In the light of events over the past year , it has been incredible to see how little understanding senior managers of financial institutions had of the risk they were taking on board .
No doubt the size of the profits that were rolling in blunted serious risk analysis .
Supervisors seemed to have no better idea of the risk in these hugely complex products .
Things were so sliced up , diced up and repackaged that no one knew where the real risk was .
One observer referred some months ago to this unfolding crisis as like watching a train crash in slow motion .
Last week the crisis went into hyper speed .
The concerted actions of the world 's major central banks and the announcement of the support measures by the United States authorities have restored some calm to the markets .
We must welcome this given the extreme situation faced by regulators .
I also welcome that the United States authorities have shown recognition of the need to address in their proposals similar assets held by some non-US financial institutions .
One thing we can be thankful for in Europe is that we have not seen the same scale of destruction as has happened in the United States .
Although banks in the EU have been suffering from a similar lack of confidence in lending to each other , there has not been anything on the same scale as experienced in the United States .
But no one is out of the woods yet .
There are difficult trading conditions ahead .
The downturn in economies will have its effects .
Vigilance and transparency are key if confidence is to be restored in markets .
At EU level we must continue to improve our supervisory arrangements for cross-border supervisory financial institutions .
There is a window of opportunity that must not be missed .
All of this leads me to believe we are going to have a different financial services sector when this is all over and we will have a different regulatory framework as well .
If moral hazard cannot be shown to work then the taxpayer cannot be expected to pick up the bill for the excess and irresponsible risk-taking of private institutions .
The ultimate shape of whatever new regulatory approach will be adopted will be designed over the coming period as the lessons from this crisis and the appropriate responses become clearer .
We need to continue to work closely with other regulatory authorities and to the extent possible dovetail our responses .
As many of you will be aware , we have already been taking action .
For a year now the Commission has been working on a detailed road map agreed by the Council of Finance Ministers and endorsed by the European Council .
We have been refining our response as the turmoil unfolds .
We have already taken measures to improve convergence and cooperation between supervisors .
A new memorandum of understanding was agreed by EU supervisory authorities , finance ministers and central banks setting out common principles including the establishment of cross-border stability groups .
This is now being implemented .
We have been reviewing enhancements of deposit guarantee schemes .
A special group which will report by the end of this year has been set up to look at the pro-cyclicality effects of current instruments including Basel 2 and IFRS .
In close cooperation with the Financial Stability Forum , the IASB has set up an advisory panel on fair valuation .
Work on off-balance-sheet items is also under way in the IASB .
Industry has come forward with valuable data which improves transparency for regulators of the securitisation market .
The Commission is pressing industry to refine this information so that transparency for regulators is improved .
In the light of these activities , and others I will refer to , it should come as no surprise to Members when I say that I can welcome many of the points set out in Mr Rasmussen 's report .
What is important is that we are able to identify the key measures we should take now and get them implemented .
As I said earlier , the market turmoil exposed failings in the risk management of large financial institutions .
It also highlighted a number of areas of regulatory weakness .
It is on these areas that regulatory attention must now be focused .
Mr Rasmussen has flagged in his report many of the most pressing areas : conflicts of interest in credit-rating agencies , the need for improvement in the valuation of illiquid assets and the misalignment of incentives in the ' originate and distribute ' model .
Over the past year I have kept Members informed , both in plenary and particularly the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , of the work we have been doing on improving capital requirements in banks , as well as my ideas for regulating credit-rating agencies .
We all agree , I believe , on the need for a strengthening of capital requirements and an obligation for transparency and due diligence in regards to structured products .
We have been working on changes to the Capital Requirements Directive , which will improve the management of large exposures , improve quality of capital through harmonising treatment of hybrid capital .
We have also been looking at strengthening the supervision of cross-banking groups .
In the next few weeks I will be proposing to the Commission two separate regulatory measures to deal with these and other issues : firstly , an amendment to the Capital Requirements Directive and , secondly , a regulation on credit-rating agencies .
I look forward to the support of the European Parliament for these proposals which are very much in line with what you call for in this report .
Hedge funds and private equity feature in both reports .
We have had some interesting exchanges over the years about the roles of hedge funds and private equity .
One thing I believe we can agree on is that they were not the cause of the current turmoil .
It has turned out that it was the regulated sector that had been allowed to run amok with little understood securitisation vehicles .
I do not believe it is necessary at this stage to tar hedge funds and private equity with the same brush as we use for the regulated sector .
The issues relating to the current turmoil are different .
Let us not forget that these funds are regulated in Member States .
Hedge funds and private equity managers are authorised and supervised entities throughout Europe .
They are subject to the same market-abuse disciplines as other participants in financial markets .
They are bound by similar transparency and consultation obligations when investing in public companies .
Exposure of the banking sector to hedge funds and private equity is subject to the Capital Requirements Directive .
But this does not mean that we are turning a blind eye to hedge funds and private equity .
As these business models evolve and their role in financial markets changes , regulators around the world need to remain vigilant .
The industries themselves must assume all the responsibilities that accompany a prominent role in European and global financial markets .
Several recent market initiatives indicate that this message is understood .
Our role should be to monitor closely these and other developments in the market and be ready to respond if and when necessary .
I welcome the constructive suggestions for supporting the functioning of the single market .
I would just like to mention at this stage that there is considerable work under way in the Commission on private placement and venture capital .
I agree with Mr Lehne that a sufficient degree of transparency is an essential condition for investor confidence .
It is , therefore , indispensable if we want financial markets to function effectively .
The report sets out a list of transparency rules that apply today to the different players in the financial markets in the EU .
To my mind , what is important is that the market is provided with a sufficient degree of clear information that is useful .
We need to find the balance between the need for confidentiality of the proprietary information of investment vehicles against the legitimate needs of investors , counterparties , regulators and investee firms .
I am , therefore , pleased that the report puts an emphasis on the need to analyse the impact of the existing EU provisions and of additional Member States ' rules in this field before one embarks on introducing any new legislation .
The Commission has already been very active in this field .
We have held extensive consultations in the context of our shareholders ' rights initiative , where we looked at a number of issues that are touched upon in the report - stock lending , for example , and the question of the identification of shareholders .
Furthermore , we have recently published a call for tender for an outside study that will look at the implementation , in Member States , of the Transparency Directive .
This study should be available next year and will form the basis for a general evaluation of the Directive , including the notification thresholds .
As Members will recall , the Commission adopted , in spring of this year , a communication setting out its policy approach to sovereign wealth funds .
We had come to the conclusion that these measures were appropriate but also sufficient to address the issues that currently are being discussed .
This approach was endorsed by the European Council ; I see , though , that the Committee on Legal Affairs does not entirely share this assessment .
I shall make some brief remarks in this area .
Firstly , we should acknowledge that hedge funds and private equity in many senses are not unique - other institutional investors have similar objectives and nowadays use similar techniques .
If in that situation we imposed special obligations on hedge funds and private equity , this would result in discrimination of these categories of investors .
Secondly , we should not make the mistake to perceive all activities of hedge funds as a threat to the market but we should also be aware of the positive effects that their activities have .
Let me be clear , the EU economy is going to need massive investment in the time ahead : without sovereign wealth funds , private equity and the like , Europe 's recovery from today 's turmoil will be all the slower .
Thirdly , I agree that certain techniques , such as stock lending and the use of derivatives , do pose challenges to established models of governance .
This is an area we , in conjunction with national supervisors , will be giving close attention to in the time ahead .
In conclusion , these two reports will be significant contributions to our ongoing reflection .
I commend Members for these reports .
The Commission will examine your recommendations and report back to you as envisaged in the framework agreement .
We remain fully committed to responding to this crisis with the measures necessary to restore confidence and stability .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , I would say to the Commissioner that , in the current turmoil , the interconnection between all institutions is plain to see .
It is equally plain and logical that regulation has to be targeted at function and not at entities .
It would be wrong if one private company had to abide by different rules from others just because it was owned by private equity .
There are two sides to everything .
Amid the frequent criticism again this week of short selling , let us not forget the stock lenders .
Attention by investors - even supervisors - to the lending policies of pension funds and others is relevant , and not just the activities of share borrowers .
We have visited this matter before in the context of voting borrowed shares .
' Two sides ' also means that enhancing transparency will only be effective if it is accompanied by due diligence , and not undone again by excessive disclaimers .
Finally , voluntary codes do have a role , and reach parts which we cannot regulate .
However , they are not just a private matter for the industries concerned , and need exposure , easy access and active review and monitoring .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , 2007 has continued to be brandished as a possible continuation of the mortgagee crisis .
We have been trying to lay this to rest .
In June 2007 we should have been hearing even more alarm bells ringing , at least when two hedge funds managed by the New York investment bank Bear Stearns went astray because they were involved on a grand scale in bonds secured by real estate .
This was only the beginning of the whole affair !
It has become clearer and clearer how these kinds of financial service businesses have been developing with such a low level of transparency .
On the one hand a few have been making large profits - in high-risk sectors , of course - while on the other hand we are dealing today with a classic nationalisation of losses .
It is not just US economic journalists and economists who are describing this situation in precisely this way .
We in the EU as well , in the European Parliament , are changing our perspective willy-nilly , but rather late in the day .
It would also be preferable for the Commission to stand out on this .
Both reports - the Rasmussen report and the Lehne report - demonstrate the urgent need for action .
By now at least it must be clear to all the political players that the market is not able to regulate itself entirely .
The Commission should now also be aware of this .
Hedge funds and private equities are already some of the largest employers , but according to many judicial systems , they no longer appear so and are therefore , of course , relieved of their obligations as employers .
This is not acceptable ; the lack of transparency is too great !
In the meantime , thousands of jobs have been put at risk by the financial crisis .
Regulation , supervision , transparency , employee participation and information in the pension funds sector , which are heavily involved in hedge funds and private equities , are vital .
It is important to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that employees are not asked to pay out twice , Commissioner : once due to the financial crisis per se and once due to risk-sharing by pension funds .
In order for this not to happen , Directive 2003 / 41 / EC should at least ensure that employees must be kept informed directly or indirectly by trustees about the type and risk of the investment of their pensions and they must be given a voice in decisions .
This is just one of many facets that we have highlighted in our reports and opinions .
Commissioner , you are now being asked to do something .
I know we can talk about a lot of things , but you are duty-bound to assist .
The legislative period is not yet over .
I should like to draw your attention to this .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report was originally aimed at hedge funds and private equity , but now covers the entire financial system , which has completely collapsed .
The present crisis is the hideous aftermath of a credit mania , specifically of the excessive expansion of debt .
The Federal Reserve kept interest rates too low for too long and thereby essentially provided a credit subsidy .
We have drawn up the report on the basis of the current situation and together with our fellow Members from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , we have reached an agreement with Mr Rasmussen , which encompasses the entire financial system .
We are grateful that this has gone through virtually unanimously in the Committee on Economic Affairs .
We can no longer rely on US standards and the setting of standards in the international financial system .
We must create our own new , European options and we have proposed adopting a whole range of items and ending discussions on them .
As a start we must include all the financial institutions working with leverage in the particular risk assessment .
We then say that in the global financial system , risk-adjusted capital requirement must have the same status for all players .
We should also be stipulating requirements for promoters of packages and syndicating packages , whereby they retain a chunk beyond these packages .
The rating agencies - Mr Rasmussen and Mr Lehne have already pointed this out - must close the gaps in information and disclose conflicts of interest .
We should consider whether or not we get the rating agencies to assume liability for their rating along the lines of the financial auditors .
We must then also consider whether or not derivatives should be traded compulsorily on the Stock Exchange - possibly with the exception of interest rate swaps .
We are also asking that the banks ' governing boards ensure that bankers ' bonuses take account not only of good performances , but also of any losses that may eventually occur .
This therefore means that incentives for bankers apply in the good and the bad times and not just in the good times .
Greed was and is a bad advisor on financial strategies .
In recent years we in the ECB have had a reliable partner , who all in all has reacted grosso modo in a rather more reasonable and balanced manner than the Federal Reserve .
This we can say with hindsight .
In the euro area we are also in urgent need of European banking supervision for the euro area because we cannot carry on living with national supervision alone .
This means that all in all we are assuming that institutions , or even voluntary associations , are being set up in Europe so that the subjects we are addressing can be better understood in order to prevent the next crisis of this magnitude .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would say to Mr Lauk that he may support the report that Mr Dăianu and I drafted on European supervision , but there was a lack of support for it from the EPP .
Allow me also to say something in response to the Commissioner , which is that I find it unbelievable that he has not reacted to the core issues of the report .
He merely told us that the Commission is closely monitoring and closely following developments , and then said that hedge funds and private equity also have much positive influence , and that we should reflect on that .
It is like hearing that a hurricane or tsunami is coming and being told that we should reflect on the positive aspects of water and wind !
It is ridiculous .
( NL ) I shall continue in Dutch , as I wish to focus on two issues with particular relevance to Mr Lehne 's report .
One of these - which Mr Lehne himself has already mentioned - is stock lending and short selling .
This is of course a classic example of the Commission 's recent failure to keep abreast of things .
We raised the issue of the need to take action regarding stock lending , the lending and borrowing of shares , long ago , as this was being misused in hedge fund campaigns against companies .
Now , at long last , financial market supervisors - a number of individual supervisors in individual countries - have done so .
This is not a coordinated European action ; initiatives such as this have once more had to come from the national level .
We could have been one step ahead of this and perhaps also have prevented some defaults , some bank or insurance company collapses , had we had adequate measures in place for this .
This is also a further illustration of the fact that such things transcend sectors and that sectoral supervision of banks , insurance companies or securities alone is insufficient .
We really do need to combine such supervision and ensure that these securities are anticipated on both sides and that such occurrences are prevented .
The other issue is remuneration systems .
We have stated in the report that it is very important that these be curbed and that voting on remuneration policy be possible at shareholders ' meetings .
I was pleased to note that , during this week 's discussion on the forthcoming emergency fund in the United States , my Democrat counterparts in Congress expressed their desire to make borrowing from this fund conditional on , among other things , the curbing of exorbitant managerial salaries and bonuses .
After all , it would beggar belief if Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley , who are now submitting themselves to that supervision and also wish to make use of those public funds , were to continue handing out bonuses running into millions .
It is also appropriate that we in Europe go beyond the recommendation from a couple of years ago .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what he intends to do about this , as it is high time we took action .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , sorry , this is part two .
As Mr Rasmussen said , these reports are balanced , though some may be more inclined to quote from the press from one side of the scales than the other .
We have had rumblings about hedge funds and private equity for years but , caught up in the present financial turmoil , it is no longer a rarity to be concerned about debt and leverage .
However , this does present us with an opportunity to clear the air and establish a comprehensive review that addresses the exposure issues underlying the present turmoil as well as other risk and debt issues , including those within hedge funds and private equity .
The reports do accept that this must be done on a non-discriminatory and principled basis , paying due regard to proportionality .
It also needs to be done in the context of international developments and , above all , it must be smart .
Now , whilst debt and its proper management is one issue that appears everywhere at the moment , another is that of compensation packages and conflict of interest .
Clearly , for market stability , steps have to be taken to ensure that rewards match longer-term horizons .
I agree that that principle should extend to all areas .
This is not to endorse the notion that all private equity and venture capital has asset stripping as its motivation : that is certainly not the best way to turn around a failing company into a profitable , saleable one .
Indeed , national laws to prevent asset stripping already exist , but they have rarely been used .
So I am not convinced that a European measure would in fact be any progress .
Coming again to the matter of regulation versus voluntary codes , many of the voluntary codes are only just getting under way , and for the main part these should be given time to operate .
They are also easier to update , but as I said earlier , they are not a private matter , and public confidence does come into the equation .
So I am pleased that my suggestion of a one-stop website as a register of voluntary codes with relevant links to compliance postings has been accepted by colleagues as a potentially useful tool , and I hope the Commissioner will follow that up .
When it comes to transparency , it is also important to recognise that the public investors and supervisors need different levels of information , and that information has to be fit for purpose .
Even within the context of professional investors , burying information in what I would call ' legal spam ' is unacceptable .
Supervisors should have all the information that they need , but care has to be taken in those areas where the information should not get into the public domain .
Finally , we have gone into those sensitive areas of securitisation and credit rating agencies .
On securitisation , I know the Commissioner likes the retention idea , but that is clearly just one available tool , and I would urge that he be prepared to swap tools and that he should not close the tool box too soon .
On rating agencies , there is a need to get a better handle on many matters , but I do warn against fragmentation from a system of internationally accepted ratings .
Again , both these areas are an example of where , as I said , we must be smart : we must be smart ahead of trying to be vindictive .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , certainly this report has come at a very interesting time , as we are experiencing a time of unprecedented economic upheavals , and recent events have made us sadly aware of some of the shortcomings , weaknesses and abuses in many sectors of the financial market .
There is no sector or grouping that has emerged unscathed or unblemished .
There can be no case of ' let 's go back to the same old rules ' .
Indeed , in the United States we are witnessing radical alterations in the landscape of high finance .
Changes must also be made here in Europe , but also globally .
In such a tense financial climate , it can be tempting to make scapegoats of certain financial actors or bodies .
The lack of understanding that can surround hedge funds and their operation often makes them good targets for this kind of scapegoating .
However , we must remember that neither hedge funds nor private equity led to the current financial crisis and , instead , at times provided much needed injections of liquidity into the market .
We should also remember that the crisis which started in America resulted from bad banking practices , and the European banking sector , while badly affected , seems to be in a better position to deal with this problem than those banks in the United States .
Nonetheless , we must not deny that there are problems and faults in the structure and operation of many investment vehicles , alternative investments included .
It is not good enough to tinker with a small rule here or there .
Real reform is needed , and it is needed on a global level .
I believe that the report that has emerged from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , under the stewardship of Mr Rasmussen , reflects these concerns .
For longer-term financial health and competitiveness , we must not and cannot regulate away constructive risk .
Despite its name , this text does not seek to vilify hedge funds and private equity but instead notes the need for general market reform , greater transparency and calls for principle-based regulation .
I welcome the comments made by the Commissioner here this evening , and I have absolutely no doubt that he will respond to the situation that we now find ourselves in .
The financial system is international by nature , and we need international supervision of these markets in a global context .
To secure global economic stability we must work together to find the best way forward , to put credibility and confidence back into the financial institutions and market for citizens globally , but also for the citizens of Europe , for their pension funds and also for their savings .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , rapporteurs , I believe that this report as adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is a good one , and we should be grateful to Mr Rasmussen , in particular , for having insisted over so many months on the need for wider-ranging EU intervention in the areas that are the subject of tonight 's debate .
Nevertheless , my group has re-tabled a number of amendments which - strange as it may seem - were drafted not by us but by Mr Rasmussen himself .
In other words , these are important proposals - notably on the establishment of an EU-level supervisory body and a European system of registration and approval for asset management and fund management companies ( Amendments 6 and 7 ) and the introduction of a debt limit for capital investment funds ( Amendment 9 ) - which Mr Rasmussen put forward but which he felt compelled to withdraw , understandably in certain respects , in order to secure a majority in the House : that is to say , a majority with the PPE Group and the Liberals .
As I see it , these amendments - which cover issues raised in the working documents and which we consider to be constructive and worth arguing for - were withdrawn because here in Parliament , as in the Council and most certainly in the Commission , there are two schools of thought : the first is that we have enough rules already , at both national and European level , and that any outstanding problems can be addressed through self-regulation by the finance industry ; the second , to which Mr Rasmussen subscribes ( and he is by no means alone ) , has been saying for years that the current supervisory system for the financial markets generally is inadequate .
The reason why no action was taken , Mr McCreevy , was not , in my view , because we could not predict , or were unaware , of developments .
I believe that , over the years , quite a few authoritative voices have been raised , particularly in the Forum for Financial Stability , to alert the public authorities to the nature of the risks we faced .
You and the Barroso Commission have generally tended to argue for a more laissez-faire approach , deeming the current arrangements to be adequate .
What Parliament is asking of you now is nothing less than a change of heart .
Whether you can manage that I do not know , but I believe it is necessary .
Personally I should like to emphasise three points which other speakers have already touched on but which are of particular concern to environmentalists .
We know that the climate and energy package that needs to be adopted will depend on a sustained level of investment , at a relatively modest rate of return with relatively modest gains , to provide the financing we need .
Financial instruments such as equity funds and hedge funds are not appropriate and we are waiting for the European banking and monetary authorities to come forward with ideas for putting some old proposals back on the table : I am thinking here of Jacques Delors ' proposals in the early 1990s and of a reinvigorated role for the European Investment Bank so that we can secure long-term investment at a moderate rate of return .
It will be hard to stabilise the financial system - and the Rasmussen report mentions this point - without a determined assault on offshore financial centres and tax havens , and this is another area where the Barroso Commission is failing to take a lead .
Lastly , in relation to corporate governance - which other speakers have also mentioned - we ought to take a much harder look at investment funds ' managerial pay and reward policies .
They are not acceptable and indeed they pose a threat to the economy generally .
Mr President , in our opinion , whether to tackle the credit crisis through steadfast compliance with existing Community legislation or through some new , stricter regulations is a false dichotomy .
Neither choice can thwart the cyclical course of the capitalist economy towards the crisis , which has its basis in the over-accumulation of capital in production .
The credit crisis is also a reflection of this course .
Bourgeois management sought to tackle the problem of over-accumulation by encouraging over-lending and stimulation of popular consumption in hedge funds and private equity as ways of financing businesses .
The specific management choices not only could not stave off the course towards deceleration and recession but , on the contrary , constituted a bomb ready to explode , with incalculable consequences for people 's income .
At the same time , EU policy accelerated the full liberalisation of capital in the credit system , in line with the principles of the capitalist market .
Hedge funds and private equity are the progeny of this course towards liberalisation .
No proposed effort towards greater transparency and stricter legislative regulation in relation to the movement of capital in the credit sector , that is to say , in the sphere of circulation , can tackle all the inconsistencies and contradictions created by capitalist relations of production .
Correspondingly , the imposition of stricter lending terms will lead to a contraction of popular consumption and the very rapid manifestation of crisis .
No-one can provide a clear definition or common characteristics , other than rapid profit , for these schemes , which have ever-increasing control within the global economy , schemes created by the plutocracy and exploitable by it alone , with the help of specialist market organisations .
The victims of this policy are the workers , who watch the wealth they produce accumulate in the hands of a small number of plutocrats and see their savings at risk of vanishing and their pensions also at risk .
It is typical that hedge funds and private equity are exempt even from those obligations that employers have towards workers .
The same also happens with pension systems - public and private - which transform workers ' pension rights into prey for capital , participating ever more widely in these schemes , termed investment schemes , multiplying the risks and dissipating the rights of workers .
There are many recent examples in the United States and the United Kingdom of secure credit institutions collapsing in a single day like a pack of cards and hundreds of thousands of workers losing their savings and pensions .
The economic crisis that currently plagues the markets did not come as a bolt from the blue .
It was widely anticipated , in terms of both timing and scale .
Perhaps the measures being taken today were also planned .
The workers , who , in the capitalist system of exploitation , financed the superprofits of the plutocracy through their labour and their savings , are today being called on in the name of stability - as taxpayers - to fund their losses as well .
Workers and the popular classes are unconvinced by the announced transparency measures , with the possibility of implementation and effectiveness , moreover , being doubtful .
They are unconvinced by the measures , which call on them to pay yet again for the rescue of capital profits and the maintenance of the system of exploitation .
They are expressing their disobedience and their insubordination towards this system and the centre-right and centre-left alliances that support and preserve it .
They are fighting against injustice , inequality and the exploitation of peoples , and for radical changes towards a system of popular power that will serve the interests of the workers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , doesn 't this all go to show that this vast exercise of EU financial regulation has singularly missed the mark ?
In its obsession about money laundering and pursuit of the elusive single market in financial services , the EU has been pursuing the wrong objectives .
Let us accept that , despite earlier assurances from Mr Trichet and Mr Almunia and others , there will be further financial failures in the European Union , and real economies in the EU will be affected by the credit crisis .
So there is not much point now in discussing capital requirements and what we will do in the future to stop this sort of thing happening again ; we have a problem , and the problem is now .
We can blame the Americans , we can blame hedge funds , we can blame investment bankers , we can blame who we like , but what Mr McCreevy 's Commission might rather spend its time now doing is discussing with the finance ministers of the different countries how the burden will be shared across countries when we find that we have to bail out financial institutions to the tune of hundreds of millions , as is now happening in the USA .
How are we going to come to the aid of Italy , Spain , Greece and Ireland - Mr McCreevy 's own country - when bad situations there are made worse by the crisis , and , stuck in the euro , there is nothing that those countries themselves can do to help themselves ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if European banks are withstanding the current crisis relatively well , it is simply because banking supervision in Europe - while far from perfect - is at least serious .
The ongoing work on the Capital Requirements Directive and on Solvency II affords an opportunity for introducing useful measures to improve financial security .
It goes without saying that the job of a banker entails taking risks but those risks must be controlled .
The important thing for bankers is to know at all times what security they have on a given risk .
Certain unregulated financial operators lost sight of that simple principle , and in their case self-regulation will no longer suffice .
Derivatives markets have grown increasingly murky , and traders have bought and sold at levels of risk that could not be contained by the management of those institutions that are now most exposed .
Recovery from this crisis depends on creating a supervisory system capable of inspiring and re-establishing confidence .
There are currently whole swathes of the finance industry that lie beyond the reach of supervisory authorities .
Who was supervising the mortgage brokers as they lent so generously to households that would never be capable of repaying ?
Who was supervising the investment banks that took the crisis up a notch by transforming the bad debt into financial products for sale all over the world ?
There is a regulatory void out there that is also inhabited by credit enhancers , ratings agencies and hedge funds .
It is not acceptable that Europe should periodically have to suffer the consequences of America 's faulty financial system .
With regard to hedge funds , the financial ' police ' in the UK and the USA have just temporarily prohibited speculation on falling asset values , and quite rightly so !
The failure of some of these murky operators would accelerate the crisis in the deregulated sector .
Not all investment funds are pernicious and some of them are actually necessary , but we cannot permit the continued existence of financial black holes .
Reviews are worthwhile and indeed essential but what we need right now is action !
That is the thrust of the two reports we are debating .
( ES ) Madam President , despite the fact that the speaker who preceded me is from a different political group , I am in total agreement with him : we cannot leave the financial markets in the hands of financial managers .
It is like leaving cheese to be looked after by mice .
Self-regulation and voluntary codes of conduct are no use .
As Commissioner Matridis said earlier , the thing that is saving the European financial markets is the existence of regulations , national regulations because each of our countries has regulations which work and are preventing the financial catastrophe in the US markets from spreading to Europe .
What lesson can we draw from this ?
That Europe cannot copy the United States in financial deregulation .
If our goal is to protect our economy and our economic and social system we have to have European-wide regulation but we must not replace national regulation with supranational deregulation as in the United States , where the system allows managers of companies to get rich on the back of poor investors , pensioners and people who depend on that capital .
I believe , therefore , that the lesson we must learn is not to deregulate but the reverse : it is that we need to adopt European regulations on all these aspects .
That , to my mind , is the core of both the Rasmussen and the Lehne reports : the need to establish European financial regulation .
There is much talk of the European passport , of giving a passport to undertakings to allow them to move throughout Europe in complete freedom but how can we grant the passport if we cannot be sure that those undertakings are subject to detailed regulation in their country of origin ?
To do so would be to invite another supranational financial catastrophe .
The regulations in the Lehne report contain a number of indications or recommendations on , for example , the actions of fund managers .
We should know how those funds are being managed ; and especially , we should know about the profits they earn through , for example , the purchase and sale of shares .
I believe this is essential .
Transparency must be combined with very strict regulation with the option for intervention at the appropriate time without waiting until the market has collapsed , as is the case in the United States at the moment , only for tax-payers ' money to be used to right all the wrongs committed by people who have abused their position .
Therefore , Commissioner , I urge you to use your position to try and establish a genuine Community system for regulation of these sectors so that we do not follow the path of self-regulation or deregulation .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to say a big thank you to Mr Rasmussen and Mr Lehne for their important reports .

As many have pointed out , they could not have come at a better time .
Developments on the US mortgage market have had major consequences for the entire global market over the last year .
Bad loans have been bundled and passed on .
Short-sightedness and the difficulty and complexity of many of the new market instruments have made the market more obscure and fast-moving .
Besides , exorbitant remuneration for company directors has seriously shaken confidence - I think we can agree on that .
Nor have the world 's financial supervisory authorities been able to strengthen their cooperation and competence sufficiently .
New instruments have been introduced ; openness and transparency have been lacking .
The starting point now should be the equal treatment of all financial market players ; that is to say , the introduction of stricter capital requirements and regulation , including for hedge funds and private equity .
On the matter of supervision , there has been discussion of the need for new authorities , in which regard many - I saw Gordon Brown only today - have been pressing for a common European , indeed even a global , system of financial supervision .
In my opinion , the continuing differences between markets - as illustrated by developments in the United States - give cause for reflection .
On the other hand , markets are connected globally .
As our committee also said , the existing committees in Europe for cooperation in the financial , banking and insurance fields should be strengthened considerably .
A great deal can be done in this regard - including at global level .
Transparency and clearer supervision need to be achieved if we are to rebuild confidence in the financial market .
I believe that there is a complete consensus on this , too .
The market economy needs clear rules , including clear rules of play .
As a Liberal , I have no difficulty at all in arguing in favour of clearer rules and more effective legislation .
On the other hand , we must take care not to introduce laws and rules that do not solve current problems and do not take account of the importance of a global financial market .
Global access to capital increases growth potential and creates new jobs - we should not forget this .
Europe needs an open , effective financial market that also leaves scope for self-regulation and internal remedial measures .
The challenge , therefore , is to avoid paralysing our systems by over-regulating , leaving us unable to handle either growth or new crises .
This week there was panic among the financial community .
We must not let such panic dictate our legislation - at least in this House .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is taking place against a backdrop of widespread financial market crisis caused by the increasing ' financialisation ' of the economy , unregulated speculation and the proliferation of financial instruments and products , the aim always being ever higher speculative gains .
This is one more facet of the crisis of capitalism .
It has been clear for some time that there was another financial bubble , and that one day it would burst , not only in the United States but in the European Union too .
It is also a result of the neo-liberal policies that prompted investors to seek increasingly higher gains , that encouraged lack of transparency , and that created tax havens and allowed them to shelter and launder capital from the underground economy , from the profits of war , from people trafficking and from drugs .
Now , the public funds that were not available for social policy , for combating poverty and social exclusion , and for preventing millions of people , including children , from dying of hunger and lack of basic health care , now , I repeat , public funds are being used to avoid bankruptcies and greater losses among financial groups .
The profits and gains were in the private hands of just a small group of investors and obscenely well-paid administrators , but those who will suffer the consequences are always the same : workers who lose their jobs , the rank and file who have to pay more interest , including here in the European Union , particularly in countries with weaker economies .
Take Portugal for example , where low wages and pitiful old-age and retirement pensions are the rule , and where poverty and unemployment rates are amongst the highest in the EU .
Since households have one of the highest debt ratios , amounting to around 120 % of GDP , and micro and small and medium-sized companies depend a great deal on credit , they are now experiencing ever greater difficulties due to the resulting increased interest rates , a particularly serious problem in Portugal and other countries with weaker economies .
Some measures are therefore required in the immediate term , beginning with the abolition of tax havens and confidentiality , without which there can be no transparency .
From what has been said here , however , by Commissioner McCreevy in particular , it seems that that will not be the way forward , and that is unacceptable .
In this critical situation the European Central Bank 's false independence must also be abandoned in order to ensure a change in monetary and financial policy objectives , and far-reaching measures must be taken to combat stock market speculation .
The priority in public policy must be to support the creation of jobs with rights , production and poverty reduction , thereby raising the purchasing power of workers and pensioners and supporting quality public services .
( SV ) Madam President , at present the financial crisis is casting hedge funds and private equity in a frightening light - and other financial innovations such as structure investment vehicles , conduits and money market funds are being similarly affected .
All of these have been conceived precisely for the purpose of sidestepping the capital adequacy and transparency requirements we impose on banks .
There is much profit to be made from borrowing liquid assets short , investing in illiquid assets long and staking minimum own capital , but this is a dangerous activity .
As we can see , both liquidity and solvency can soon vanish .
That is the reason for the strict international banking rules .
We are now seeing the collapse of the international non-banking system .
Hedge funds and private equity are next .
These have very little own capital ; they are highly leveraged .
Private equity involves enormous numbers of leveraged buyouts , LBOs , which have been carried out with virtually no own capital .
This being the case , should we really be presenting feeble reform proposals such as these in this field at this historic juncture ?
I for one do not think so .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have now heard everything from the experts who produced the report - Mr Rasmussen , Mr Lehne , Mr Lauk , thank you very much .


It was an excellent piece of work and met with great approval in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
In the past three years , Commissioner , we have constantly been asking for rules to be established , for questions to be raised , such as : how can we obtain greater transparency for hedge funds , who is advising the rating agencies , and so on .
They now come from Ireland and are therefore racing experts .
When the fences are high , the horses may well shy .
Put simply , shying away from an obstacle that is no longer there !
We must now - and this you have indeed promised - lay down rules and make proposals .
We have to show that we have learned something from all these crises and are striking new paths .
You put forward this proposal .
I hope that in October we shall be receiving the guidelines from you .
A few days ago I was at a large conference near Rome .
The first item discussed there , of course , was that of the banks .
On the Thursday the newspaper headlines read : Morgan Stanley offers hope .
On Friday , they read : Morgan Stanley seeks protection .
How can this happen in a single day ?
There are deficiencies here in transparency and the like .
If , after Bear Stearns , Lehman Brothers and Merril Lynch , this investment bank is also now sinking in the chaos of the financial markets , corrective action should be taken as a matter of urgency .
A short time ago I was in China .
The Chinese were saying : our role model , the United States , has collapsed .
Together we - Europe , China and others - must seek out new paths .
My hope is that together we shall have the strength to strike these new paths , then not only those who have won , but also those who have lost will be rescued with us .
( FR ) Madam President , I know that the Commissioner enjoys betting on horses so he will forgive me for using a sporting metaphor when I say that he is not exactly a favourite in today 's event .
Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , on the other hand , looks like a very good bet , so I think you might do well to consider changing colours , Commissioner .
What Mr Rasmussen has just outlined and proposed to us is precisely what the European Union needs .
It is right not only for the Union but for the rest of the world too - and the trans-Atlantic relationship that is so dear to your own heart would be enhanced by a European initiative on the basis of the Rasmussen proposals .
You seem to have come to the wrong debate , Commissioner .
You gave us a review of how the crisis started last year , but the issues we are discussing now are issues that had engaged our attention long before the crisis surfaced last August , for the rot had clearly set in at that stage and the financial world was ripe for a collapse .
We are not fuddy-duddies seeking to condemn or to prohibit alternative funds or investment funds .
We simply recognise that when certain financial vehicles or instruments are performing such strategic functions in the international markets and have acquired such a key position , then they must be subject to the general principle of regulation .
The operators in question are , in fact , telling us this themselves .
They are saying : ' Yes , OK , we can agree to regulation ; we just do not want to be stigmatised and we do not want a special system of regulation . '
Well , fair enough !
We want them to be registered , we want them to be supervised , we want them to be paid in accordance with normal principles , and we want them to be subject to transparency rules and to the rules on capital adequacy .
That is the reality .
These structures now occupy such an important place on the financial markets that they cannot continue to be exempt from the general rules .
Yet , this is the very point that you , Commissioner - a former Irish Minister for Finance - are refusing to concede .
That is the reality !
You tell us that hedge funds and private equities ' are not the cause of the current turmoil ' and that the blame lies with the regulated sector .
I have no wish to deliver an economics lesson , but we know full well that the banks felt able to take the risks they took precisely because of the parallel existence of hedge funds and private equities , processing financial products that accelerated the rot in the banking sector .
In relation to Mr Rasmussen 's report , I should like to invite you to respond to it in practical terms , point by point , for it contains a number of legislative proposals that might improve your own end-of-term report when the current Commission steps down .
I listened to what you told us and you spoke of a ' window of opportunity ' for improving transparency .
Well , we agree with you and we expect the Commission to use that opportunity .
The key to confidence among ordinary people and among financial-market operators is transparency .
It is obvious today that , in the areas of alternative funds and investment funds , there is no transparency . But transparency is what we need .
It goes without saying that I support many of the proposals in Poul Nyrup Rasmussen 's report but I should also like to take the argument a little further .
If we really want to strike at the heart of the problem , we shall have to examine the concept that you have described as the ' shareholding democracy ' .
What is meant by a shareholding democracy if it is possible , in a matter of minutes or a matter of days , to put so many people 's jobs in jeopardy ?
There is a very real problem here , which you need to address and on which we expect effective proposals .
Securities lending and borrowing jeopardises jobs in Europe and is at odds with the Lisbon Strategy .
My final point is one that previous speakers have also raised , namely the problem posed by offshore centres .
You , Commissioner , are an ardent defender of the trans-Atlantic alliance , so allow me to inform you that over on the other side of the Atlantic there are democrats who , like us , are ready to lobby for a full-scale assault on tax havens .
What is the use of fighting heroically in Afghanistan or Iraq without attacking evil where it exists on the financial markets - and offshore centres are a source of evil for the finance industry .
This is another subject on which we await your proposals , Commissioner .
Madam President , such failure of financial markets has never happened until now .
The main cause was the enormous increase in turnover , and the development of a new system of financial gain beyond the existing banking system without transparency , any effective evaluation or supervision .
New investments and vehicles brought big profits , but also caused an increasing threat , even to the IMF .
Although the proposal from Mr Rasmussen and his committee concerning transparency and supervision - particularly of the excessive debt leverage - are right and indispensable , we should also acknowledge as very dangerous the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs which demands simply that it be left solely to participants in the market to assess the appropriate level of risk to take .
The committee overlooked the fact that last year the average securities firm was leveraged 27 to 1 , with no regulation or supervision .
What is more , they regulated themselves completely on their own , and even the big lenders ignored the extent of the risk they were taking .
The cost of this failure will be extremely high .
The cost to Americans , for example , has been terrible , at around USD 1 000 billion .
It will have yet another additional effect : the actors on financial markets may not learn to be more cautious , because they will be accustomed to relying on help from taxpayers .
We then have the choice of either protecting the almost full freedom of choice for financial actors in taking risks , or to impose distinct obligations and limitations insuring effectively against excessive shocks and guaranteeing a stabilising development of financial markets .
The opinion of the Commissioner gives some hope for the future , but I am afraid that the tasks facing the Commission are extremely difficult and demand much more courage in finding new methods and new measures .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to say that both reports - the Rasmussen report and the Lehne report - as well as the social agenda with its 19 items that we debated last time , and the Council and Parliament resolutions on Georgia show what we are capable of when we are all pulling together , despite our different opinions .
I am saying this , therefore , because I am glad that the socialist election campaign machine , the superficial populism and the mutual recriminations have been dispensed with and the business of democratic parliamentarianism , responsibility for taking the necessary action and a frank and realistic debate will hopefully win through tomorrow .
Hence I am also saying this because the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , Mr Schulz , has tried repeatedly in plenary to drive a wedge between the groups on precisely these issues .
Good / bad , left / right , state / market thinking does not equate with the reality of people 's lives today , but emanates from an old electoral rhetoric based on class war , which I had hoped had been conquered in the EU , and today 's debate has so far also thankfully shown this .
Reason has triumphed and a realistic step forward can therefore be taken , a response given to the financial turbulence and people 's questions answered .
We have an enduring financial crisis .
We therefore need action .
We cannot ignore the agenda .
We need more European Union , more transparency , more supervision , more European and global regulation .
We need risk-based equity capital and we must ensure that we do what we admit to in these reports and that what we demand in both reports is implemented by all those involved .


( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Karras , if I have understood Morgan Stanley correctly in the last few days , they are less fearful of Mr Schulz 's stranglehold than of hedge funds .
If I have grasped one thing from the discussion of the last few days , Commissioner , it is that the American consensus in this company , which has made many mistakes in handling the property and financial crisis , is that we no longer want to allow individual gamblers to drive the entire financial system to the wall by exploiting its flexibility and lack of regulation .
How much longer do we actually want to carry on waiting until not only the ailing institutions , but also the sound ones have the red light forced on them and then hedge funds and other funds bet on their decline in order to snap them up again later at cheaper prices ?
This leeway must be dispensed with and for this reason I doubt that what you have done here will be sufficient .
It is not the time merely to be commissioning further studies .
It is not the time for further supervision of those involved .
It is time for action !
Last week I looked at an enterprise in my constituency , a sound enterprise , an enterprise producing the new materials we need : the vacuum melting company in Hanau , near Frankfurt .
For a very long time it was a sound enterprise , until it was taken over by an American investor .
Debts from the takeover are affecting the workforce , they are affecting the enterprise .
Since then the enterprise has been trying to pull out of the collective labour agreement and has been forced back into it by a bitter strike .
Is this what we to happen all over Europe ?
Do we really want the strength of the European economy to be based on this kind of conflict or can we regain some kind of understanding and fill the regulatory loopholes with European legislation ?
This is what is on the agenda .
In the last nine years in this House , Commissioner , I have not experienced a discussion on economic policy in which you have been asked to act so unanimously and by such common consent .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , six years ago we launched the global harmonisation of accounting rules and competitiveness in the European banking sector .
The Union 's cross-border financial integration has no equivalent in the world .
Financial researchers have long been pointing out that the European Union is far from being sufficiently equipped with mechanisms for solving cross-border crises arising from the increasing interdependence of European banks and their links to the global financial markets .
Although the European Central Bank has managed to maintain financial stability in the eurozone to date , the fragmented national regulatory bodies are not capable of implementing effective solutions to the cross-border banking crises we continue to experience .
In other words , centralised control is crucial .
However , rather than establishing an all-encompassing financial regulator , we should carefully define specific conditions for intervention by a pan-European financial regulator .
State intervention in investments banks such as AIG also arouses fears that such a precedent will lead to banks behaving irresponsibly in the future .
I am therefore convinced that we must introduce control mechanisms that will prevent the managers of investment and hedge funds from making ill-judged analyses of operational and systemic risks .
For example , hedge funds and private equity should not be able to finance long-term investments through short-term loans without setting the minimum amount of their capital stock , according to the level of risk of their activities .
The way mortgages have been financed not only in the US but also in the United Kingdom and Spain serve as a warning that the European financial markets are due some fundamental self-reflection , which will , I am afraid , be just that little bit too late .
Even if the European Commission came up with concrete binding legislation tomorrow , it would be implemented not in calm conditions but in a stormy and possibly hysterical atmosphere .
In any case , there is also the question of how acceptable the legislation would be to the Council .
Madam President , let me start by saying that it is a rare event when a European institution is acting before and not after a problem occurs .
And we are talking about a huge problem the real consequences of which will become visible in the months to come .
Thanks to the efforts of the rapporteur , Paul Rasmussen , the issue of hedge funds and private equity regulation has moved from the periphery to the centre of attention of the financial experts and policymakers .
It is the European Socialist Party that raised the need for better regulation of the activities of hedge funds and private equity .
We did it because all European policies need long-term investment , which requires long-term financing .
We did it because our main goal should be to secure sustainable growth and job creation , to ensure predictability and long-term planning for families and businesses .
I urge all Members to support the report , which has been approved by a large majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
That will be a big step for Parliament since we are going to request from the Commission a number of legislative measures which are aimed at achieving transparency and financial stability .
This is not an easy debate .
It is true that this report foresees much less than we initially strived for .
At the same time we are about to achieve more than seemed to be possible a few months ago .
Recent times and developments on the financial markets prove that we are right .
Now , Commissioner , we are not going to blame you if you decide to act preventively , and include in your legislative proposals more than the European Parliament will require from you .
It is not a time for competition in regulation - since excessive regulation is not better than the lack of regulation - but it is high time to act , and you know it .
( PL ) Madam President , the events of recent years , or months , even , but also the efforts made by individual countries and regions , indicate the growing importance of transparency not only for individual companies , but also for the development of specific states ' economies .
One barrier to direct regulation of the activities of hedge funds is the global nature of this industry and the potential for a fund 's offices to move to another state in order to avoid being subject to national regulations .
This is the main reason why all international institutions dealing with hedge funds try to influence fund activities through their relations with entities that are subject to regulation , especially banks .
The problems of transparency in the European Union are concentrated mainly on convergence and harmonisation of the law in Member States .
The problem areas relating to transparency aspects may be summarised as follows : establishing unified standards for information disclosed by companies introducing their shares onto the stock market and company law and corporate governance in relation to the question of the collective responsibility of agencies for information contained in company reports , reinforcing the role of independent council members , standards in the area of setting up committees as part of councils , disclosure of information on council and board members ' reimbursements , and also increasing investor protection .
The introduction of unified regulations , creating better conditions within the European Union for hedge fund action and distribution , could have a positive impact on their development in Europe , but the introduction by individual countries of their own , individual regulations relating to these funds is not helping to create a unified , common European market .
The establishment of common and transparent principles would considerably facilitate fund product distribution .
In the opinion of the European Commission , which received a request to review the framework principles relating to non-harmonised products like hedge funds , with a view to creating a pan-European market , there are no significant arguments for the creation of EU regulations on hedge funds .
Nothing could be more wrong !
I side with the rapporteur 's call for the Commission to present a legislative conclusion on the transparency of hedge funds and private equity .
Madam President , to begin with I would like to congratulate Poul Nyrup Rasmussen for his preparation of the report based on such profound analyses and excellent knowledge of the financial markets .
Both types of alternative financial instruments that we are discussing have an increasing share of assets in the global market and participate in creating new jobs .
However , the most important thing in the face of the financial crisis we have lately been observing with great anxiety and unsuccessfully trying to fight is to ensure financial stability .
In my opinion , the most efficient way to increase not only financial stability , but also fair competition between participants in the market , is to enhance supervision and transparency at the appropriate levels without doing any harm to the model based on innovative market strategies .
Some norms concerning the financial markets that have a direct and indirect application to hedge funds and private equity do exist above the national and European level .
Nevertheless , we should strive for the coherent , non-discriminatory and consistent implementation and application of those juridical regulations .
For this reason , I fully agree with the recommendations of the European Parliament , directed at the Commission , for increased activity and submission of the appropriate legislative proposals .

( RO ) I would like to congratulate rapporteur Rasmussen , and I believe that the recommendations contained in the annex to his report are particularly important .
Hedge funds and private equity funds ensure the capital required in order to meet the demand for the funding of long-term investments and of innovative , often highly risky projects .
Their operation , however , is less regulated than the banking system .
The stability of financial markets requires appropriate transparency , and that specific measures must be taken in order to prevent excessive debt .
Over the last 10 years , pension funds and insurance companies have provided one third of the amount collected by private equity funds .
I believe that increased transparency is needed , particularly in the case of pension funds , for them to be able to accurately assess the degree of risk of various investments .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that hedge funds and private equity funds are based on a growth strategy designed for a term shorter than the duration of the investments which Europe needs .
( ES ) Madam President , the financial crisis has shown that the various financial operators are interlinked .
Their conduct has weakened the financial markets and the real economy : growth and employment .
Achieving open , competitive and reliable markets is not something that occurs by happy chance ; this is shown by the experience in Europe .
The fragility of the financial markets also requires political action at European and international level .
It must remain clear that to innovate does not mean to imitate the old practice of privatising profit and socialising losses or that to diversify means to transfer the costs of decisions made by a few people to society as a whole .
The European Union cannot just do nothing in the current crisis .
The rapporteur , Mr Rasmussen , has taken the initiative and had the vision to propose that hedge funds and private equities , which hold assets amounting to over 4.5 % of world GDP , are not free of responsibility towards society and must be subject to intelligent regulation and supervision .
I congratulate him for this and support him , as I do Mr Lehne for his report on transparency .
( EL ) Mr President , with regard to the immense and tragically topical issue we are discussing , I should like to focus on a single question : is there a right and a left answer to the issue we are considering ?
Is there a right and a left way out of the crisis ?
Many would say , and indeed some of us today have said , that there is not - that everyone here must agree on such questions , which are technical and economic .
Apart from the fact that those who say this are nearly always on the right , I want to say that the dividing lines here - and the reports show this - are very clear .
What is the perspective of the left ?
That the market cannot regulate everything on its own and regulation by state power is required - and regulation even means prohibitions .
Why should we not think about what was said previously in the Katiforis report : that credit-rating agencies must only provide ratings and all other activities should be prohibited ; that transparency is important , not for the markets , but for citizens ?
Here we must think about the fact that pension funds must have special supervision .
Lastly , that it is highly crucial that state intervention takes place not at the end , as is now happening in America , and the American people are paying for it , but at the necessary moment so that the crisis is avoided .
( PT ) Madam President , I agree wholeheartedly with what has been said here on the window of opportunity created by Poul Rasmussen 's excellent report .
I would say , however , that it would have been even more opportune if it had been politically possible to present it six years ago - and I think Poul agrees with me .
Six years ago some of us tried to raise this issue of regulating hedge funds in the European Parliament , and the majority formed by the Liberals and the PPE systematically prevented the Socialist Group from incorporating it into various debates .
We are now experiencing a crisis , a structural crisis as Mr Almunia puts it , a crisis that will end no-one knows where , and one that we cannot turn a blind eye to .
We cannot take the position that Commissioner McCreevy has taken , we must - and I want to believe that the Commission is prepared to do this , bearing Mr Almunia 's comments in mind - we must be proactive and must abandon the financial governance model that has regulated the European and global economy in recent years .
This is what Poul suggests in his report , and this is what the Commission has the duty - I repeat , the duty - to examine and follow closely .
( NL ) Madam President , people are worried about what will become of their savings , but this seems to be of little concern to the Commissioner .
Workers have been urged to take out non-statutory pensions , which were supposedly safer and more efficient than state pensions ; their money is now in these pension funds , but they no longer have any certainty .
Current events are a setback for those who believe in unbridled free-market forces .
The Commissioner himself is one such believer in the free market .
As far as can be anticipated , there should not be too much regulation , he said last year in this House , and he is still saying it today .
Well , it is never too late for him to change his mind .
After all , in his opinion , what further action is needed in the way of prevention ?
The consequences of failing to act in good time will be felt for many years .
Prevention is better than cure .
Madam President , the new demon , I think the Commissioner will agree , seems to be short-selling .
I would ask the Commission to arrange a study which compares in the case of HBOS the incidence of short-selling against sales by long-only investors - pension funds , insurance companies , private investors and their fund managers - and the plain withdrawal of deposits by frightened banking clients and other banks .
I suggest we should have some facts before rushing to a conclusion , and yet another possibly mistaken conclusion .
In his report , to which incidentally our group has made a lot of contributions , Mr Rasmussen used HBOS and Northern Rock in his speech as reasons for more regulation , but HBOS and Northern Rock were banks , not hedge funds and private equity , and subject to the full rigour of the existing regulatory system for banks , including statutory capital requirements .
Is it not ironic that the crisis has occurred and spread in the supposedly most highly regulated part of the financial industry ?
Beware Sarbanes-Oxley !
( RO ) Sometimes we , politicians especially , are trapped in a dogmatism that leads to catastrophic consequences .
A few years ago , the supporters of liberalism , and in particular those of neo-liberalism , would have thought it impossible that something like the recent events in Washington could have occurred .
They would have rejected it on the basis of their doctrine , and yet it still happened .
Today , in the context of globalisation , consequences are quick to arise and they affect every country and every economy .
What the Rasmussen report says is that the EU must take action and I am convinced that , as a result of the vote of the European Parliament , the European Commission will be called upon to rise to this challenge that affects not only the life of a few , but the life of the population of the entire European Union- and will do so .
Madam President , some time ago we had a hot debate about investment banks .
Now investment banks have gone from the market , and we are feeling good with the current rules for the banking sector .
The same issue is relevant to hedge funds .
Hedge funds , in the current environment , are not sustainable any more , and I do think that we just need the same rules for all investment funds rather than specific rules for hedge funds .
With these rules , Mr Rasmussen , we are actually hindering restructuring of the financial sector , and the losses will mount .
That means that , in the end , you will not be able to protect the ordinary people you want to protect .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , one of the latter speakers , in furtherance of his argument , made the point - but I am sure he did not mean me to use it against him - when he said , people should not be blinded by their own dogmatism .
The danger in this particular debate is to try and get a balanced solution to the problems that we now have .
In the main , the report , which has been amended considerably from the initial ideas put forward by Mr Rasmussen , makes a genuine attempt , in my view , to have a balanced approach to this whole area .
But many of the contributors to the debate here in this House want to have an unbalanced approach to it , and that is not reflective of what was in the report .
Some - many of the speakers from one side of the argument , in particular - see the current financial turmoil and the difficulties which there undoubtedly are as the great opportunity to regulate everything out of existence , and the great danger is going to be , both nationally and in Europe in particular , that a very unbalanced approach is going to be taken to this .
I think Mr Purvis put his finger on the pulse when he made reference to the fact that the supreme irony of this particular financial crisis has been that it was the most heavily regulated sector , namely banks , that got themselves and the rest of us into considerable difficulty , and that it was not the activities of private equity or hedge funds that caused any of these problems at all .
In fact many of them suffered considerable losses as a result of the things that happened in other areas .
I certainly will take on board what Mr Purvis said about looking at what the incidence of short selling contributed to the demise of some of these institutions as against what long-term disposals by long-term investors have contributed to it .
I suspect that Mr Purvis knows the answer nearly as well as I do , which is that , in those two particulars which he has referred to , it will not be short sellers that will be deemed to be the problem in this area : it was long-term investors , rightly getting rid of long-term positions , because they felt that a particular institution was not on a sound financial footing .
But , be that as it may , I think the Rasmussen and the Leinen reports as they have come before us are a genuine attempt to look at all of these particular areas in a balanced way .
And I am prepared to do that .
For a number of months - for nearly a year now - I have signalled that I am going to do something in the area of credit-rating agencies .
As far back as last November / December , I started the process by writing to CESR , posing them a number of questions , finally getting reports from them this year , and ESME and other bodies , as well .
And having received all of that , I will be putting forward a proposal before Parliament and the Council in the next couple of months .
Credit-rating agencies are referred to in this particular in the Rasmussen report .
I also have been making efforts for well over a year to try and get some semblance of order into the idea of colleges of supervisors or a better regulatory system for cross-border financial institutions .
Anyone that has been following this particular debate is very much aware that there has not been universal agreement or anything near it among the Member States .
The proposal which is currently before the ECON Committee under the rapporteurship of Peter Skinner , namely the Solvency II Directive , and the ideas I put forward there about cross-border supervision of insurance companies and the considerable advancement there as to supervision , has run into considerable opposition from a large number of Member States and from a large number of parliamentarians in this House who are affecting the views of the supervisors and in their own Member States .
And , even though the call in the main in this House is for better cross-border supervision , when a test is put in front of them as to what I should do about it to have a more coherent approach to cross-border supervision , they go back and represent their national positions .
So let us have a little bit of honesty in all of this particular debate and in all of these debates .
In the area of the Capital Requirements Directive , as people who follow this in the ECON Committee will know , since the time we put through the Capital Requirements Directive , left over from that were a number of areas which we said we would deal with in an amended Capital Requirements Directive in the autumn of 2008 .
This is well over a year , 18 months ago .
Then we have added on to that , in particular , other areas , such as the cross-border supervision of financial groups , about which we finally got some type of conclusions from the ECOFIN Council some months ago , and I have signalled what I am intending to do in the question of the ' originate and distribute ' model .
It goes a long way towards what I signalled were my intentions some months ago - what I want to do - and I put forward some propositions ; it is reflected in Mr Rasmussen 's report , which is more or less in the same idea as myself in this particular regard .
But I will tell you this before it comes before the relevant committee : the Members of Parliament - if form is anything to go by in the past - will be representing the position of a lot of their own Member States , which is very much anti what I have put forward there .
So the proof of the pudding is going to be in the eating .
There is no point in supporting Mr Rasmussen 's report in this particular area and then , on the other hand , when the specific questions come before Parliament in the form of a proposition - which I am putting forward also in the next couple of months and which many months ago I signalled I was going to do - if Members of Parliament then take their own national positions , representing the views of some of the banking firms in their own country and some of the views of the governments of the Member States , then this will not necessarily be a very good idea .
Again I appeal for some type of rational approach , and at least some coherence .
I very much respect the opinions of people who are consistent in all of this : people who say , ' I do not think that is a particularly good idea ' , and follow it through by saying it here in Parliament and when they go before the committee and stick with that position .
But where I do have difficulty is with people who in the main go along with some advancement in some of the areas which are referred to and then , when it gets down to a specific proposal , go back and more or less represent the views of their own Member State 's position or of institutions in their own Member State .
But this particular city is probably the headquarters of the world lobbying industry .
I have heard different figures over the years as to whether there are more lobbyists here than there are on Capitol Hill in Washington , but there is not much between them in any event .
So I will be interested , when some of the ideas which I am bringing forward , which I have signalled for some time and which are now in the public domain ( there has been consultation about it , the papers have been out and everybody knows some of these propositions in the areas which have been referred to ) - when , in the next very short while , these propositions come before Members of the European Parliament - whether all the Members who spoke so heavily for some changes in the wider area , when it comes down to specifics , will follow through and support what is here .
We have taken good note of the points identified in both the Rasmussen and Leinen reports .
As I promised in my earlier remarks , we will respond to this in more detail in the context , as provided for in the framework agreement .
Mr Rasmussen asked me if that would be before the end of this year - I think a couple of months ago he said that , hopefully , by the end of the year we would be able to respond - and I promised him we would be able to respond .
But in response to the gentlemen who spoke about how everyone should not be blinded by their own dogmatism , I think he might be referring to the other side of the argument .
I ask people on that side of the House not to be blinded by their own dogmatism either .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I want to thank my colleagues , and also the Commissioner , for the debate .
Just before I round off the debate as far as I am concerned on the report , I want to say to Mr Purvis , my colleague , that it is true that banks are regulated , but the products that were the cause of all this trouble we are having now are not regulated , and it was not regulated that we could put as much aside of the balance sheet as we actually did .
So , Mr Purvis , the answer is that we need better regulation and we need regulation for the products as well .
I would say to Mrs Starkevičiūtė , in order to avoid any misunderstanding , that I am not talking about regulating the entity but about regulating the behaviour .
We know that in real life hedge funds and private equity often change their legal constructions , and there are a lot of examples of that - investment banks themselves have executed private equity activities .
So it is behaviour we have to change , and this is at the heart of this report .
I would say to Commissioner McCreevy that there is one fundamental thing - which has nothing to do with dogmatism or whatever - that I want to underline to you , and that is that the first paragraph in our report underlines the following : that the regulation has to cover all financial actors .
It is the fundamental intention of this report , for the first time in the European Union 's legislative history , that what we want is a common total regulation based on the philosophy of a level playing field , leaving no one outside , but which has a unique regulation covering all financial actors .
The report explicitly adds : ' including hedge funds and private equity ' .
Then you tell me , Commissioner McCreevy , and the rest of the European Parliament : yes , I agree with you , but not on hedge funds or private equity .
What are we talking about here ?
For three years we have been discussing with you whether private equity or hedge funds should be covered or not covered by regulation .
Before the financial crisis you said this was not necessary : they are better than any government to regulate , so let them do their job .
Now you say that they do not have a share in the financial crisis , so we will not intervene in regulating the hedge funds and private equity .
Mr Commissioner , you talked about lobbyism here in the European Parliament .
I can confirm to you that many hedge funds , lobbying organisations and private equity organisations are here every day , every night , every time .
But I think this House must now insist that the Commission - and that is you - come up , before the end of the year , with a total regulation ; this is the first paragraph covering all financial actors .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , so great is the transparency of funds that the well-endowed rating agencies , the even better-endowed boards of banks and the more meagrely endowed regulatory authorities no longer knew what was going on .
That is how transparent things are !
The fact that we need to act here is self-evident and needs no further justification .
Commissioner , you addressed the question of the position with regard to short sellers .
It is not a matter of whether the short sellers themselves lose out at the end of the day .
The point is what they set in motion and what damage it might have caused .
It is really about the effects of their actions on others .
That , indeed , is precisely why the regulators in numerous countries have reacted .
As various Members have said , it is about ordinary people , about pensioners and taxpayers .
I must re-emphasise that we are nationalising losses , and that cannot be right .
My report , like Mr Rasmussen 's report , contains a large number of very specific proposals .
In my case , they mainly relate to issues of company law .
It is relatively easy to draw up and implement proposals on these issues .
In essence , the only thing that need be done is to supplement the existing rules .
Nor is it in any sense a matter of discriminating against some hedge funds or other .
At the present time , we have a situation in Europe - and no one disputes this - in which these alternative financial instruments are regulated by national law but are regulated in very different ways in some instances .
It makes perfect sense to incorporate them all into a European financial market and regulate them uniformly .
To call for more specialists ' reports now , when we have already been discussing the matter , as Mr Rasmussen said , for three years , when we in this House already have specialists ' studies , when the Commission has been dealing with the matter and we have held hearings about it , is , I believe , pointless and would only waste time .
There is truly a need to take real practical measures .
The situation demands action .
Let me make one more remark , which relates to government funds .
I entirely agree with you .
We need government funds , and in the long term we shall also need government funds from other countries , from countries outside the EU , because otherwise it will probably become impossible in the long run to fund infrastructure expenditure in Europe .
That is a matter in which you surely have the support of the Committee on Legal Affairs too , although it is not directly connected with the subject we are discussing today .
We have always backed initiatives that the Commission has taken in this domain , and we shall continue to do so .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The fact that the lack of transparency concerning hedge funds and private equity funds has led to a flare-up of the current economic crisis is not up for debate .
It is one of the elements which have led , among other things , to the current impossibility of an accurate evaluation of the debt and loan balance of many financial institutions .
For years on end these financial institutions have wrecked economies and carried out aggressive take-overs , ignoring not only medium and long-term economic consequences , but also the social consequences of their activity .
Lured only by the prospect of short-term profit , they orchestrated the breakdown and sale of entire companies , disrupting national economies and toying with monetary markets , in total disregard for transparency and rules .
It is clear that these funds must be regulated and that an appropriate level of transparency must be put in place .
This is necessary not only for the stability , health and proper functioning of financial markets , but also in order to decrease the risk threatening those financial markets which are in an early stage , in developing countries , and therefore lack stability .
This crisis has proven how dangerous the consequences of laissez-faire are , and how important it is to ensure the future transparency of financial activities .
in writing . - ( RO ) I commend the rapporteur for his tenacity in pursuing a topic against stiff opposition from various vested interests .
The deepening financial crisis has structural causes which are linked to a huge overexpansion of financial transactions during the past decade , which have been based on a flawed securitisation process , reckless risk-taking , a breakdown of due diligence and lack of understanding of systemic risks .
The problem with hedge funds , in particular , is that they contribute to increasing systemic risks .
The claim that it is the money of investors which is at stake is only a very small part of the whole story .
Very high leveraging and focus on short-term gains increase overshooting .
But , even worse , the speculative nature of such operations produces instability and can damage financial stability , as has been clearly indicated by the current crisis .
It makes sense to bring the activity of hedge funds ( and equity private funds ) within the territory of regulated financial entities .
Leveraging should not be unconstrained .
Likewise , hedge funds should provide the regulatory and supervisory authorities with full information on their transactions .
Citizens ' petitions during the year 2007 ( debate )
The next item is the report by David Hammerstein , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2007 .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank all members of the Committee on Petitions , especially all the shadow rapporteurs and our Chairman , Marcin Libicki , for their cooperation and daily work on petitions .
More than ever , we need petitions from citizens to bring Europe closer to the street and day-to-day problems .
More than ever we need petitions from citizens to ensure that Community law is complied with and implemented .
We need petitions from citizens so that we can provide tangible proof of what Europe is for , to prove that Europe is not an opaque institution but something that affects everyone 's daily lives and that we are able to hold a dialogue with thousands of citizens .
We are succeeding .
In 2007 the Petitions Committee had 50 % more cases than in 2006 .
That success is a reflection of our work ; it is a success which blazes the trail for the European institutions in general .
My country , Spain , is the country with the highest number of petitions studied at the Petitions Committee .
One third of petitions on the environment of the European Union are from Spain .
This is a reflection of the confidence in European institutions which exists in Spain , and a reflection of the work we have done in Spain .
But there is an increasing number of cases from new Member States of the European Union such as Romania or Poland .
However , the success of the Petitions Committee , the success in the number of petitions , is also causing a number of administrative and political problems .
The Committee lacks resources .
The number of cases is continually growing yet the same number of people are working at the Secretariat and the same number of people are working at the European Commission to process the petitions .
The institutions need to respond sensitively to citizens ' concerns ; we need sufficient resources to be able to deal with the petitions quickly and appropriately .
Sometimes petitions procedures drag on for years and years ; if petitions are not processed they lose their validity and the European Institutions completely lose their capacity to intervene .
Sometimes there is a lack of high-calibre legal and administrative care in the way petitions are handled by the European Commission .
Yes , there are petitions which irritate the powerful .
Yes , there are petitions which irritate the authorities .
Yes , there are petitions which are inconvenient because they bring hundreds or thousands of people to the European Parliament .
Yet this is how Europe will be strengthened .
Last year we made six fact-finding visits to Germany , Spain , Ireland , Poland , France and Cyprus , each of which resulted in a report .
We placed particular importance on petitions which reflect citizens ' concerns about the environment and its protection , and petitions relating to directives on water , property rights and minority rights .
In many ways we have improved cooperation with the Commission , the Ombudsman and institutions such as SOLVIT to speed up responses to petitions .
Petitions often require mediation outside the courts , not a solution which simply consists in bringing the matter before the European courts .
One of the most important cases in recent years , in 2007 and previously , was the petition on the Via Baltica , a roadway which goes through an area protected under Community law ; the European Commission and the Court of Justice have already acted in an exemplary manner to prevent irreparable damage to the environment .
Other very important cases ( and at this point I would like to thank Commissioner McCreevy , who is here today ) were the Valencia urban development law , where Mr McCreevy and his team acted effectively to defend the Public Procurement Directive .
Other cases were Equitable Life , the Loiret in France , protection of water quality in France and the delicate issue of custody of children in Germany .
We currently have a number of petitions such as the petition for a single seat for the European Parliament , which has been signed by one and a half million citizens : we demand the right to process that petition , a right which has not been granted by the Bureau of Parliament .
Finally , we make some proposals , including a change of name to the Petitions Committee , which would become the ' Committee on Citizens ' Petitions ' so as to clarify the essential function and role of European citizens within the Committee .
To the same end we ask that Parliament be opened up in all ways on the Internet and request interoperability of Parliament 's web systems ; the web systems currently close the door to thousands or millions of Europeans who do not have the type of software needed to access the web , where my speech here in Parliament is being broadcast right now .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am taking part in this debate on behalf of my colleague Margot Wallström .
The work of the Committee on Petitions is a fascinating source of insight into the concerns and grievances of citizens concerning European affairs .
They cover a wide range of policy areas , although land-use planning and environmental issues crop up very often ; they cover practically all Member States , and they cover a broad cross-section of civil society , from the individual citizen right up to the multi-national non-governmental organisation .
Your rapporteur is right , I believe , to underline the importance of all the work represented by the thousand or more petitions you receive each year .
There are two aspects of the report and resolution which I would like to pick up .
The first is the recent development of on-the-spot visits of the committee to the sites of grievances , and which can have a considerable impact in the media , and will no doubt raise the visibility of your work .
These missions , besides the press and media coverage , also give rise to very informative reports and would seem to me to be of a high quality .
I think that these are important records of your activity and that they deserve wide publicity .
It is a big investment of your time and resources , but I am sure that it is one that pays off .
The second of the points I wish to raise is turned more to the future .
I wish to reassure you once again of our intentions for the best possible collaboration between the Commission and Parliament .
This collaboration is mutually reinforcing ; the habit of collaboration instils a better exchange of information , and , as an outcome , a better all-round standard of service for our citizens .
The recent increase in the workload in the petitions routine , described in the report , makes the need for an efficient and effective interinstitutional collaboration all the more important .
I would like you to know that we will do our best to make it work .
Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Hammerstein , on the report he has drafted and the work he has done on it .
The last Eurobarometer opinion poll at EU level shows that the European Parliament is the institution most trusted by European citizens .
In fact , 52 % of Europeans trust the European Parliament , which is more than the percentage who trust the European Commission ( 47 % ) , more than the percentage who trust their national parliament ( trusted by only 34 % ) , and also more than the percentage who trust their national government ( trusted by only 32 % of EU citizens ) .
I feel that we should increase this trust that is placed in the European Parliament .
The fact remains that the European Parliament is the institution most trusted by EU citizens .
I think that this results from the fact that the Members of this Parliament are directly elected by the people ; it also results from the fact that the Treaty recognises the citizen 's right to make a complaint , to present a petition to this Parliament for its consideration .
This is in fact the work that is performed by the Committee on Petitions , which is therefore a very important committee because it gives voice to the people and is therefore the committee , among the 20 committees in this Parliament , that is close to the people .
What can we do to improve this situation ?
I think that we should increase awareness of this committee and of the possibility for citizens to petition .
Here I disagree with the rapporteur that there is sufficient awareness ; I think that 1 500 petitions are too little when you consider that we represent a continent of half a billion people .
Moreover , we have to increase awareness and the possibility for citizens to complain , to petition .
We need more simplification so that it is easier for citizens to make a complaint .
That is why we are asking in this report that the Secretary-General of the European Parliament negotiate with the European Commission to simplify the petition .
We also want more efficiency , because we feel that there is too much of a delay in the consideration of complaints .
To say the least , we take three months to register people 's petitions or complaints ; this delay is unacceptable .
Lastly , we want a more effective remedy .
We want there to be more cooperation before the start of legal proceedings and we want national representatives to be present too when our citizens ' complaints are heard . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work he has done and for his concrete proposals .
The text we have today reflects the need for his report to be more than a simple enumeration of the main activities carried out by the Committee on Petitions on 2007 .
I am glad to see that the points we insisted on are in the report .
Petitions are about bringing to light the wrong or non-application of Community legislation .
Petitions are about guaranteeing the rights that the European Union confers on its citizens .
However , I cannot avoid sharing with you the feeling that this unique institutional instrument is not always effective , or at least not as much as it could be or it should be .
As rapporteur , Mr Hammerstein has rightly underlined some shortcomings and deficiencies which exist , and these must be addressed .
Firstly , it is hardly disputable that the number of petitions coming before the committee is constantly increasing .
Petitioners sometimes face substantial delays before receiving a response or seeing the effects of proceedings .
The instruments for exerting pressure on Member States are not always satisfactory .
I am wondering what we can do to be more efficient .
How can we ensure both effectiveness and a prompt response ?
We need better rules and more stringent time-frames .
We need to enhance the committee 's own independent investigatory facilities , and for this we need more resources and legal expertise for its secretariat .
The number of petitioners is increasing steadily .
This is the voice of the European people and we cannot afford to ignore it .
Secondly , the institutionalised channels of communication with national authorities are insufficient .
The number of inadmissible petitions is significant .
We need to establish additional coordination structures with the relevant authorities at a national parliamentary and government level .
I again congratulate the rapporteur on his work , and thank him and the colleagues from the other groups for their valuable cooperation .
Petitions are about citizens fighting for their rights , their European rights .
We must be here , ready to defend them .
That is the committee 's institutional role and duty .
That is what we owe our fellow European citizens , and I am sure you will agree that there could be no better time to show our commitment to meeting their expectations .
Commissioner , this Committee is not just about visibility and making itself more effective in the eyes of the European media .
I wish to refer here - even if this is not about the 2007 report - to the very successful way in which the Committee on Petitions and the European Commissioner , László Kovács , have been working together to defend the rights of European citizens in my country of origin , Romania , and I wish to thank him .
Thank you very much .
I am sorry , but we have run out of time .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I want to say well done to the rapporteur , Mr Hammerstein , on his very comprehensive and wide-ranging report .
I was very interested to read in the report that , while other committees have a heavy responsibility of legislative activity , the Committee on Petitions has shown that its role and function are also essential .
Indeed , I fully agree with that sentiment and I become more convinced of it with every committee meeting I attend .
Our primary role in this Parliament is that of legislators , but , in order to be good legislators , we need to be aware of the impact of our legislation so that we can improve our efforts in Parliament .
In my opinion , any legislation emanating from this House should improve the quality of life of citizens in some way , and in the Committee on Petitions we see that this is not always the case .
This often happens because of the non-implementation of legislation , or inadequate implementation , or because of specific circumstances or situations that the legislation does not address .
I think that is a salutary lesson to all of us and we need to hear and respond .
For me , however , the core of this report is about how the committee responds to citizens , and I have said before that in order to respond effectively , we need to put ourselves in the shoes of the petitioners .
They are approaching a large institution ; they often have no legal or political background ; they are put off by bureaucracy and are probably very frustrated at the situation in which they find themselves .
For many petitioners , we are the last port of call and it is crucial that we respond effectively and efficiently .
This in my opinion starts with clear , understandable information for citizens .
And we as MEPs are not always the best people to judge .
Panels of citizens , I believe , should road-test any information we supply , any websites we design , any booklets we print .
We need to be very careful that we do not promise more than we can deliver , otherwise citizens will be totally frustrated and end up blaming Brussels bureaucracy .
When I use the word ' promise ' , what I mean is this : We must understand that citizens do not know about national authorities stonewalling , they do not know how the system works and we have a duty to them to tell them how it is .
Certainly , we can and should try to influence change and this report is certainly doing that , but we cannot allow citizens to get caught as the meat in the sandwich .
Once citizens have good , accurate information and once they are aware of the possibilities for action , then we can provide the service they need .
This report outlines in detail what is needed : sufficient resources so that the secretariat can respond in a timely way ; greater involvement by the Council and Member States and maximum coordination with the Ombudsman and SOLVIT .
But , above and beyond that , this report also clearly indicates that systemic weaknesses need to be further investigated .
This happens where petitioners cannot obtain rightful compensation and where Member States delay to avoid compliance until fines are imminent and still avoid responsibility for past intentional violations .
We as legislators , in conjunction with the Commission , surely have a responsibility to act in those situations .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , David Hammerstein .
I am very pleased that Mr Hammerstein prepared this report , since he is one of the most committed and outstanding members of the Committee on Petitions .
He is someone that I have enormously enjoyed working with over the past four years .
I would also like to thank all the other members of the Committee on Petitions , as well as those who have already spoken and also those who are about to speak on this matter , and also the secretariat of the Committee on Petitions , which is doing great work .
As can be seen from the report presented to us by Mr Hammerstein , the number of petitions has grown enormously .
This is the work that has been weighing on the secretariat .
The Committee on Petitions is a very special committee because , as has been mentioned before , it does not work on legislation in the same way as other committees ; instead it works primarily to create communication between European institutions , especially the European Parliament , and our citizens .
As Mr Busuttil reminded us , the European Parliament enjoys an enormous amount of trust and this trust results from , among other reasons , the work of our Committee .
These 1 500 petitions do not just represent 1 500 people .
Behind these petitions there are often hundreds of thousands of people .
I would remind you that with regard to the issue of a single seat for Parliament , there were over a million signatures .
With regard to the issue of references to God and Christianity in the constitution , there were over a million .
For the COPE radio in Barcelona , there were 700 000 .
Tens of thousands of signatures on the petitions concerning area management plans in Spain , concerning Equitable Life and Lloyds .
Millions of EU citizens know that the Committee on Petitions is part of the European Parliament and they know that , very often , this is their final possibility of redress .
Unfortunately , I do not have the time to speak any more on this subject .
Once again I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in the good work of the Committee on Petitions .
I would also like to say that the Conference of Presidents of the Political Groups rejected the report from the European Ombudsman concerning improper administration in the European Anti-Fraud Office .
That is a great shame !
The Leaders ' Conference also rejected a report concerning discrimination against children from broken families in Europe , which we called the Jugendamt , the Jugendamt report .
It was about discrimination against children from broken families where one spouse is German and the other of another nationality .
I am very sorry that the Conference of Leaders did not help European Union citizens to get help from the European Parliament .
Mr President , please treat this as a small token of appreciation for your excellent work .
We shall now continue the debate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I speak here as a non-member of the committee .
Petitions give a direct voice to the people of Europe ; at a time of growing Euro-scepticism in many of the Member States , I consider that very apt and very important .
The petitions themselves are taken seriously and acknowledged .
This is reflected in an increase in the number of petitions .
We therefore consider it crucial that all the matters addressed in these petitions be followed up appropriately so that public confidence in the institution of the European Parliament can be maintained .
We must keep a watchful eye on this .
Let me cite three examples .
Firstly , the petition on a single seat for the European Parliament was signed by huge numbers of people .
But there seems to be resistance to the idea of holding a genuine debate here and providing a clear answer .
The public , however , deserve an answer , and we must give them one .
My second example is the Via Baltica expressway project with all its attendant environmental problems .
An appropriate response was made in this case , which the petitioners have duly acknowledged .
My third example is a reminder that petitions sometimes relate to aims that the European Union proclaims but does not subsequently pursue , as in the case of the Open Parliament initiative .
The thrust of this petition is that people should not be required to buy one particular computer program so that they can watch the material transmitted from the European Parliament and respond in the only permissible format .
Open Parliament means open standards .
We have an obligation here , and we must act on it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I consider the Committee on Petitions the most important in this House .
It is a forum in which the citizens tell us how the many laws that we deal with in other committees affect them or do not affect them .
Without this feedback we are doomed to work in a vacuum .
But , in terms of its work of standing up for Europe 's citizens , there is something missing in the procedure , and that is the presence of the Council and the Permanent Representatives of the Member States .
How can we mediate for citizens in a dispute with their country without the country attending the Committee on Petitions ?
The people of Ireland came to the Committee on Petitions with three petitions in connection with our most valued and sensitive archaeological site : Tara , the Home of the High Kings and of St Patrick .
The Committee on Petitions responded enthusiastically and called for the destruction of this site to stop , and urged the Commission to pursue its case against the Irish authorities , and yet nothing has changed .
The destruction is nearly complete .
There will soon be a toll gate where the Home of the High Kings once stood .
The Irish people will , understandably , not get over their disillusionment .
( NL ) Mr President , it was with mixed feelings that I read the 2007 report of the Committee on Petitions .
Positive feelings in the first instance , because it goes without saying that our citizens are entitled to see all legislation properly applied .
Naturally I have no problem with people turning to any organisation , including of course the European Parliament , in order to get those laws implemented if a national or local authority refuses to do so .
The 2007 report is full of examples of cases where the Committee on Petitions was quite right to take action .
But my feelings were mixed , because on the other hand I am particularly wary of and alarmed by the growing encroachment of European law , by more and more European meddling and interfering in things which to my mind are unquestionably matters for subsidiarity and would really be better left to Member States .
In my own region of Flanders , for example , we have increasingly seen Europe meddling in matters of major concern to us .
I am thinking especially of the defence of our Dutch language , of our culture and identity in our capital city of Brussels and in the area of Flanders around Brussels , the Vlaamse Rand .
On issues like these we find Eurocrats who know very little about it all preaching to us in very general terms and telling us what to do .
That makes us particularly angry , and it is unacceptable .
I also see that this report repeatedly refers to the procedures set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
And I must stress once again that following the ' no ' vote in Ireland , this Lisbon Treaty is politically and legally a dead duck .
We of the Committee on Petitions , perhaps more than any other members of this House , must show respect for the legal realities and the democratically expressed voice of the people , in this case the people of Ireland , who have consigned the Lisbon Treaty to the dustbin of history .

( EL ) Mr President , our fellow Member Mr Hammerstein always bears in mind matters that are of concern to citizens , and I have had occasion to see this for myself when taking part in delegations to the Committee on Petitions .
He also shows great sensitivity in the way he wishes to present the work of the Committee on Petitions in a report .
I daresay this is a ground-breaking report because it is not the same one we present every year ; it tries to highlight certain cases that the committee has attended to .
The aim of the endeavour is certainly to improve the effectiveness of the Committee on Petitions in order to meet European citizens ' expectations .
The endeavour aims to ensure that citizens have confidence in the way their cases are handled and that there is a distinction between the right to submit petitions to the European Parliament and the submission of complaints to the European Commission and other bodies .
It is very important that citizens understand the differences between procedures .
We are not aiming for more petitions .
We are aiming for petitions that have substance and are apolitical .
We therefore want a secretariat with integrity , one that will not get involved in political disputes or decide the petitions procedure on the basis of political developments in the country .
Similarly , in the case of court decisions , we do not want the Committee on Petitions to get involved in legal developments , and we want it to respect the decisions of the European Court of Justice .
We have not seen any benefits from the increase in the number of committee members from 25 to 40 .
Look at the results of the votes .
How many members vote ?
Never as many as the 25 who first made up the Committee on Petitions .
Extrajudicial proceedings provide a valuable channel for citizens , and fortunately we have SOLVIT for cases concerning the internal market , a resource that citizens should make use of .
Above all , everything should be conducted in a transparent , independent manner , so that we are equal to our task .
( PL ) Mr President , in 2007 the European Parliament received over 1 500 petitions , which is 50 % more than the previous year .
This shows unequivocally that there is an increased awareness among our inhabitants that they can pursue their rights on a European level .
Over 500 petitions were discussed during meetings of the Committee on Petitions , 159 of these in the presence of the petitioners .
In addition , in 2007 as many as 6 fact-finding visits were organised to Germany , Spain , Ireland , Poland , France and Cyprus , as a result of which recommendations were prepared for all interested parties .
The concerns of EU citizens as contained in their petitions focus largely on issues such as : the environment and how to protect it , property rights , the right of free movement and employment rights , recognition of professional qualifications and discrimination .
The process of submitting a petition can have a positive impact on the process of good law-making , especially through the identification of areas , highlighted by petitioners , where European Union law is still weak or ineffective .
For this reason the competent legislative committees should pay particular attention to the problems described in the petitions when preparing and negotiating new or updated legislation .
Taking into account the fact that Member States do not always display the political will to find practical solutions to the problems described in petitions , the Committee on Petitions should move in the direction of increasing the effectiveness of its work in order to serve its citizens better and to fulfil their expectations .
Better inter-institutional coordination should accelerate the process of considering complaints , as also the system of passing on petitions considered as inadmissible to the competent national authorities .
The fact that activities of the Committee on Petitions are effective gives inhabitants a clear signal that their justified concerns are being investigated effectively , which creates a real link between citizens and the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , this is another report on the standard function and operation of the Committee on Petitions , and the truth is that we must acknowledge that from one report to the next the Petitions Committee and the European Ombudsman continue to be excellent tools that European citizens can use to flag up and request solutions to misapplications of European law .
Therefore it is crucial that our proposals continue to keep European citizens in the leading role , even though sometimes on occasion things have perhaps not gone as smoothly as they should .
Sometimes , especially recently , and here I must confess that I am as guilty as anyone , the leading role of MEPs and their political debates , even at national or local level , is too influential in procedures where national remedies have not run their course , and may give citizens false hopes that the European Union can resolve everything ; therefore there is a need to set an example that the principle of subsidiarity is crucial to ensure that all bodies , whether at State , local , regional or even European level face up to all their responsibilities .
I therefore would like citizens to be able to reclaim their leading role and for them to do so through greater and more extensive information on all the opportunities of the right of petition , the fact that they exist and that there are more of them than ever , and information on how the other means of recourse , whether local , regional or national , operate so that recourse to the European Parliament , recourse to a petition , is genuinely appropriate and effective and does not ultimately result in frustration .
I also believe that there are contradictions in some of the proposals put forward by the rapporteur : we are told that resources are insufficient , there are delays , wishy-washy replies , duplication of cases , yet the proposals include , for example , transferring the register of petitions to the Secretariat .
I believe that this would demote the profile of petitions and the ...
There is nobody on the catch-the-eye list at this moment .
A rule is a rule .
So you may finish your speech !
( ES ) Thank you , Mr President ; if this is another facet of flexibility then I am grateful to you for it .
I believe , therefore , that we should hold the register of petitions at the Presidency ; I am of the view that we should not demote the status of petitions , and holding the register at the Presidency would provide and even maintain visibility for petitions in our Chamber as they would not be restricted to the Petitions Committee .
I am also concerned , and I would like to hear the Commission 's - Mr McCreevy 's - view on this , as he is here , about the rapporteur 's proposals on revision of the infringement procedure .
I would like him to give us some clarification .
Finally , I am also concerned about the role of fact-finding and conclusive proof under discussion .
I believe that the role of our Petitions Committee and its duties must be to maintain politicians ' and citizens ' standing to demand that other powers , other institutions , operate as they should .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to thank Mr Hammerstein for his report , and also the committee chairman , Mr Libicki , and the vice-chairs , for all the work they have done in collaboration with us over the years .
I trust that the spirit of collaboration will continue up to the end of this legislature .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for all the contributions , which I have tried to include in the report .
The comments on the slowness of any procedure have merit .
One of its causes is the register for petitions : there is no reason why a petitioner should have to wait three or four months just to be given a number for their petition .
That is the reason behind transferring them to Brussels under the Presidency and , with the help of the Secretariat to the Petitions Committee , registering petitions here ; there is absolutely no question of demoting petitions .
More comments have been made on scant implementation of Community law or non-compliance with it in many cases .
We on the Petitions Committee monitor this lack of implementation .
We do not in any way view our task as one of interfering .
The fact that the Chairman of the Commission , a Pole , visits Spain is not interference ; it is a matter of European law .
The Petitions Committee offers citizens recourse to Community law when remedies in their countries have been exhausted .
In no way do I believe that any cases have been politically influenced , not at all .
The important cases which have come to the attention of the Petitions Committee have been ones where there has been a continuous breach over many years of Community law , and therefore they have come to the right place , the Petitions Committee .
The resources of the Secretariat of the Petitions Committee are important in order to maintain its autonomy and independence .
By way of illustration , if we take the view that a procurement method for a computer service which cannot be operated by Parliament or Council and the Commission is incorrect , how can we ask the European Commission for its opinion on its methods of procurement if we do not have the means to conduct an autonomous , independent investigation ?
Quite simply , we cannot .
That is why we need greater capacity , and it is obvious to all members of the Petitions Committee that the Secretariat has too much work and needs more resources .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 23 September 2008 .
European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Katerina Batzeli on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) - C6-0151 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , the proclamation of next year as the European Year of Creativity and Innovation is fully in accord with the aims and priorities of the EU to develop the European knowledge society as a key response of the Europe of 27 to the economic and social challenges of globalisation .
This globalisation blatantly seeks to place at the centre of developments nothing other than the economy , which is in fact all too often the illicit distribution of profits .
Globalisation , if it is to develop into an equitable development policy able to deliver its economic and social benefits to all regions , must be human-centred .
It must provide equal access opportunities for all citizens , in every part of the world .
We have made the right choice in opting for the combination of innovation and creativity as the key dimension of the European Year 2009 .
Thus , the ' knowledge triangle ' - education , research and innovation , with creativity - makes the citizen the central pillar of the EU development model .
In addition , the choice of 2009 as the Year of Creativity and Innovation is in terms of policy clearly an extension of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Let me add that with your participation , Mr Figeľ , it is proving to be a great success .
The mobility of knowledge and creativity forms an integral part of open intercultural dialogue .
The aim of this dialogue is to encompass cultural diversity , partnership in business , professional cooperation , social convergence and closer educational alignment among EU citizens .
It is therefore essential that there should be a clear commitment and mobilisation of all social partners , SMEs , educational and professional bodies , as well as Community , national and regional authorities .
The main driving force for all the actions in 2009 will be the educational programmes at national and European level , the Community programmes for lifelong learning , the actions linked to training and education under both the Social Fund and the other Structural Funds , and also the national educational programmes to be included in this Year .
The fields of culture , communications , the job market , young people , women , immigrants , local and regional entities , cultural industries and SMEs are included .
It has been decided that this cooperation should be based on multi-annual and one-year programmes with specified funding for projects , although Parliament would like this Year to have its own budget , as is the case with the Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
Parliament has made amendments that , if anything , will ensure that this Year is funded not primarily through the Community programmes for lifelong learning , but through each programme and sector-based action .
Under this proposal , innovation and creativity will not place a burden on the educational programmes , but will be central to all Community policies .
Let me end by thanking the Commissioner , the Commission departments , and the Slovenian and French Presidencies for the open dialogue and cooperation we have had .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to express my gratitude to Mrs Batzeli , to the Committee on Culture and Education and to all Members for their support and amendments - and improvements - to the original text , aimed at strengthening it and stressing several aspects of a potential European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
The Commission can wholeheartedly support the text as it stands .
This initiative is a response to calls from this Parliament and from the Member States to strengthen the links between education and culture .
By focusing on creativity and human talents , the Commission wants to emphasise that , while we can draw inspiration from the past by learning from our rich European and world heritage , engaging with culture should , above all , be an experience which helps to unfold people 's innate potential and engage their active participation .
Creativity and capacity for innovation are linked competences which need to be fostered as widely as possible through lifelong learning .
There is creativity and innovative potential in all of us , and everybody has different talents , be they professional artists or amateurs , teachers or entrepreneurs , from a rich background or a poor one .
Fostering that potential can help solve societal challenges and also to shape Europe 's future in the globalised world , as Mrs Batzeli just said .
This European Year will provide an opportunity to highlight the fact that Parliament , together with the Council and Member States , has already drawn up a charter for a balanced approach to education in the form of the recommendation on key competences for lifelong learning .
We adopted this in December 2006 , and it will be our guideline throughout the year .
One of its striking features is the definition of competence as ' knowledge , skills and attitudes ' , and we plan to use the Year to highlight particularly the question of attitudes , which is arguably the idea which Europe most needs to work on .
When this proposed European Year was initially discussed with the Committee on Culture on a very informal basis , Mrs Pack emphasised that this was a European success story and a good one to put before voters in an election year - 2009 .
With this in mind , I would urge Parliament and all of us to become real ambassadors for creativity and innovation - not only in 2009 , but also beyond that .
on behalf of PPE-DE . - ( RO ) As you know , the Commission 's proposal that 2009 should be the European Year of creativity and innovation is part of the initiative to emphasise the importance of various topics by associating them with individual years .
Europe needs to stress creativity and innovativeness in order to cope with a mobile Europe , and choosing this topic for the European Year is a good opportunity for conveying information to the public with regard to the best practices in the field , and for stimulating political debate .
The overall goal of the 2009 European Year is to promote creativity as a driving force for innovation and a key factor in the development of personal , vocational , entrepreneurial and social skills throughout life .
Creativity and innovativeness are two values which become more and more precious as we use them .
The more we use them , the more effective they become .
However , top performance requires special attention under favourable circumstances .
In 2009 it will be very important for each Member State to promote , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity and proportionality , those activities which involve young people , men as well as women , as we know that women are under-represented in science and research .
These activities should also involve disabled persons with a high potential for creativity .
The European People 's Party supports European innovation and treats the setting up of a European Institute for Innovation and Technology as a priority .
However , we believe that reliance on people 's innate creativity and innovativeness is not enough ; we should organise activities and create events .
In this context , we support the adoption of the draft report on the European Year of Creativity and Innovation which has been negotiated with the European Commission and the Council .
Moreover , it is essential that we should launch a set of follow-up measures meant to keep up these efforts once the year is over , and , as the Commissioner said , in our capacity as Members of the European Parliament , we should indeed act as ambassadors of creativity .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are still in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , and we are thinking about the Year of Creativity and Innovation , which is a good thing , because the two subjects complement each other .
That is very important , because it takes a lot of creativity and innovation to establish intercultural dialogue , to practise it and make it part of our lives .
We should now get into practice so that we can then move seamlessly into the next year and the new requirements , for creativity must be regarded as a driver for innovation and as a key factor for the development of personal , occupational , entrepreneurial and social competences .
Particular importance attaches in this context to lifelong learning .
Europe must become more creative and innovative in order to rise to the challenges of global competition and to adapt and respond to rapid technological changes and developments .
There is still a great deal to be done in this respect .
If we consider the research and development programme and the budget that every country is supposed to provide , namely 3 % of GDP , we cannot fail to recognise that we are still far short of the target .
When we look at other countries , such as the United States and China , which invest far more in research and development , we can see where there are gaps to be filled here in Europe .
It also takes a very great deal of creativity and innovation to assemble funding packages .
This programme could certainly have done with one .
Sadly , it had to get by without financial resources .
The Member States - and organisations and institutions too - must now work out for themselves where they set priorities and how they fund them , to which end , of course , they will have to avail themselves of appropriate EU support programmes .
For additional innovations and additional activities , however , we could have done with extra funding .
That was surely essential .
It is also very important to establish a close link between artistic creation and schools and universities .
Art and culture also need support and encouragement if they are to engender creativity .
The ideas are very often there , but the money to implement them is lacking .
It is very important that we do not neglect evaluation in connection with the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , the Year of Mobility and all these things which are actually intertwined , so that we know , at the end of the day , what advantages are accruing to the population and how we can make it clear and comprehensible to our fellow citizens that all of these priorities ultimately benefit them personally and foster the development of the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , it is a special pleasure for me to speak today , because Parliament 's best vice-president , Marek Siwiec , is leading the session and the distinguished Commissioner Ján Figel ' is here , and because the subject is most interesting : creativity and innovation ; although one could always ask , when discussing such matters , what creativity and innovation actually are .
It often seems as if they are just words which do not appear to have a lot of content .
If I had to answer the question of what creativity is , I know at least one answer , which the Finnish composer Sibelius is said to have given : he thought creativity was pain .
Of course we have no fear of pain in Europe if it begets added value , something which takes us forward as a group of nations and in the context of Europe as a whole .
As I see it , it is the main purpose behind this European Year : to bring some added value to the European reality .
How do we promote creativity and innovation ?
As the President knows , your country , Poland , is to get the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
That is surely one factor in this area which is going to encourage the Member States of the European Union to create new added value and innovations using various incentives .
We know , however , that it is not government decisions that bring about innovation or creativity .
Whatever we decide here , they do not come about as a result of decisions .
Instead , we need resources and the right prerequisites at universities , schools and in different sectors of our society , so that people can focus on creating something new and exchange best practices , and so that they can break free of the stereotyped thinking that prevents them from approaching things in a new way .
This , I think , is a great challenge , because we all know that the education institutions in our own countries have in many cases developed as a result of traditions going back a long time .
Certain traditions have been taught , a certain truth , but to some extent there is a need to question issues and examine them from a pluralistic angle .
We need to realise that by being critical and by disagreeing , by challenging the paradigms and certain ' truths ' , we can succeed in creating new added value .
I know that the Commissioner will certainly urge all the Member States to put forward national innovation strategies on how they will help students to think of new ideas or provide scope for new ways of thinking all the way from the early school years to university based on a programme of lifelong learning .
This is an important issue , and I think that the main contribution that this European Year will make will be that creativity , innovation and new ways of thinking will become the core of the debate .
Perhaps it will lead to innovation and new added value , and perhaps they will result in productisation , because the economy in the European Union is an important business . Thank you , Mr President .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Paul Gauguin said ' I shut my eyes in order to see ' .
We want to see better , to understand better and to act better .
We need to awaken the skills and talents that are dormant within ourselves .
It is essential to use all the powers of creativity that European society possesses in order to face the challenges that the world is bringing forward .
We constitute less than 8 % of the population on our planet .
Other people are neither passive , nor any less gifted .
For this reason , acting on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to support the establishment of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
I would not , however , like this to be an activity just for the sake of the activity .
We must do everything to avoid wasting the opportunities and abilities that we have to create new and positive values in all areas : in technology , entrepreneurship , in finances as well as in social and other areas .
We cannot afford to waste the skills , abilities and hard work of thousands of talented Europeans , young and old , including those who are disabled .
We must do everything to simplify procedures to introduce innovative solutions .
Let us make use of objective 7. of the framework programme for this purpose !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) I should like to begin by congratulating both the Commission on its proposal and the rapporteur , Mrs Batzeli , on a report which had almost unanimous support with the customary exception of one member of our Committee for the entire report .
On one hand I should note that my region , the Basque Country , is holding a Year of Innovation this year .
It is being carried out on the basis of concepts approved in 2007 and I believe it should be possible to draw on at least some of them to a fair degree .
Specifically , one concept could be to promote critical , free thought in society .
The year should at least include this concept .
Thought which drives the scientific spirit forward and develops the ability to reason in order to facilitate change in the organisations and institutions in our territory and their contribution to the construction of a modern , supportive , open and innovative continent .
On the other hand , the Year of Creativity and Innovation should encourage a concept of open innovation : innovation which , as well as being based on internal capabilities , incorporates all its possible sources - users , suppliers and networks - and which , going beyond product and technology , includes the intangible and generally manifold aspects leading to value creation .
Similarly , the year should take innovation into all spheres : innovation which reaches all Governments , and here I do not mean only the governments of the Member States , regions or non-State bodies which have plenty to say during the year .
I would also ask the Commission to please bear them in mind as well .
Innovation should also extend to all organisations and institutions , whether public or private , profit-making or non-profit-making , and to all aspects of life ; in particular it should promote social innovation and innovation in support of environmental sustainability .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , I was elected to the European Parliament in a former communist country .
Surprisingly , here in the EU we are once again experiencing those things that we were convinced we had left behind long ago .
It is strange case of déjà vu .
I lived through the entire communist era in my country , during which our lives were carefully divided into years , months , weeks and days , each dedicated to someone or something .
We had the Year of Folk Culture , the Month of the Book , the Month of the Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship , the Cosmos Week , the Miners ' Day .
Every time we woke up in the morning , our day , week or month belonged to someone other than us .
Our lives went by like one big endless campaign .
This campaigning was designed to cover up the lack of freedom , as well as the scarcity of oranges and meat .
As members of the European Union we have enough oranges and meat , and yet , the Union is succumbing to the same temptation : to achieve results through campaigning instead of patient and steady work .
How does the European Union intend to whip up more creativity ?
Creativity is based on invention and talent , on an inspired ( or at least a good ) idea .
We will achieve nothing more than making hundreds of additional new NGOs happy .
These NGOs are a strange disease affecting our democracy .
Although unelected and unauthorised , they are allowed to draw money from our funds since they act for the greater good , of course .
They will happily spend the entire budget for this annual campaign .
They will spend taxpayers ' money on thousands of leaflets , numerous advertisements , events and seminars .
Creativity , however , will be the same one year on .
Mr President , I have a suggestion .
Instead of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , let us declare next year to be a year of regular work , free from any campaigning .
A campaign-free year : what a relief that will be . Thank you .
Mr President , the overall objective of the European Year 2009 is ' to promote creativity for all as a driver for innovation and as a key factor for the development of personal , occupational , entrepreneurial and social competences through lifelong learning ' .
But we are always talking of new legislation .
An oppugnant state mired in legislation and bureaucracy stifles creativity and entrepreneurship among its people .
Belgium , for example , is unlikely ever to produce a Joe Meek or a Richard Branson , and , let 's be honest : the Singing Nun was never really on a par with The Beatles or the Rolling Stones .
As the Commission sinks into caducity before becoming lost in caliginosity , the great works of European culture will remain as knitted beacons .
Let us not stifle our artistes with any more legislation , and , as the great Ral Donner once lamented : ' You don 't know what you 've got until you lose it , uh-huh , oh yeah ! '
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Year of Creativity and Innovation is an excellent occasion for drawing the attention of citizens to the Union 's activities in the field of education and research , particularly with regard to the Lifelong Learning Programme .
Lifelong learning is an integral part of the Lisbon programme , and its most important goals include the development of a knowledge-based society , increased competitiveness , stimulation of the economy and the creation of jobs .
When we talk about creativity , we are prone to thinking exclusively of scientists , engineers , builders or master craftsmen .
However , in addition to economic and technological innovation , the concept of creativity has another , easier interpretation which is perhaps closer to us , namely creativity in the artistic sense .
To a great extent , artists who dazzle us again and again contribute to making our lives complete , whether it be painting , sculpture , literature , song , theatre , graphics , photography , design or even film , which reaches vast masses of people .
Artists and the works they create define our quality of life .
The Year of Creativity offers a good opportunity to recognise and appreciate those people who make our immediate environment inhabitable and influence the tastes , value judgments and demands of young Europeans for the better .
I realise that we have a great need of innovative and creative technologies that bring about revolutionary changes .
We are dazzled by fabulous cars , miraculous means of communication and the results of innovative , scientific research , but what would life be worth without the beautiful works of art , statues , graphics , textiles or the creative works of music and literature that surround us ?
I very much hope that the European Union 's programmes will include the ethical and material appreciation of culture , especially the works that contribute to a sense of pride in European identity and as a result of which we can all like being European a little bit more .
Finally , even though I have been speaking about the arts up to now , please allow me to express my hope that the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , which has recently opened in Budapest , will also make an effective contribution to the success of this Year . Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Mr President , growth in consumption as well as growth of resources for economic growth , healthcare and culture in the coming globalisation process depend to an ever increasing extent on the effectiveness of education , on activities to promote people 's everyday creativity and innovation , on creating better organisational and financial models for the introduction of innovations and on ideas that increase productivity , improve quality , create jobs , reduce costs and improve competitiveness .
What is important in all of this is the development of education , and this includes statutory education , which should encourage creative thinking .
The media too should encourage innovative thinking by showcasing achievements and showing respect for those responsible for those achievements .
Innovation in the economy , at different levels of local government , and so on , could unleash a high degree of involvement , providing that administrative barriers are eliminated and there is full social integration , which depends , to a large extent , on politicians .
2009 , the Year of Creativity and Innovation , should not be a year of thinking , but a year of concrete and creative activity .
The draft directive is a necessary document and the changes put forward do not change its essence . Thank you , Mrs Batzeli , for your report .
( PL ) Mr President , creativity and innovation are key factors for knowledge-based economies , and the European economy is certainly one of these .
Facing the challenges of globalisation and taking advantage of the opportunities that it presents requires an innovative and creative approach .
Economic activity is only one of the areas where creativity and innovation are important factors for success and where they often provide a decisive competitive advantage .
Without them it is difficult to think of products or services that fulfil the growing demands of consumers .
For this reason I believe that increased involvement among companies , particularly as regards their experiences in taking advantage of the potential offered by human innovation and creativity , should be given considerable emphasis in European Commission plans .
Creativity and innovation are skills that it is difficult to learn , but they can certainly be supported .
Education is very important in stimulating their development .
However , this should not be restricted to schools or academic education .
What is important is that creativity and innovation should be promoted at every level of education , from different forms of education , throughout one 's professional life and on into retirement .
When promoting innovation and creativity it is worth taking advantage of experiences gained from existing programmes in education as well as from other initiatives , particularly those with a cross-border dimension .
I believe that announcing 2009 as the European Year of Creativity and Innovation will be effective in helping to raise people 's awareness , to spread information about good practice and to stimulate research and creativity and , above all , will stimulate a discussion about policy and the changes that should be initiated so that creativity and innovation gain more support from companies , European institutions and Member States .
( PL ) Mr President , it is a rare event indeed for me to say that I agree with everyone who has spoken before me .
You have all explained clearly and convincingly why this year is important .
Mr Janowski explained this particularly eloquently just a few minutes ago .
However , I also agree with those who say that this could be just another of those years that do not have any real results .
Therefore , if we do not want to be saying just that in a year or two , then we must prepare some concrete steps .
One concrete step would be to state that we are realising our fundamental priority , which is the Lisbon strategy .
I have not heard anyone mention this .
This is an incredibly important issue .
It is in the Lisbon strategy that we first linked technological and economic issues with artistic issues .
If we are to speak of specific steps , then I believe we should do this on two levels .
The first level ( I am taking advantage of the fact that Commissioner Figel is with us and that he is in charge of schooling and education ) is education .
We should analyse the situation in the European Union .
Does the matriculation examination in our secondary schools really provide a basis for creative thinking in the young people taking this examination ?
There has to be a real review of what is happening in Europe .
Aesthetic sensitivity on the one hand , and , on the other , mathematical abilities and science - this is what we are lacking .
Traditional humanities do not make this possible .
The European University Association often speaks of this issue .
One last issue , which is very important .
If we are to speak of resources , there is talk of allocating some resources on the level of the European Union .
We have to try to create a situation where , at the end of this year , we have some report , some specific data , on the situation in individual Member States , what is missing , how can we make comparisons , because we have never made this type of comparison on the European level , not properly .
This will help us with the Lisbon strategy .

( SK ) Commissioner Figeľ , I am glad you are present for this debate today as your life experience is similar to mine in many ways .
My own artist 's experience allows me to say that devoting European Years to certain themes definitely helps increase public awareness and involvement .
Since present-day Europe must rise to the challenges and opportunities of globalisation by strengthening its creative and innovative capacities , I welcome the Commission 's decision to declare 2009 the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
The motive forces behind innovation are people , their occupational , entrepreneurial and social competences .
Consequently , special attention must be paid to lifelong learning .
I welcome the proposed measures to promote creativity and a capacity for innovation in all stages of lifelong learning through working life to retirement .
I am convinced that , in order to achieve the 2009 goals that are meant to make Europe benefit from innovation , the set of measures should dovetail with other policies , which should continue beyond the end of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
( RO ) Declaring 2009 as the European Year of Creativity and Innovation is a firm commitment that we have undertaken .
42 % of the businesses working in industry and services within the EU have reported innovative activities .
In 2003 , 65 % of German companies innovated and 312 patents were awarded per 1 million inhabitants , compared to the European average of 128 per 1 million inhabitants .
In Romania , one fifth of companies do innovative business .
In 2006 , European investment in research and innovation amounted to a mere 1.84 % of GDP , compared to the 3 % target set by the Lisbon Strategy .
Investment in research and innovation did not increase at the same pace as European GDP .
I believe that surveys , polls , conferences and information campaigns are not enough .
The European year of creativity and innovation must be a year when promises are kept .
Promoting creativity needs appropriate support from the Community budget as well as from national budgets .
Commissioner , together with us , with the European Parliament and the Member States , you are committing yourself to an increase in creativity and innovation in Europe in 2009 .
( RO ) We thank all those who made a Central and Eastern-European country celebrate creativity a year earlier , as Budapest is , in fact , the capital of this new European trend of creativity and innovation .
Along the same line , we propose that leading universities should have the opportunity to promote European policy by organising special actions in at least one university in each country from the last two waves of enlargement , and experts and specialists should have their say in these actions .
We also propose that the top two or three researchers in the countries from the two most recent waves of enlargement should go on a tour of the top five universities and research centres in Europe .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , the designation of 2009 as the " European Year of Creativity and Innovation ” provides an opportunity to promote cultural , scientific and economic cooperation , the prospects that are opening up for each country to develop its own national programme for encouragement of people 's creative potential .
Just as lifelong learning is important , so creativity , which underlies each innovation policy , is decisive for generation of new social value added .
This policy shows that we count on and develop human resources , and that they are central .
It is important that a direct link should be established between education , culture and science .
It is important that institutions should interact for broadening their range .
Creativity and innovation apply to all ages .
It is also important that adequate resources should be allocated and public support should be enlisted for talent encouragement .
Talents evolve , but they need support , because the driving forces in society are precisely the capable and talented creative personalities .
I should like to say many thanks for an interesting discussion that shows interest in innovation and creativity and Parliament 's support for this agenda .
I noticed that the debate was dominated by Members from the new Member States , which in itself is a plus and perhaps sends a positive signal that Union enlargement means that new themes and realities are viewed both from the perspective of the global world and from the local perspectives .
Richard Florida , an American sociologist , said that the key to an innovative society is the combination of ' three Ts ' : talent , technology and tolerance .
Everyone has a talent to some extent , in a special way , of a different kind .
Technology is represented by a computer or a musical instrument , perhaps by a wheelchair , as a means to develop a skill .
The third T , tolerance , makes it possible for everyone , including the marginalised and weak , to participate in the processes leading to improvement , social inclusion and new knowledge .
I am glad that we heard about the continuity with 2008 since our aim is to develop , on the basis of cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue , another dimension of the cultural agenda , and that is the creative industry .
It helps us to view culture as a creative part of society , not as a consumer , not as ' something , sometimes ' , but as a permanent part of the economy-creating process .
Culture contributes .
Culture is not about consumption .
If we view culture this way , our creative industries will prosper and bring good jobs and significant economic growth which , in fact , is the same as the Lisbon Strategy .
There is no dichotomy ( either business or culture ) but rather a communion which is of course balanced and reasonable .
Secondly , the transfer of knowledge into practice is very important for the learning process .
Our learning is often isolated and fragmented and has little relevance to practical needs .
I do not want to talk for too long , just to recap that we had a real thumbs up here for the entrepreneurial sector , for business education , for the responsibility that not only the European Union but also the Member States have to promote and support talent and innovation .
All this is interconnected with modernising the education system and with lifelong learning .
I should like to conclude by saying that innovation is not only reflected in end products or new services .
Innovation also shows in new approaches , new methods and new mentalities .
This is the importance of 2009 : to change our perception of the importance of innovation , of the value of talent and creativity . Thank you very much .
I will look forward to further cooperation .
Mr President , I think all of us here in Parliament unanimously , and by political agreement , support the view that 2009 should be the Year of Creativity and Innovation .
We have tried to shore up our confidence in the success of the 2009 Year programme , and this has been made all the more possible thanks to the co-decision procedure .
The European Parliament has asserted that this procedure will be a policy based on interinstitutional agreement , not only in decision-making , but also in terms of the implementation and effectiveness of the programme .
Let me now stress that the Commission must take account of our Members ' concerns about the implementation and success of the programme during monitoring and submission of proposals by the national authorities and the parties concerned .
This creativity and innovation will indeed be mainstreamed into all the policies .
It will also facilitate mobility among artists , the cultural industries , educationalists and teachers .
This calls for a much more extensive audit than in the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , when funding was clear-cut and guaranteed in the annual budget of the European Communities .
Taking into account the message given by Commissioner Figeľ and other fellow Members that we should monitor the implementation of the programme , let me point out to this House that intercultural dialogue and the Year of Creativity and Innovation must be the spearhead of our communications policy in view of the European elections .
This way we can make a small contribution towards mobilising citizens for entrepreneurship , creativity and culture .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Before I became a Member of the European Parliament I had the opportunity to learn about the principles behind the functioning of the educational system and private companies .
The experience I gained showed me that Europe needs to develop its creative and innovative skills for both social and economic reasons .
It seems to me that the coming Year of Creativity and Innovation is an excellent opportunity to improve EU competitiveness in the globalised world .
Projects relating to the continuing growth of cooperation between Member States in the field of education , exchanges of good practice , as also the Europe of Knowledge and Innovation , are all supported both by the Polish government and the EU authorities .
I was delighted to see the consolidation of the idea of the EIT through the establishment of its headquarters in Budapest in June 2008 .
To be able to use people 's capabilities to the full and to take full advantage of ideas such as the EIT , what is needed is not just a well-developed infrastructure to encourage people 's creativity , but also a support system that ensures there are proper working conditions , making it possible to continue personal development .
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to draw your attention to an initiative from Poland , and specifically from Łódź , which is one of the EIT branches .
Łódź stands out in Europe by its innovation and exceptional skills in the areas both of modern education and in the concepts introduced into business .
Making good use of favourable circumstances , such as the Year of Creativity and Innovation , as well as of the undervalued potential of cities such as Łódź could be of benefit to us all !
in writing . - ( HU ) Creativity and innovation play an extremely important role in Europe 's ability to react effectively to the challenges and opportunities of globalisation .
Using knowledge more effectively and developing innovation are core elements of the European economy , so we need to place special emphasis on them .
The European Year , which aims to develop creativity and innovation , wants to draw attention to this .
The dynamism of the European economy largely depends on its innovative capacity .
Europe must focus its creative and innovative abilities for both social and economic reasons .
This is why I feel it is important that the European Year should also talk about practical measures and promoting the development of innovation .
The results of creativity and innovation must become more widely known .
For this reason , there is particular demand for initiating information and promotional campaigns , holding events at joint European , Member State , regional and local levels , formulating key messages and making good practices known .
The cluster networks that are recognised as the driving force of innovation must be promoted , as well as the creation of knowledge triangles and forging ahead with different forms of education .
In order to promote innovation , Member States must concentrate on the developments achieved in the field of services to support innovation , especially for the purposes of technology transfer , on creating poles and networks of innovation through contact with universities and businesses , on knowledge transfer and on better access to funding .
in writing . - ( RO ) Diversity is one of the sources of innovation , and the EU 's enlargement policy has brought new sources of diversity into Europe , and therefore new sources of innovation .
Unfortunately , though , the cost of participation in Erasmus programmes is prohibitive for many students in Romania and Bulgaria , which decreases their level of involvement .
Erasmus was created in 1987 with the aim of providing students with European mobility and the prospects of a better career .
Twenty-one years later , not only has the programme attracted 2 million students and 3,100 higher education institutions , it has also made an active contribution to improving the academic life of students by helping them acquire intercultural abilities and self-confidence .
Although this was not one of its overt aims , the Erasmus programme succeeded in making students understand the very essence of the European Union : freedom of movement within this diverse yet united family .
Therefore , in light of the approaching Year of Innovation and Creativity , I believe that the allocation of extra funds to the budget for students coming from recent Member States would lead to increased participation in the programme and consequently to an increase in diversity as a source of innovation and creativity .
Adaptation of a number of instruments to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , " omnibus " Regulation , Part Two - Alignment of legal acts to the new Comitology Decision ( Legislative initiative ) ( short presentation )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by József Szájer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council adapting a number of instruments subject to the procedure referred to in Article 251 of the Treaty to Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC , as amended by Decision 2006 / 512 / EC , with regard to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny - Part Two - C6-0476 / 2007 - , and
by József Szájer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with recommendations to the Commission on the alignment of legal acts to the new Comitology Decision .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) It has long been humanity 's experience that a decision-making authority , and particularly the authorities in implementation situations , cannot go without parliamentary monitoring .
Today , especially in connection with the preparation of the Treaty of Lisbon , we have very often heard about the European Union 's so-called democratic deficit , and we have also heard a huge amount about bureaucracy in Brussels .
Interestingly , the Treaty of Lisbon is not supported today by precisely those whose interests would best be served by all this change , and by those who remain to be convinced that the Treaty of Lisbon ensures precisely more effective monitoring of the implementing authority , the European Commission , and so-called European bureaucracy .
I want this to be considered by all those who think there is no need for the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am convinced that , by safeguarding broader powers for the European Parliament , which is elected directly by the citizens , over the European Commission , we will serve this goal .
Particularly when Parliament and the Council , or the legislative authority , delegate more and more powers to the implementing authority in Europe , it entrusts the European Commission in more and more respects with laying down the detailed rules .
Since , in a huge number of cases , we need to react immediately when the complicated European legislative mechanism does not work , when the Council and Parliament cannot meet , and in this case there is no other alternative than to authorise the Commission in such matters in the interests of rapid , effective action .
This still happens .
These two reports concern the fact that , within the framework of the agreement concluded in 2006 by the European Parliament and the Commission , the European Parliament 's sphere of influence and powers will extend to monitoring the actions of the Commission within the spheres of implementation and legislation .
Up to now , only one legislature , the Council , had this opportunity .
The European Commission has produced four packages , of which we adopted two during our summer session .
The third is coming now , and my own initiative report is about the principles through which this process must be implemented and how this monitoring must be recorded .
At the same time , I would like to establish that the discussions gave rise to a good compromise , but I would like to clarify fully , on behalf of Parliament , that we do not consider this to be a precedent , either for the Committee procedures that are currently under way , or looking to the future .
These monitoring powers will be Parliament 's due irrespective of the Treaty of Lisbon ; in other words , the Treaty of Lisbon , which safeguards similar powers , has come a little further and we are already realising these powers within its framework .
This is a gigantic amount of work for Parliament , and Parliament must be guaranteed the necessary instruments for this ; and for this very reason I have taken action with regard to the budget too , so that , by taking it away from the bureaucracy , we can safeguard for Parliament the opportunities that are necessary for completing this new task .
In other words , Parliament must also prepare for completing this task , and I think that by taking this step the European Union will also become more democratic and more transparent .
In other words , we will be taking a significant step towards having the implementing authority monitored by the legislative authority , and thus by sovereignty , within the European institutions . Thank you for your attention .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I welcome the two reports from Mr Szájer , and my thanks to the rapporteur for his work .
Köszönöm szépen Jóska .
With the first-reading agreement reached on the so-called ' second omnibus ' , an additional set of legislative instruments will be brought in line to the revised comitology decision .
This implies a stronger role for Parliament - for you - and closer democratic scrutiny .
The Commission is really pleased to see that work has been advancing at quite a good rate and fair solutions have been reached between the three institutions - the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
With the second report , Parliament actually invited the Commission to present new proposals to adapt a further limited number of acts .
I can assure you of the Commission 's intention to examine thoroughly the recommendations made in your report .
Once this assessment is completed , we will be able to decide how best to respond to Parliament 's recommendations .
Finally , let me also express the hope that the examination by the Council and by Parliament of the next omnibus will also proceed rapidly and smoothly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Marianne Mikko , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union .
rapporteur . - Mr President , EU membership has almost doubled since the beginning of 2004 .
Ensuring the convergence of standards for the protection of democracy and basic freedoms towards the highest existing levels is one of the main post-enlargement challenges .
In this context , the report welcomes all initiatives aimed at safeguarding democracy and points out that the media remains an influential political tool which should not be treated solely on economic terms .
The report recognises the decision of the European Commission to entrust determining the reliable and impartial indicators of media pluralism to a consortium of three European universities .
In addition , this report stresses the need to institute the monitoring and implementation systems based on the indicators thus determined .
The report also recognises the ongoing efforts of publishers ' and journalists ' representatives to create a charter of media freedom .
In addition , the report underscores the need for social and legal guarantees for journalists and editors .
The report advocates the adoption by the multinational enterprises of the best practice for editorial and journalistic freedom in each country where they operate .
It expresses concern over lower standards being applied in the Member States which acceded to the EU in 2004 and 2007 .
The development and acceptance of new technologies has led to the emergence of new media channels and new kinds of content .
The emergence of new media has brought more dynamism and diversity into the media landscape .
The report encourages responsible use of new channels .
Weblogs : I understand and I do not understand the concern of webloggers .
My entrance into cyberspace has created rapid reaction among a lot of bloggers .
I shall make it clear now that nobody is interested in regulating the internet .
That is why I support , as rapporteur , the compromise that has reached common understanding in the PSE , ALDE and Verts / ALE Groups and which underlines the following : ' encourages an open discussion on all issues relating to the status of weblogs ' - full stop .
We remain here .
The report acknowledges the challenges posed to the print outlets by the migration of the advertising revenues to the internet , but points out that the new commercial media landscape is dominated by the established public and private media content providers .
It also takes the standpoint that the concentration of media ownership is approaching levels where media pluralism is not granted by the forces of the free market , especially in the new Member States .
The report recognises that the public service media needs a sizable and stable market share to fulfil its mission .
It points out that , whereas in certain markets the public service media is a leading market participant , it mostly suffers from inadequate funding and political pressure .
The report recognises the need to increase media literacy in the EU , recommends the inclusion of media literacy among the nine basic competences and supports the development of the European core curriculum for media literacy .
Once again , the report welcomes all initiatives aimed at safeguarding democracy and points out that the media remains an influential political tool , which should not be treated solely on economic terms .
Freedom of expression is the key of my report - for that I really stand .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate Mrs Marianne Mikko on her excellent report .
The Commission shares many of the views expressed in this report .
We are convinced that this resolution sends a very positive signal in favour of media pluralism to all interested parties , including Member States and European institutions , including the Commission .
Safeguarding democracy and plurality of expression - as you have said - is essential .
We must maintain a good balance between the objectives of the diversity of voices in the media and the competitive strength of the media .
However , earlier and intensive consultations indicated that it would be politically inappropriate for the Commission and the European Union to harmonise media ownership rules or media pluralism .
Subsidiarity is effectively a strong consideration here , and a one-size-fits-all measure or model would not suit the variety of situations .
This is the reason why I think that it would be a mistake to over-regulate the very lively blogosphere .
Nevertheless , I agree with you that certain legal obligations imposed on the press , such as respect for copyrights or the right of reply , must in any case be respected by websites .
Putting user-generated content sites on an equal footing with any other forms of public expression seems to us to be a desirable aim .
Conversely , creating a rigid and special status for blogs seems counter-productive and in contradiction to the genuine spirit of the internet .
The Commission agrees with Parliament that the European Community 's competition rules themselves can only partially ensure the pluralism of the media .
This is exactly the reason why media pluralism is regarded as a legitimate public interest by Article 21 of the EC Merger Regulation .
Therefore , Member States may take appropriate measures to protect media pluralism by implementing additional rules beyond the Merger Regulation .
They must , however , apply national and EC law .
However , as regards competition rules , I would like to nuance a little your statement on the harmful character of the concentration of ownership on media pluralism .
Europe 's media companies , including the written press , must be strong enough to withstand competition at global , international level .
We are against over-restrictive rules on media ownership which could reduce the competitiveness of EU companies .
Situations are not comparable from one Member State to another .
There is a real diversity of situations .
I am , of course , in favour of more transparency of ownership and of complete information being available to the public regarding the aims and background of broadcasters and publishers .
This is a sine qua non condition to attaining more authoritative and reliable media .
As you insist in your resolution , public service broadcasters are an indispensable element for media plurality .
This is why the Commission thinks that their public-service missions must be clearly specified and their funding ensured ; otherwise great uncertainty will ensure .
In this respect , Ladies and Gentlemen , we all agree that the definition of the public service remit is , in principle , a matter for Member States , rather than the Commission , to decide .
Member States also decide the means of financing public service broadcasting , as indicated in the Amsterdam Protocol .
In this context , the Commission 's role is to minimise distortion of competition between all types of media .
The Commission also appreciates your position on codes of conduct and self-regulation as instruments to support media pluralism .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 September .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Concentration and pluralism will continue to be at the centre of debate at national and Community level .
Today 's society and citizens receive live information and can see discussions on the media .
Against this background , then , the primary objective is to settle and define the limits within which the public and private media can cooperate and intervene .
In each case , there must be an assurance that information will not be manipulated .
Independence from political power , the financial independence of the media , transparent funding of the media , safeguards for journalists ' working conditions , and the quality and variety of news reporting - all must be guaranteed .
As democratic dialogue through the media opens up , a new means of communication is being developed : the blog , which individualises the exchange of views .
In many cases , however , this form of expression has turned into a ' collective protest ' , such as on crucial issues like the environment and society .
Self-regulation codes can at this stage form an adequate basis for mutual respect between users and readers ; they need not impose any limitation on the right of expression and response on either side .
The media and online exchange of information forums are being expanded , assessed and regulated with unfailing regard for the principle of democratic expression and participation , and respect for human rights .
in writing . - ( NL ) We attach great importance to pluralism in the media and we also endorse the broad principles of the report .
It is a pity we were not able to agree on every last point in it .
We fully agree that public service broadcasters must be given room to play their part in a digital , interactive media environment , in proper balance with the commercial broadcasters , of course .
An open debate on weblogs should be encouraged .
Blogs and other ' user-generated content ' provide a lively contribution to the multifaceted media landscape and are increasingly influential in the interpretation of news and current affairs .
But the quality of a blog stands or falls by its author and not all bloggers are equally honourable in their intentions .
If blogs are not to degenerate into anonymous sources of libel , we need to think about how to deal with breaches of privacy or the right of reply , for example . But Parliament absolutely must not be overly paternalistic .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to emphasise that the European Union needs to make sure there is a balance between private and state media in Europe .
Interference in information content by the proprietors of television or radio stations is a breach of democratic standards .
I come from a country where the present government is destroying the independence of the media .
A whole series of measures is being taken to make the state media subservient to the ruling elite .
I would like to express my support for any initiative aimed at protecting public mass media , since these constitute a powerful political tool .
Public service broadcasters need additional protection because of the lack of sufficient funding and the political pressures to which they are subject , particularly in the new Member States .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education seems to have a problem of underemployment and , in its eagerness to find subjects to keep it busy , it produces reports which the world would manage quite well without .
The report on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union is an example of this .
It is an own-initiative report from the Committee and , in her original text , the rapporteur proposed a voluntary classification of blogs on the basis of the professional and financial responsibility and interests of the author and publisher .
There are many objections to such an idea , as regards both implementability but also , and even more importantly , its possible implications for freedom of expression .
Although the draft report was amended during its passage through committee , it still contains much that is unnecessary and harmful .
in writing . - ( FI ) I wish to thank Mrs Mikko for her report on pluralism in the media .
This is a burning issue in European society : what is our role and our influence ?
History has made it crystal-clear that the concentration of power is never for the good .
People are always ill-disposed to power in whatever shape it presents itself , and concentrated power makes the whole of society sick .
This is also true of the fourth estate , the media .
One of the main functions of the Union is to guarantee competition in the single market .
Why should that not also be true of the media ?
The notion in the report of interlinking competition law with media law to avoid conflicts of interests between media ownership concentration and other forms of power in society is justified .
Nevertheless , I am more worried about the media 's ability as the watchdog of what is good in society , because the interests of both are more and more exclusively about profit .
The Church has not spoon-fed morals to the people for a long time .
This has been the work of a certain kind of press , because sin , defamation , and condemnation are what it thrives on .
In an ingenious way , this type of journalism can combine the adoration of immorality with extraordinary narrow-mindedness to make a productive business : provoke , condemn and make money .
' For by thy words thou shalt be justified , and by thy words thou shalt be condemned . '
These words showed a good knowledge of the human mind .
When will the media itself address itself to the question of whether it ultimately achieves something socially evil or socially good through its actions ?
in writing . - ( RO ) As we all agree , pluralism should be a vital element of the mass media .
Pluralism must be supported , and the adoption of the Mikko report constitutes a major step in this direction .
The need for a balanced mass media market should be recognised and supported by the Member States , which should commit themselves , both individually and collectively , to giving European citizens the opportunity of obtaining accurate and diverse information .
Cultural diversity , as well as the ever-increasing need for integration of the migrant population and of minorities , along with the importance of providing quality information to the active population , are the priority reasons for creating a Media Freedom Charter .
I would like to express my full support for the European Parliament 's recommendation that public media services should be encouraged to act as alternative providers of information to ones based exclusively on commercial criteria .
Active exercise of rights and obligations by European citizens , and their being informed and capable of understanding and criticising the provision of information is a necessity which should bear on every measure to be adopted in the future both by European institutions and by each Member State .
in writing . - The report of Marianne Mikko reflects very well on the general tendencies in the media in the European Union , pointing out an extremely important aspect in paragraph 35 , regarding public broadcasting services .
In order to maintain sufficient media pluralism and diversity , public broadcasting corporations must also provide programmes that might not gain the highest ratings or advertising revenue .
I have always been convinced that if a public service broadcaster becomes extremely popular among the people and profitable for the state , it need not be a public broadcaster at all .
The purpose of the public broadcaster is also to cater for the various needs and interests of the people , who are not always the unexacting audience of private broadcasters that tend to go with the mainstream .
The public service broadcasters across the European Union should not neglect high-quality niche programmes in order to compete with privately owned broadcasters .
One of the principles of providing public goods is solidarity .
Public broadcasting services should operate in solidarity with viewers of more demanding or fastidious tastes as well .
in writing . - The report concerns an important subject , media diversity , which is an important element in safeguarding democracy and the right of citizens to have access to reliable and independent media .
Countries where economic , religious or political interests control the media have difficulties offering their citizens a variety of means of gathering information , which creates large gaps in their ability to absorb information and guarantee free and impartial elections .
Now we in the European Parliament are voting on a report concerning these important issues .
We Swedish Social Democrats had really hoped to be able to vote for this report . But as it stands today , we will not do this .
There is great purpose in the compromise proposal reached , but there remain several ambiguities , mainly around issues that affect web-blogger status .
We do not want to contribute to the European Parliament equating web-blogging with traditional media by questioning and proposing discussions on web-blogs status , as proposed .
This is not required for other groups , so why the web-bloggers ?
However , we share the view , with many web-bloggers , that violations and slander are equally punishable on web-blogs as in other media .
Therefore , we will vote against this report .
in writing . - ( CS ) The European Parliament own-initiative report on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union is very significant and useful , and in many places accurately describes the situation already existing in the Czech Republic for a number of years .
Here I want to emphasise two particular aspects that the report rightly criticises in broad terms and on which it calls for redress .
The first one is the almost total concentration of the daily newspapers in the hands of foreign ( specifically German ) syndicates , whose economic and political interests clearly contradict the objective interests of the Czech Republic , in particular with regard to the pluralist view and media independence .
In the Czech environment , these have become nothing more than a fiction .
Instead , there is a clear tendency towards a radical right-wing slant and bottomless manipulation .
The other aspect concerns the activities of statutory television broadcasting that exclusively serves the interests of the present right-wing government and is so tendentious in news coverage and journalism that the term statutory does not apply to it any longer .
Consequently , my recommendation to the authorities and institutions that are concerned with the issue of media concentration and pluralism in the EU is to pay increased attention to the situation in the Czech Republic in particular .
Follow-up of the Monterrey Conference of 2002 on Financing for Development ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Thijs Berman , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the follow-up to the Monterrey Conference of 2002 on financing for Development .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , the UN is currently debating the Millennium Goals in New York .
Unless things change , we shall not achieve those Goals by 2015 .
That means that poverty will not have been halved , the maternal mortality ratio will not have been significantly reduced , and not all children will be benefiting from primary education .
Here and there we are even hearing calls for the Millennium Goals to be shelved .
They are not working .
Aid fatigue is the problem .
That is another term for cynicism and short-sighted self-interest .
Insufficient aid is guaranteed not to produce results . And yes , aid programmes frequently fail .
And that is the problem . Too little aid doesn 't work .
It is as if a football trainer kitted his team out with shoes for their right feet only .
After a dozen or so matches he says ' you lose every time , you 'll never be any good .
I 'm out of here - keep the shoes , but you 're on your own from now on . '
There are plenty of countries where aid does produce results .
The scale of the aid is important .
In Rwanda substantial aid was given after the genocide .
The country has recovered admirably .
There are many criticisms one might level against President Kagame - I have plenty myself - but following the terror of 1994 Rwanda offers a lesson in living to the whole world . But without aid its economic growth would have been less impressive .
In Mozambique too , aid has produced results ; and there are many other examples .
Since the Millennium Goals were formulated , 29 million children have been able to benefit from primary schooling .
If the world kept its promises , there would not be a food crisis .
If every prosperous country spent 0.7 % of its GNP on development aid the number of malnourished children would not now be rising again after being in decline for years .
So this report constitutes a sharp reminder by the European Parliament to Member States to keep their promises , especially those Member States which are dragging their feet - France , Germany , the United Kingdom and Italy , to name just those big Member States .
They must increase their aid by 2015 , within a clear time frame and in equal increments .
No backloading , because a late surge after a series of small increases would mean the poor countries losing out on aid worth 17 billion euros between now and 2015 .
One thing has to be clear : public funds alone are not enough to get development going and keep it going .
It takes more than that .
The European Union has to go on investing in peace and security , in good governance and respect for human rights .
In Kenya that has worked , thanks to pressure from Europe , and Raila Odinga is now prime minister .
In Eastern Chad EUFOR is having a far harder time of it . But it is vital to harness private funds for public goals .
The ability to borrow money is key here .
Loans are rarely available to the poorest , and that must change .
With development as the goal , there must be equal access for women as well as men , no punitive rates of interest , investment in opportunities for small employers who are very good at networking , all this in association with local organisations .
Private banks do not automatically think about these conditions and are slower to lend to women than to men .
The European Union can make an enormous difference here through credit guarantees . And the European Investment Bank must lend a lot more than it does at present to microcredit institutions .
These things give people a real chance to show what they are made of and consolidate their own existence as independent , self-sufficient citizens .
The poor countries also need to be given more of a say in the IMF .
More money is also needed to cope with the consequences of climate change using the carbon emissions trading system .
The polluter pays ; it is not the poor countries that are responsible for global warming .
Aid here must focus on sustainable forms of energy .
Development policy is a central concern of the European Union .
The European Union must be a strong player on the world stage , each Member State in its own way but standing together and contributing 0.7 % of GNP .
That is Millennium Goal number 8 , and achievement of that eighth goal will bring the other goals a little closer to realisation .
In conclusion , in the time it has take for me to deliver this speech , eighty people will have died of starvation and fifty children under the age of five will have died from easily curable illnesses .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to express gratitude especially to Mr Thijs Berman for his report .
It is very thorough and forward-looking .
I think this report is very timely and can make an impact especially in two areas .
One is the UN negotiations in New York on the outcome document of the Doha Review Conference on Financing for Development which should start at the end of November .
Secondly , the EU position for the negotiations in the United Nations and Europe 's own contribution to a successful outcome of the Doha conference .
This position is being currently developed .
In 2002 , as you said , Monterrey was a success ; the developed and developing countries joined forces and committed themselves to a concrete set of actions , the so-called ' Monterrey Consensus ' .
The role of the European Union was strong and decisive in order to bring about this successful outcome .
I think Europe has been serious in following up the commitments made in Doha , and the Commission has assessed the progress in our Member States annually .
In 2005 the EU reviewed and further strengthened our commitments .
The most prominent EU commitments are the time-bound targets to increase the volume of official development assistance with a view to spending , by 2015 , 0.7 % of the EU 's gross national income for development .
I think you all know that we decided to get there step by step with the first immediate target in 2006 - collectively reached by the EU .
The next deadline is 2010 , when our aid should collectively reach 0.56 % of GDP .
In June this year ( 2008 ) the European Council strongly reconfirmed those commitments , a welcome and essential measure since EU aid levels dropped last year , for the first time since Monterrey .
This was a rather negative signal .
Against this background , the Commission remains confident that the European Union aid levels will increase again as of 2008 - this year .
Multiannual rolling timetables illustrating how each EU Member State wants to achieve the agreed targets are an important tool in this context .
We need to see the overall picture but also a country-by-country mosaic .
Since Monterrey , the European Union has also achieved progress on its other commitments .
The aim of the Doha Conference is to assess progress made , reaffirm commitments , identify obstacles , but also find ways to overcome these obstacles .
It should also be about new challenges , for example climate change and high and volatile food , fuel and commodity prices in the light of the global economic downturn and even financial crisis .
The Commission hopes that at Doha the international community will reconfirm the global partnership on financing for development based on shared responsibilities between developed and developing countries .
Therefore it is not one way , but a two-way process .
Doha should lead to an action-oriented forward-looking outcome that facilitates an effective implementation of the Monterrey Consensus in all its dimensions , including mobilising domestic resources , foreign direct investment for development , international trade , external debt of developing countries , financial and technical cooperation and global governance .
The report that you are going to adopt tackles a number of the issues at stake and provides a welcome contribution to the international debate .
Thank you for your report and for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )

in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Berman for his excellent report , which sums up well the direction that EU development policy is taking : development has taken place , but there is still a lot to do .
Very recently , the EU published a research paper called Millennium Development Goals at Midpoint , which looked at the implementation of the Millennium Goals and the Union 's role in achieving them .
The report concluded that there had been positive development but also areas that needed improving .
The EU is the world 's largest donor of development aid , accounting for 60 % in all .
In 2006 the EU reached its official target to channel 0.31 % of its combined GNP into development aid .
Despite achieving its 2006 target , the amount of aid is insufficient and forecasts for 2007 show that it is decreasing alarmingly .
Most of the EU countries have not increased the amount of development aid they have donated in the previous year , and in some countries that amount has actually fallen by more than 100 % .
The EU countries , which committed to the Millennium Development Goals , therefore have much to improve on .
According to the EU targets set , the percentage figure for aid needs to rise to 0.7 % of GNP by the year 2015 .
Development problems and poverty will not be automatically eliminated with the 0.7 % : there is an urgent need for planning , structure and monitoring .
Without cash , however , nothing will happen and it is crucially important that we keep to this goal and our promise .
Internal Market Scoreboard ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Charlotte Cederschiöld , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the Internal Market Scoreboard .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I am extremely glad to note that great progress has been made since we adopted our internal market report in committee .
The new Internal Market Scoreboard , presented in July , showed that the Member States had achieved their best result ever as regards transposing internal market rules in national legislation .
The target set by the Heads of State and Government of an average 1 % transposition deficit has been met , and we have a winner with 0 % transposition delay : Bulgaria .
Well done !
Let us hope that this positive trend will continue and that our citizens will in future enjoy the full benefit of our internal market .
We must place greater emphasis on correct implementation .
In our report we urge members of the European Parliament and the Commission to include new and more sophisticated tools and indicators that provide more information in depth , in order to give the public means of measuring and making good the losses which they and industry incur because the Member State Governments do not always do what they are supposed to do on time or in the correct manner .
In particular , we must develop the monitoring and assessment of implementation in such a way as to coincide with the national implementation process .
For everyone stands to gain if legal proceedings can be avoided in this way . We must find ways of avoiding infringement cases to begin with and , should they go to court , of speeding them up .
Through implementation working groups and networks , differences in implementation and unnecessary ' gold plating ' can be avoided . With the aid of an efficient SOLVIT and sectoral reviews by the Commission , any remaining problems can be detected at an early stage .
SOLVIT is an instrument that should and will gain in strength .
One of the major issues under discussion here in Parliament has been the link with the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
I would like to take this opportunity to emphasise here and now that we should not press ahead with any decision at this stage .
As we have noted , the Internal Market Scoreboard performs its function as a means of exerting pressure and there is still considerable development potential .
Furthermore , it is appropriate to let the two grow separately , so that each one develops its own qualities .
After that , we can examine whether it would be worthwhile , as may well prove to be the case , to merge them .
After all , the Consumer Markets Scoreboard is still a very immature product , whereas its counterpart for the internal market already performs a major role in promoting harmonised EC legislation .
Despite its power in that respect , the Member States are very positively disposed towards it .
In other words , it is an extremely effective instrument which we must retain , but perhaps also transpose to other sectors further down the line .
I must also mention the sectors in which the worst problems arise .
They are environment , taxation , customs , energy and transport .
Here I believe we should try new models and perhaps take up the model of the Services Directive , where implementation calls for extremely close cooperation with the Commission .
That is to be recommended .
I hope that there will be more opportunities to discuss this immensely important subject in the future in a yearly Internal Market Forum , and through strengthened networks , administrative cooperation arrangements and perhaps a new Internal Market Council in the Council of Ministers ; I would appreciate that .
Regular updating is after all a method which helps to develop this field .
I would like to thank all who have contributed to the work on this matter , for I am convinced that what we have done will lay the basis for EU cooperation in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The quality of Community legislation and its timely implementation are vital to the proper functioning of the internal market .
Correct transposition and application of internal market directives have implications for competitiveness and the economic and social balance within the EU .
For example , the Construction Products Directive that we should replace with a regulation on which I am currently working as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group was transposed in such a way that CE marking is voluntary in four Member States and compulsory in others .
This situation creates huge problems for the production sector .
Unclear provisions and incorrect implementation of secondary legislation often ends in proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
In my opinion , establishing single points of contact where European citizens can get assistance with all legal and practical matters when moving within the internal market is a very important step .
In an open and competitive internal market , better targeted and more stringent tools are needed to improve the fight against counterfeiting and piracy .
Please note that my colleagues and I prepared the Written Declaration 67 / 2008 in order to draw attention to the counterfeiting and piracy that pose a growing threat to European economy , employment and creativity .
Our priority must be the protection of consumers who often unwittingly purchase a counterfeit product believing it to be the genuine article and who , in so doing , may endanger their health and safety .
Improving the quality of teacher education ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Maria Badia i Cutchet , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on improving the quality of teacher education .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Commissioner , I believe we can agree that adopting a report on such a current , key topic as the quality of teacher education is good news , given that the aim of teacher education is in fact quite simply to improve pupils ' education and give them knowledge which provides them with intellectual maturity and a critical mindset while at the same time providing them with the skills necessary to be able to participate in a society which is increasingly competitive and demanding .
This is a concern shared by many stakeholders , from pupils to their parents , the teaching profession and business leaders among others .
In Europe there are currently over six million teachers performing this key role in developing the knowledge and skills of society 's young people and making a decisive contribution to improving the opportunities for economic growth and greater competitiveness .
Current working conditions in this sector are more complex and more demanding : classrooms are more heterogeneous from the social and cultural point of view , teaching concentrates on individual learning , teachers have gone from being ex-cathedra trainers to being classroom managers ; there is a requirement to have a good knowledge of foreign languages and information and communications technologies ( known as ICT ) , not only as a means of transmitting knowledge but to be able to use them as a teaching tool .
The data available to us show that there are shortcomings in teaching quality ; this is in line with the increased complexity of the profession mentioned above , and it makes greater investment in teacher education crucial during both initial training and in-service training , and highlights the need for greater support in the first years of a teaching career .
There is also a whole range of related issues which should be taken into consideration : considerable differences in salaries between countries , and differences relative to average wages within the same country , a high proportion of older workers , demotivating working conditions in some cases , low numbers of people wanting to enter the profession , etc .
This is the context in which this report was written .
It proposes various recommendations which I shall now summarise :
First , we need to attract better candidates into the profession , a factor which is closely linked to improved status in society and the remuneration of the teaching profession .
This involves improving the working conditions of the teaching profession by formulating proposals to support teachers in their first years in the job ; young teachers could gain from the knowledge of older teachers , who could reduce their contact hours with pupils and spend more time in applied research and transfer of knowledge .
It also involves investing in initial and in-service education for teachers , making university education compatible with professional development and facilitating improved qualifications and skills for existing teaching staff .
Thirdly , encouraging the exchange of good practice by enhancing mobility programmes , especially under the Comenius programme , which also contributes positively to the updating of language skills .
Fourthly , promoting decision-making at school level ; in other words , greater autonomy bearing in mind the different backgrounds of each school and the various stakeholders involved in each school community : parents , local cultural amenities , etc .
Commissioner , this report , in accordance with the provisions of Article 149 of the Treaty on the Union on education and training , will not be binding on the Governments of the Member States .
It is nonetheless a resolution to which regard should definitely be had .
Key issues such as those surrounding education are also closely related to the values of the Europe of the future and European citizenship , and I therefore ask the Commission to support this report from the Committee on Culture and to do its utmost to defend the proposals it contains to the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , in our conversations we often note the importance of thinking about the kind of country we are going to leave to our children . We should also think about the kind of citizens we are going to leave to our countries , and that is an area in which education has a crucial part to play .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , distinguished Members of Parliament , I warmly welcome this report , especially as I am the Commissioner responsible for education .
I would like to thank Mrs Maria Badia i Cutchet and the Committee on Culture and Education for their work .
Like you , the Commission believes that all Member States face significant challenges as they seek to improve their educational and training systems , especially vis-à-vis higher quality .
We have talked repeatedly - and I remind you again - of the importance of key competences as well as equity and efficiency in our systems .
These challenges cannot be met or reflected in a full sense without a high quality in the teaching profession , which is key to all of this .
The quality of teachers is the critical factor for the modernisation of our education system and the achievement of equity and efficiency .
Without such teachers , it is difficult to achieve any improvement .
The particular challenges faced by teachers are increasing as economic , social and educational contexts become more complex and schools and classrooms become more heterogeneous and more diverse .
In the debate on the first report this evening we spoke of creativity and innovation .
We can only achieve higher creativity and innovation in pupils if we have creative and innovative teachers in our schools .
We need to attract the very best candidates into the teaching profession .
We need to give them the best possible preparation for their career and - most importantly - we need to continue training and developing all our teachers throughout their careers .
This is - as you said , Mrs Badia i Cutchet - about the recruitment and salaries of teachers .
Every teacher must also be an autonomous learner , constantly reflecting on the way she or he teaches , learning from her or his peers and seeking new ways to develop knowledge and skills and to meet the individual needs of pupils .
Every teacher must also be a lifelong learner .
He or she cannot teach lifelong learning if he or she is not a lifelong learner .
An initial education of three or four years can never be enough to equip a teacher for a lifetime of teaching .
Only if teachers continue to learn can they keep up to date and provide learning that is truly relevant to their pupils .
I was very pleased to note that there is such a large consensus on these issues - as indeed there was in the Council among Ministers last November .
We must now work to build on these good intentions and this consensus to put in place real improvements in teacher education .
We need to encourage Member States to invest more in developing their teaching staff .
Three or four days of in-service training per year is simply not enough .
Induction support for new teachers also needs to be improved and extended .
We need to encourage Member States to improve the quality of in-service training and ensure that it provides the kinds of practical teaching skills that teachers really need today and tomorrow .
We need to promote school leadership .
Schools these days are major organisations affecting the lives of hundreds of thousands of people .
They need to be well-administered and well-managed , but most of all they need to be well-led by a leadership team with a clear vision of high quality education for all of its pupils .
Thank you once again for your report and your commitment .
I look forward to continuing not only our discussions , but especially our cooperation on this important issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The report was based on the European Commission 's communication ' Improving the Quality of Teacher Education ' ( SEC ( 2007 ) 0931 ) and stresses the need for the Member States to reform the national education systems in order to improve teachers ' training .
The rapporteur has pointed out some very important facts such as the difficulty of keeping the best candidates for the teaching profession , the low payment of teachers in many countries , the poor social status of teachers , teachers ' low level in foreign language learning and many more .
In order to solve these problems , we should have a coherent , complex and complete strategy all over the EU .
We should have more training programmes for teachers , and these programmes should be structured in such a way that the qualifications obtained in the end are recognised in all the Member States .
In order to achieve this , we need to share the responsibility with the national governments , as we may have the desire but they have the competence to reform the education system .
I hope this report will be the first step in a long process that will end with a real improvement of the quality of teachers ' education across the European Union .
in writing . - European Roma have been subjected to low-quality education in the form of segregated education and gypsy-only classrooms , not only in the post-communist countries but in Europe as a whole .
Roma children encounter difficulties in receiving quality education in new and old Member States alike .
Geographical segregation of Roma is a major obstacle to equality in education .
The living conditions of Roma make it difficult to take the steps necessary in the long battle to eliminate gypsy-only classrooms .
Making progress on this fight depends on highly-qualified teachers from Roma and non-Roma backgrounds to ensure the essential development of Roma children and to change the status quo .
Providing highly-qualified teachers to give Roma children the challenges found in mainstream schools is of huge relevance to the education future teachers receive in teacher-training colleges .
If we are to expect results from our children we must provide our teachers with exemplary training .
The knowledge about progressive teachings in multiculturally diverse classrooms must be a main focus in future teacher training .
The goal of equalising the quality of education between schools , stopping early drop-outs , and making sure Roma children make it to university and that they are prepared to face life 's challenges is not one taken lightly but one we must endeavour to fight for .
The Bologna Process and student mobility ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Doris Pack , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the Bologna Process and student mobility .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do hope the fact that we are once again meeting in camera this evening does not imply anything about our basic attitude to education .
The Bologna Process is truly the most radical reform of higher education in recent years .
The flow of knowledge should surely not stop at national boundaries any more in this day and age .
This is why it is also essentially gratifying that the Member States and the universities are prepared to work together on this matter , regardless of the subsidiarity principle they always prize so highly .
I welcome that , but I also note that all the parliaments have been bypassed in this matter .
The European Parliament was not contacted , nor were any of the 46 national parliaments .
The galling thing is that we Members of Parliament are constantly being asked out there about this Bologna Process .
If anything goes wrong , the finger is pointed at us , yet we have nothing at all to do with it ; not even the Commission has had anything to do with it .
I am glad to say that the Commission is now on board and is helping to get this Bologna Process off the ground in the framework of our educational programmes with which you will be familiar .
In short , the labour pains were difficult , and they are not yet over .
It would have been wise to involve the parliaments .
By 2010 we want to create a European area of higher education .
That goes without saying .
Students must have a broad spectrum of choice , a wide range of high-quality courses .
To this end , the Bologna Process envisages three priority areas for action : the introduction of the three-cycle system of bachelor 's degrees , master 's degrees and doctorates , quality assurance and recognition of qualifications and periods of study .
Student mobility and high-quality education are supposed to be among the top priorities of the Bologna Process , but the process itself , and particularly the rushed introduction of bachelor 's courses , has resulted - as we have learned from our hearings - that fewer students dare to spend any study time abroad during their bachelor 's courses because these courses have been overladen with far too much learning material .
Five years of university study cannot suddenly be packed into a three-year bachelor 's degree course .
That is what has been done in some cases .
Then it emerges that students cannot get away at all , that studying abroad is out of the question .
That is a pity .
Erasmus is such a great programme , and the opportunities it offers , plus all other opportunities to go abroad , ought to be taken .
In fact , a course involving mobility really ought to be made compulsory .
In my view , the credit system is not working .
It is not right that three credits should be awarded for a particular module in one country while another country awards only one .
There must be a European framework within which everyone is treated equally .
This is an area where more work is needed .
I believe the theory is good , but it is not being applied particularly well .
We should also ensure that universities do everything in their power to take advantage of funding opportunities in order to make it easier for students to exercise their mobility if they wish to do so .
For many universities , this will mean coming out of their ivory towers and linking up with the business community .
How many large companies would consider it an honour to sponsor a doctorate or master 's course ?
If it meant that a master 's course had to bear the name of Mercedes or Sony or some other corporate brand , so be it !
The point is that the sponsorship money would help students .
It is not a matter of selling anyone the right to stipulate the content of the curriculum but of locating sources of funding that really do enable anyone who is interested to study abroad .
If we make progress towards the achievement of these goals with the aid of the Commission , we shall all be well content .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I especially want to thank Doris Pack again .
She is one of the founding mothers of the lifelong learning programmes , which are very popular programmes for student mobility .
This report on the Bologna Process and student mobility is a very concrete contribution towards even better and even more mobility .
As we all know , the Bologna Process is well advanced and will soon have existed for a decade , having become continent-wide .
It started because we had already had a mobility scheme , called Erasmus , since 1987 , and most of its instruments became part of the Bologna Process .
The two are mutually supportive and make a very important policy contribution .
It is not just mobility for mobility 's sake , but for modernisation and openness and the internationalisation of our universities .
The report provides a very comprehensive overview of what further actions are needed in this field .
Your conclusions are in line with the findings and recommendations of the special group I invited to work with the Commission , which was the high level expert forum led by former Minister Maria João Rodrigues , who reported to me in June this year .
Both reports suggested we need substantial and concerted action to increase student mobility and , if I may add , mobility of young people in general : pupils ; young people in training ; young artists ; and young entrepreneurs .
I would like to see a mobility period introduced into all degree programmes to encourage students to go abroad , and for mobility to be seen as the standard rather than as a special case .
I agree with you that the Bologna reforms should be used to open up our higher education systems , and not become new obstacles to mobility .
Your ideas on flexible formats for courses in some study areas would be compatible with the Bologna rules and deserve to be explored .
I also agree that we should invest better and more , which means more effectively , in the mobility of our citizens .
We need to combine public , private , national and European funds .
I welcome the suggestion that ' strengthening the financial envelope provided for the programmes in the field of education and notably for Erasmus grants could be considered . '
That would be very beneficial not only for education but also , for example , for citizenship - to feel like Europeans in Europe , and to have access and opportunity and a real experience of Europe .
I am sure that Parliament will take its responsibility in full in this respect .
Once again I offer my congratulations and thanks and recommend adoption of this report to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome this report and the sound recommendations it contains regarding the effective implementation of the Bologna objectives and the creation of a European space for higher education by 2010 .
This year , it is important to analyse existing obstacles as well as the opportunities for strengthening this process in the future , after 2010 .
I would like to emphasise two of the many proposals in the report , due to their major importance .
First of all , greater effort should be made to harmonise national education systems , to complete mutual recognition of qualifications and the equivalence of degrees .
I believe that persisting diferences in this field constitute the main obstacle to the equal treatment of students . .
Secondly , I would like to draw the attention of all European institutions to the fact that mobility is still something inaccessible to many students , researchers and teaching staff , particularly those from new Member States , due to insufficient grants .
Consequently , the appropriate funding of projects in the new Member States is a priority .
Only in this way can the objective of European mobility be accomplished in a coherent and balanced manner ..
in writing . - ( RO ) Young people , especially students , are a priority in my political agenda , and I can only welcome the adoption of Mrs. Pack 's report on the Bologna process and the mobility of youth .
I believe that the principle of reciprocity in the exchange of students and scholarships , as well as the setting up of a European framework for the quality and recognition of degrees , must remain two priority aspects of this policy , all the more so as a reduced level of mobility of students towards the new Member States has been noticed .
The exchange of good practice between the Member States is a highly effective way of improving the European mobility framework ; therefore , it needs to be constantly supported and extended .
The social side of this report , shown in its concern for young people coming from disadvantaged environments , is commendable .
Other considerations aside , we must promote quality and excellence , both among students and among teaching staff , and this can only be done with constant support , both in terms of politics and of investment , for mobility within the education system ; this support should be both national and European .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to tackle the social dimension of mobility , which is extremely important : it provides young people with an extremely rich experience in terms of academic , cultural and social diversity , and this is why I would like to congratulate Mrs. Pack on this report .
As a Romanian MEP , I proposed the amendment that students from all Member States should receive a single European student card .
I believe that the single card will encourage the mobility of young people throughout Europe , which will lead to the exchange of ideas and implicitly to a change of mentalities , to opening up towards other cultures , stimulating creativity and the capacity for innovation .
From my point of view , this measure is perfectly in line with both the objectives of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , 2008 , and with the objectives of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , 2009 .
Hill and mountain farming ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Michl Ebner , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the situation and outlook for hill and mountain farming .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to express my pleasure at the fact that the Commissioner is also dealing with this issue , and I hope this will be reflected not only in his brief address but also in the work of the Commission , because we naturally have a duty to ensure that the actions of the European Commission duly reflect our wishes and ideas .
Anyone reading the title of my report , or rather the report of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which adopted it unanimously , namely ' Report on the situation and outlook for hill and mountain farming ' , must realise that it represents only part of the actual content of the report .
This report says that we must formulate a policy for areas that cover up to half of the entire territory of some Member States , such as Austria , Italy and Spain , and more than a third of the territory of other Member States , for areas that are home to a total of 19 % of the EU population .
These are areas that may be described as uniquely disadvantaged in many aspects of farming and rural life and extremely vulnerable .
The Alps , for example , feel the impact of global warming far more acutely than lowland regions .
Mountainous areas are disadvantaged in many respects as a result of steep slopes , weather conditions , erosion , height differences , high altitudes and rocky terrain .
For this reason we need an overall strategy for these areas and not only an agricultural policy which has borne fruit and needs to be nurtured but which is not sufficient to deal with the problems affecting mountainous regions .
Old proven recipes therefore need to be preserved , but old and new recipes must be combined if agriculture is to be maintained as the lifeblood of mountainous areas , and other major factors must also be incorporated into this approach , namely a wide range of sustainable uses of natural resources , the creation and improvement of transport networks - not only physical transport but also Internet access and communications networks - the improvement and development of municipal and local services - which is made all the more difficult in these areas by the dispersed settlement pattern - and reinforcement of the social fabric .
New features must be added , such as a sharper focus on basic and continuing training , sensitivity to biodiversity in the landscape and the aforementioned adaptation to climate change .
This report , which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted unanimously , devotes 13 recitals and 72 paragraphs to these matters .
The aim is to develop a framework strategy on the basis of the existing sectoral efforts .
For this reason , the report calls on the European Commission to develop an integrated strategy with a wide range of instruments within six months in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity and in harmony with the Member States ' national action plans .
I hope that the Chamber will give its assent in the same way as the Committee , and I ask the Commissioner to make our case to the Commission and to remind it that the contribution of the inhabitants of mountainous areas is made on behalf of the entire population and benefits them accordingly and should therefore be duly acknowledged .
It is a contribution to the environment and to the value of our continent as a tourist destination , a contribution that must be taken into account because it serves as a guarantee against depopulation in regions such as Piedmont and Lombardy and parts of France and Spain .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Farming in mountain areas is a crucial factor in both local economic development and environmental protection ( e.g. combating climate change , biodiversity , provision of open and secure recreational and tourism areas ) .
The specific disadvantages connected to altitude , topography and climate that face mountain farmers justify compensatory payments to offset the natural disadvantages and direct income support to offset their additional production costs and the growing role of managing their local area .
In my view , the key issues are as follows : to avoid full decoupling of agricultural aid in the stockfarming sector , as it risks leading to job losses ; to support the dairy sector , for it plays a central part in disadvantaged areas ; to increase support for the settlement of young farmers ; and to encourage solidarity between upstream and downstream in regard to water management .
I am also in favour of establishing a genuine integrated European strategy for mountain areas , to ensure that the specific features of mountain areas are taken into account in the formulation of the various European policies .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Parliament report on the situation and outlook for hill and mountain farming is right to oblige the European Commission to present a strategy for hill and mountain areas within six months .
This is a real step towards considering the special conditions in which 19 % of all EU citizens live and work .
The European Parliament proposal relating to the everyday problems of the people living in the Polish Podhale region deserves our support .
So far , guidelines for hill and mountain areas were based , in law , solely on agricultural policies .
This report also emphasises the need to support agriculture through compensatory payments and through support for high-quality products .
However , hill and mountain areas have many other problems in which the EU should get involved , as they include a wide spectrum of economic , social and quality of life issues .
For this reason it is very good that the report speaks of the problems relating to access to transport networks and to the Internet .
In addition , communities should be supported both financially and by specific solutions on the regional level , in order to improve the level of communal services .
At the same time we must remember the importance of the ' hill people ' in protecting national traditions as well as traditional knowledge of the natural environment .
The significance of permanent social structures and the needs of sustainable use of the environment are deserving of special emphasis .
In this context , the Podhale region is without doubt the best example of good practice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me congratulate Mr Ebner on his report .
Hill and mountain regions are particularly important in the EU because they cover more than 50 % of the territory of some Member States , whose rural population is still a significant component .
The specific physical characteristics of such regions ( steep slopes , differences in elevation ) put them at a disadvantage compared with other EU regions .
The difficult conditions for agricultural production , high transport costs , inadequate transport and communications networks , as well as the cost of transporting people and services , affect the economy and everyday living conditions of citizens living in hill and mountain areas .
On the other hand , producers in those regions are known for their quality agricultural products and for their experience in the sustainable exploitation of forest and pastureland .
These characteristics should therefore be strengthened and exploited to reinforce their competitiveness and cultural identity .
A strategy is therefore needed to take account of the specific features of the regions in question , and to help new challenges , develop alternative forms of employment and maintain the population .
Such a strategy should also provide special care for stricken regions , such hills and mountains ravaged by fire .
in writing . - In my opinion , people in small and isolated rural communities , and especially in mountainous areas , are disadvantaged and confronted with constraints and difficulties in everyday life .
Their needs should be high on our list of priorities , as basic necessities , such as access to services , are often lacking .
They are under constant pressure from daily financial and practical problems , which create feelings of anxiety .
Looking at the situation in my country , Bulgaria , I would say that predominantly the basic human needs seem to occupy the minds of the majority of rural inhabitants .
Therefore , long-term development strategies are often lacking .
Further , it becomes clear that rural policies still lag behind and do not correspond to the reality in rural areas .
Regional and rural development policies and measures should be decentralised in order to be adapted to local conditions .
Thus , there is the need to develop concrete , flexible and tailored regional and local programmes for employment and social benefits .
We thus need to focus on human resources development and capacity building , with a special focus on young people , women , and minorities ; and on the development of more rational policies in small and remote villages , taking into account the existing local natural and human resources as well as people 's needs .
in writing . - ( DE ) This report contains every conceivable thing ; it is a veritable patchwork , reminiscent of the result of a rapid brainstorming session on agriculture and mountainous areas .
It is a catalogue of wishes and demands , couched in empty words and platitudes , with repetitions and contradictions , and it cannot be endorsed , even if something can be found in it to please everyone .
The greatest contradiction is to be found between the environmental and social window dressing and the ruthless policies pursued by Michl Ebner and his party on a daily basis .
A genuinely sustainable approach to farming and food production must be at the heart of any viable European agriculture policy .
Anyone who destroys water , soil and biodiversity must foot the bill in accordance with the ' polluter pays ' principle .
What we need to encourage is a form of agriculture that truly protects the climate and seeks to market a diverse range of healthy consumer products .
Organic farming must be brought out of its niche into the mainstream .
We Greens do not support a policy of subsidising the major players in the global market .
We want to strengthen local and regional food markets , to ensure that farmers can earn a decent income and to guarantee consumers fresh and healthy food .
This form of management is also the best way to protect the agricultural landscape and the environment .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Ebner report on the situation and outlook for hill and mountain farming highlights the features and needs of these regions , which make up 40 % of the territory of Europe .
These regions face natural difficulties , which makes production more difficult and restricts access .
They therefore deserve special attention .
I therefore call on the Commission to draw up a global plan based on continuity with the measures taken to date while also integrating them among themselves in order to make them more effective .
That would mean continuing to make compensatory payments to offset natural disadvantages , giving financial support to young farmers and attaching special importance to the dairy sector .
Human activity needs to be maintained in ' Natura 2000 ' mountain areas .
Lastly , emphasis must be placed on the role of hunting and fishing in land maintenance .
A strategy of that kind will enable these regions to meet the challenges of competitiveness and sustainable development , for they are not just potential sources of economic growth but also the guardians of traditions that produce quality and contribute to preserving our landscapes .
, in writing . - ( RO ) Mountain regions constitute a major part of the European Union ; and what is more , traditions , culture and language are preserved much better in these areas compared to any other regions in the 27 Member States .
Unfortunately , national governments are not implementing integrated regional development strategies , and there are major gaps which are leading , slowly but steadily , to the depopulation of these regions .
Starting from the Union 's motto of ” Unity in diversity ” , I welcome the Parliament 's decision to ask the Commission to draw up an integrated strategy for the sustainable development and use of mountain resources , thus giving equal opportunities to European citizens who choose to live in the more difficult conditions of mountain areas .
Given the current talks on the decoupling of payments in mountain areas , I believe that it is our obligation as Members of Parliament to lobby for the continuation of financial support to mountain areas .
Thus , mountainous areas will become protected areas , capable of ensuring their own sustainable development and of acting as an oasis for European and international tourists .
in writing . - ( RO ) Mountains cover one third of the area of the country that I represent , Romania , and the inhabitants of mountain areas are disadvantaged compared to other people living in rural areas .
The proposals contained in the Ebner report are welcome and I strongly believe that a coherent EU strategy on mountain areas , which is essential and urgent , would contribute to a great extent to an improvement in living conditions in these areas .
At the same time , I would like to stress that better regulations are required , with equal urgency , as regards community funding for rural development .
For instance , Romanian authorities have launched various EAFRD-funded programmes supporting small enterprises and tourism .
Small enterprises and boarding houses are particularly important for boosting mountain areas .
The guides for applicants for these measures , involving complex paperwork , were made public one day before the launch of the session , although they had been written in August .
This is a clear breach of the principle of providing fair and transparent information to potential beneficiaries .
I believe that EU legislation should provide for the avoidance of such situations , which render the EU 's financial effort useless .
Mountain areas can provide high-quality agricultural produce and add to the diversity of agricultural products in the European market .
Consequently , greater coordination of rural development and structural support is needed .
Sustainable , modernised and multicultural agriculture is necessary in mountain areas .
Exploitation of biomass and agri-tourism increase the incomes of local people .
Preserving certain animal and vegetable species , upholding traditions and especially fostering tourist activities help to combat climate change by protecting biodiversity and capturing CO2 through permanent grassland and forests .
Sustainable forestry exploitation will make it possible to produce energy using wood residues .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to stress the importance of the issue of water management in mountain areas .
It is important that the Commission encourages local and regional authorities to develop all-round solidarity between upstream and downstream users and that it uses appropriate funding to support the sustainable use of water resources in these areas .
These regions are particularly vulnerable to the consequences of climate change .
Consequently , it is important to promote the immediate implementation of measures to provide protection against natural disasters , in particular forest fires , in these regions .
I am convinced that mountain regions require new means of protecting their territory against flooding , with an emphasis on flood prevention , whilst farmers and foresters can support anti-flooding preventive measures by means of the direct area-related payments which they receive under the common agricultural policy .
in writing . - ( RO ) We welcome Mr. Ebner 's report .
Mountains account for 33 % of Romania 's surface area .
As in other European countries , mountain areas are at risk of being depopulated and devoid of specific economic activities .
We need an integrated European strategy for the sustainable development of mountain areas .
We ask for particular emphasis on supporting agriculture , ecological products , agro-tourism , and access and communication means in mountain area .
At the same time , we insist that young families should be encouraged to start agro-tourism farms , with a view to reviving the economic potential of the area .
in writing . - ( BG ) As a representative of a Member State with distinct problems in the sphere of agriculture , and especially in hill and mountain farming , I would like to express my support for Mr Ebner 's report regarding the state and prospects of farming in such areas , which is of special importance for us .
In Bulgaria , as the report emphasizes , there is a risk of depopulation and an impoverishment of the social life of local communities , which are also facing the threat of even a discontinuation of farming .
The common policies for farm support are hardly applicable to such areas ( e.g. the requirement for a minimum number of animals ) .
Therefore , there is a need of special financial assistance for milk producers , as well as concrete additional financial measures , which should be adopted in implementation of the proposals contained in the report .
Only thus can the animal genetic resources be preserved , along with the human resources and , on the whole , the uniqueness of these areas , considering their extraordinary importance for particular Member States as well as for the EU at large .
This will boost the other sector policies as well , in environmental protection , tourism , small and medium-sized undertakings , and education .
I therefore insist on the laying down of common rules for schemes of direct assistance within the framework of the Common Agricultural Policy and for the establishment of special assistance schemes for mountain areas .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions ( submission ) : see Minutes
Combating terrorism - Protection of personal data ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mrs Lefrançois , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Framework Decision amending Framework Decision 2002 / 475 / JHA on combating terrorism - C6-0466 / 2007 - and
the report by Mrs Roure , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ( renewed consultation ) ( 16069 / 2007 - C6-0010 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , before anything else , I would like to thank all my fellow Members who have worked with me on this dossier , because our cooperation has been truly excellent throughout the procedure .
The text we will be voting on today is a particularly sensitive one because talking about combating terrorism spells danger for the rights of European citizens , whether this danger comes from the terrorists themselves or from the freedom-destroying potential of the measures adopted to combat the problem .
The scale of the terrorist threat has indeed had the potential to be exaggerated in recent years by certain governments in order to justify the adoption of security policies , whether domestic or international .
The threat is nevertheless real and the European Union must play its part in the efforts made to prevent and combat it as resolutely as possible .
The security of its 500 million inhabitants and the defence of the essential values and principles on which it is founded depend on this .
Since the attacks of 11 September 2001 , EU territory has itself been the target of terrorist attacks on a number of occasions , with dramatic consequences , as we are all aware : in Madrid in March 2004 and in London in July 2005 .
You will all have heard of the wave of attacks that took place only yesterday in Cantabria .
The increasingly sophisticated and diverse tools and methods used by terrorists make the task much more difficult .
The development of information and communication technologies , particularly the Internet , makes it easier to organise terrorist networks and spread propaganda or even training manuals online .
There are currently believed to be around 5 000 websites of this kind .
Hence the European Commission 's entirely legitimate wish to adapt Community legislation to try to prevent not only actual terrorist attacks , but also the preparations for these attacks .
In order to do this , it has drawn direct inspiration from the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism .
The problem is that it has chosen to take up only the repressive aspects , ignoring the provisions relating to the protection of fundamental freedoms , which constitute the essential counterweight , according to the Council of Europe .
My concerns were mainly linked to the concept of ' public provocation ' and the risk this poses to freedom of expression because , by criminalising this , things people say or write that are alleged to have led to an act of terrorism , or are simply likely to do so , will be punishable .
At the round table organised in April in collaboration with national parliaments , we noted that we were not alone in expressing reservations about certain aspects of the Commission 's text .
Several national parliaments expressed doubts about the application of this framework decision and the scope of the concept of ' public provocation ' .
The Council of Europe also highlighted the danger of leaving out safeguard clauses .
Finally , within the framework of various studies , independent experts expressed their reservations , particularly about the definition of ' public provocation ' and about the level of legal certainty of the text .
Under the impetus of a handful of national delegations particularly concerned about the protection of fundamental rights , the Council itself added a number of safeguards to the text of the framework decision .
On one or two specific points , however , it also proposed the tightening up of the framework decision and , in any case , work was still needed to reach an entirely satisfactory level of legal certainty and protection of freedoms .
With our fellow Members from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we have therefore tried to find a balance between these two apparently opposite but fundamentally inseparable objectives , namely the fight against terrorism and the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms .
In order to do this , we have had to perform a delicate balancing act , all the more so because it is sometimes difficult in practice to work out where freedom of expression ends and the violation of people 's rights begins .
Think about the outrage caused two years ago by those Danish cartoons , or more recently by the controversy aroused by the short film on Islam by Dutch MP Geert Wilders .
Having said that , I believe that the compromise we have reached is a good one .
The principal changes we have made are as follows : firstly , the replacement of the term ' provocation ' with the term ' incitement ' , which is more precise and is used more frequently in legal language ; secondly , a stricter definition of ' public incitement ' , which more clearly delineates the behaviour to be criminalised and therefore prevents any abuses that would lead to the restriction of freedom of expression ; thirdly , the incorporation into the text of many provisions relating to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms and , in particular , freedom of expression and freedom of the press ; fourthly , a reminder of the need to guarantee that the measures taken are proportionate to the aims pursued , which is essential in a democratic , non-discriminatory society .
Those are the main points of this dossier .
I am delighted that this subject was chosen as the priority for this morning 's plenary and I am looking forward to a rich and lively debate .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that today we are holding a joint debate on the report by my colleague Mrs Lefrançois on combating terrorism and my own report on the protection of personal data processed within the framework of police and judicial cooperation .
It should be remembered that the fight against terrorism cannot really be effective and proportionate unless we guarantee that the fundamental rights of each citizen are strengthened .
We must use our fundamental values of respect for fundamental rights to combat the terrorist movements that threaten our democratic societies .
In my view , the Commission 's proposal on combating terrorism was unbalanced because it simply strengthened security while neglecting many measures to protect fundamental freedoms .
In this regard , I congratulate Mrs Lefrançois and her colleagues once again for their rebalancing of the text to ensure that it safeguards respect for human rights and freedoms .
Terrorist networks , as we know , increasingly make use of new information technologies , including the Internet , for their incitement and recruitment activities .
Surveillance of this type of activity on the Internet requires the collection of a large amount of personal data , but collection must take place with the guarantee of a high level of protection for this personal data .
I would like to remind the Council of the commitments it made when adopting the Directive on the retention of data .
At the time , we expressed our wish that valuable information for combating terrorism could indeed be used .
In exchange , the Council has a duty to honour its commitment and adopt a framework decision on the protection of personal data that offers a high level of protection .
My warmest thanks go to all my colleagues in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and to everyone who worked with me , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , because the amendments we are proposing in my report were approved unanimously in committee .
These amendments are proof that we will not put up with harmonisation to the lowest common denominator .
We believe that the scope of the framework decision should be broad so that it is not limited solely to data exchanged between the Member States .
It must also apply to data processed at national level , which would enable cooperation between the Member States ' various police and judicial authorities to be strengthened while guaranteeing an equivalent level of data protection throughout the European Union .
The principles of purpose limitation and proportionality need to be guaranteed by specifying and restricting the cases where data can be processed further .
You must realise how essential this is !
Data must not be used for a purpose other than that for which it was collected .
We do not wish to prohibit all transfers of data to third countries , since such transfers may prove necessary as part of the fight against terrorism .
However , for each transfer , an assessment must be made of whether the third country in question is providing an adequate level of protection of personal data , and I would underline the fact that this assessment must be made by an independent authority .
We are asking the Council to include , in the framework decision , provisions concerning national authorities that have access to data collected by private parties , in accordance - may I remind you again - with the commitments made following the adoption of the ' Data Retention Directive ' by the British Presidency .
Finally , the use of sensitive data , such as data relating to political opinions , religious beliefs , health or sex life must , as a matter of principle , be prohibited , contrary to what is currently proposed in the framework decision .
You will notice that , with its amendment , the European Parliament is overturning the Council 's proposal , which permits the processing of these data under certain conditions .
On the contrary , Parliament wants the processing of these data prohibited , while providing for exceptions .
The process has been totally reversed , and this is important to us .
By adopting this position , the European Parliament wishes to respect people 's dignity , and we think that the Council should be able to agree with us on this necessity .

Mr President , Commissioner , Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Deprez , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , this is a day for the French , and it is also my day : I would ask you to kindly excuse the unexpected absence of Rachida Dati , but it is an honour for me to participate once again in the work of your Parliament , particularly on the sensitive subjects that have just been spoken about .
I would particularly like to express the gratitude of the Council Presidency to Mrs Roure and Mrs Lefrançois for the personal commitment they have demonstrated and the interest they are showing in the issues of combating terrorism and the protection of data .
With these two texts , Parliament now has a firm grip on current developments and the everyday life of European society .
We need to protect our citizens from terrorist threats , and we also need to safeguard their private lives and privacy .
That is political responsibility in its noblest sense .
I would like to respond to several points regarding the two reports just presented .
First of all , with regard to the draft framework decision on combating terrorism , combating terrorism is a challenge for the European Union that requires the pooling of all our efforts .
Mr de Kerchove , EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator , whom I met several weeks ago , has also told this Parliament that the activity of Al-Qaeda , for example , is particularly worrying .
There were 583 terrorist attacks on European soil in 2007 .
The framework decision you are looking at today is therefore a major legislative step forward in combating the spread of terrorist techniques .
It is unacceptable , for example , that a website can explain how to make homemade bombs with complete impunity .
Today there are nearly 5 000 websites contributing to the radicalisation of young people in Europe on these issues , and the Slovenian Presidency , as you know , managed to secure an agreement on these challenges at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting on 18 April .
I welcome the report by Mrs Lefrançois , who has supported the Council 's objective of incorporating , in the framework decision of 13 June 2002 , the offences provided for in the Council of Europe Convention . Her proposals largely tie up with the amendments made by the Council during the negotiations and , as you know , discussions within the Council on this text were very lively .
Clearly we are in the midst of a classic debate for all democratic societies seeking to combat terrorism effectively while respecting the fundamental rules of the rule of law and fundamental principles , such as freedom of expression , that govern all democratic life .
I would like to draw your attention to two points .
Firstly , this framework decision aims to make criminal offences of three types of behaviour likely to occur before attacks are actually perpetrated : public provocation to terrorism - and I stress the word ' public ' , which thus excludes the regulation of private exchanges of correspondence - training for terrorism , and finally recruitment for terrorism .
It would create offences for the European Union that Member States are already familiar with through the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism , finalised in 2005 .
The definitions of these offences have been copied word for word in the framework decision , with a few limited changes for consistency with the concepts of ' terrorist offence ' and ' terrorist group ' that have existed in European law since 2002 ; hence , Mrs Lefrançois , the term ' public provocation ' instead of ' incitement ' , which you are proposing .
The adoption of a text at European level will make it easier to control its transposition within the Member States and to apply it more quickly throughout EU territory .
The second consideration is that the Council paid particular attention to respect for fundamental rights .
This concern was expressed at the round table Parliament organised on 7 April this year .
The Council was very aware of the discussions that had taken place in Parliament and was careful to follow the approach adopted in the Council of Europe .
Safeguard clauses were added to the initial proposal - two in particular , regarding freedom of the press and freedom of expression on the one hand , and proportionality of the criminalisation of offences defined by national law on the other .
It should also be noted that the Council did not retain the proposals aimed at introducing rules on extra-territorial jurisdiction , which your rapporteur did not approve of anyway .
A concern for balance therefore motivated the Council during the negotiations , leading to a text that largely takes account of your concerns .
Moving on now to the framework decision on the protection of personal data , presented by Mrs Roure - it is a fact that there is very little , or even no regulation of so-called ' sovereign ' files , particularly as regards public security , as you pointed out , Mrs Roure .
However , it is in this area that it is particularly important to manage and regulate data exchanges , with the aim of protecting public freedoms .
You are right : we must act quickly and effectively , while respecting the rights of those whose data are exchanged , retained and stored .
The Justice Ministers reached agreement on 8 November 2007 on a draft framework decision .
As you yourself have pointed out , some of you in this Parliament would have liked to go further .
The Presidency is aware of this , but the framework decision on which the Council secured unanimous agreement at the end of a debate lasting more than two years is a first step , providing the EU minimum standards for personal data within the framework of criminal cooperation , at a time when no common rules have ever existed within the framework of the third pillar .
It is a compromise ; that is how Europe is built , particularly in this area .
It is a compromise , but that does not make it a second-rate decision .
Rather , it is the best possible result today , as it fills a void and opens the way for further developments .
It is the first step towards the regulation of data exchanges for legal purposes within the framework of the European Union , the application of which can be controlled much more effectively than within the Council of Europe .
The transposition and application of this framework decision could be submitted to the Justice and Home Affairs Council for evaluation , as was the case , for example , with the European arrest warrant .
Eventually , when our institutional framework has evolved - which we all hope will happen - it will be possible for infringement proceedings to be launched by the Commission , Vice-President .
The question in Europe is often to know whether we are better with minimum standards that can be raised later on or whether we should stick with the status quo , which today means extremely varied standards of data protection , a lack of proper control by the European institutions , and bilateral negotiations on the exchange of data with third countries , which do not offer our citizens sufficient guarantees and can be performed without our consent .
That is the case with the bilateral agreements made with the United States .
Personally , I believe it is better to go forward rather than to maintain the status quo .
In our view , the framework decision is the first vital step .
Furthermore , the work done by previous Presidencies has basically enabled us to find points of balance that also take account of your concerns .
I will mention a few of these , Mrs Roure .
The first is that the future framework decision will indeed apply only to data exchanged between Member States , as you have pointed out , but the Member States have also made a commitment to adapt their own levels of protection .
One clause you should look at is Article 27 , strengthened by recital 8 of this framework decision , which invites the Commission to extend the scope of the text after a period of five years , and it could concern national data .
As the Council Presidency , we do not see any drawbacks to this .
The second is that all data exchanges are subject to the proportionality principle , which means it is possible to check , on a case-by-case basis , the purpose for which the data are being transferred and whether or not the volume of data being exchanged is greater than strictly necessary .
The third is that the transfer of data to third countries is subject to important conditions and safeguards to provide an adequate level of protection .
You are well aware that this provision has not gone unnoticed among some of our external partners , whose names I have mentioned .
Article 14 is a bulwark that we can rely on to prevent the transfer to third countries , without our consent , of personal data we have transmitted to another Member State .
It also gives us an assurance about the equivalence of the level of data protection in this other Member State .
Fourthly and finally , the Member States have made a commitment to report on their national measures to the Commission , which will present its assessment and proposals for the modification of this first framework to Parliament and the Council .
Consequently , you will be fully involved in the follow-up to this framework decision .
Mr President , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , the Presidency is well aware of your attachment to the respect for fundamental rights within the European Union and I would like to stress that the future group , which has brought together the six justice ministers from Germany , Portugal , Slovenia , France , the Czech Republic and Sweden , has made strengthening data protection a priority for the European Union in the coming years .
It is a concern shared by all the Member States , and all the Justice Ministers supported it during the informal Council meeting on 25 July .
That is what I wished to say to Parliament , Mr President .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , obviously I welcome the President-in-Office , Mr Jouyet , and also our two rapporteurs , who have done a remarkable job .
Mrs Lefrançois has reported on the proposal for the amendment of the framework decision on combating terrorism , and Mrs Roure has reported on the framework decision on the protection of personal data .
Obviously I also thank the Council Presidency .
The comments made by Mr Jouyet should demonstrate the Presidency 's concern to bring the differing points of view closer together .
I will try to be brief , Mr President , because we are expecting a very interesting debate this morning before Parliament .
First I will talk about the proposal for a framework decision on combating terrorism .
As the President-in-Office quite rightly said , modern information and communication technologies play an important role in propagating the terrorist threat .
The Internet , which is cheap , quick , easily accessible and reaches almost all over the world , is indeed used by terrorists .
The advantages of the Internet appreciated by law-abiding citizens are unfortunately exploited for criminal purposes .
Terrorists use the Internet to spread propaganda for mobilisation and recruitment purposes , as well as instructions and online manuals for training terrorists or planning attacks .
Preventing this threat is obviously a political priority .
The European Union must combat modern terrorism and its new methods with the same degree of determination that it demonstrated in combating traditional terrorism .
The proposal prepared by the Commission updates the framework decision on combating terrorism and aligns it with the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism by including , in the concept of terrorism , public provocation to commit terrorist offences and recruitment and training for terrorism .
The Commission is pleased with the positive reception that Mrs Lefrançois 's report has received , which underlines the added value of the proposal .
However , Mrs Lefrançois , you have also expressed concerns about the proposal , and the wish for a number of amendments .
I am going to try to respond briefly .
Firstly , your report challenges the use of the expression ' public provocation ' and you clearly indicated that you felt the term ' public incitement ' was more precise .
It is a fact , however , that the Commission 's proposal is based on the Council of Europe Convention and very closely follows the definitions of offences in the Convention , for two reasons .
Firstly , we wanted to take account of the Council of Europe 's unparalleled expertise in human rights , and the work done by the Council in drawing up the text of the Convention that we are discussing .
The Convention is also based on the case law of the European Court of Human Rights as regards freedom of expression .
Secondly , the Commission wanted to make it easier for the Member States to implement both the modification of the framework decision and the Council of Europe Convention .
Would different terminology not make application slightly complicated ?
That is the question I want to put to you .
As regards the second point raised in the report , the Commission supports your idea of incorporating into the amending text safeguard clauses on human rights equivalent to those in Article 12 of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism .
Actually , Mr Jouyet , the Council 's common position of 18 April 2008 already contains extra safeguard clauses parallel to those in Article 12 .
I will now move on to the desire to exclude any obligation to criminalise an attempt to commit an offence .
We agree on this .
The Commission 's proposal already guaranteed the exclusion of this obligation and the Council 's common position of 18 April 2008 did so too .
What I would also like to say is that , as regards the jurisdictional rules applicable to the new offences , we largely - but not totally - agree with the modifications proposed in the report .
The Commission can therefore accept the elimination of the additional jurisdictional rules it had included in its proposal .
However , the Commission does not share the report 's view as regards the existing jurisdictional rules in the current framework decision , because this would be like imposing a limitation in relation to the new offences .
The amendment proposed in the report removes the obligation on a Member State to pursue new offences when they are committed outside the territory of this Member State but on behalf of a legal person established on its territory , or against its institutions or population , or against a European institution with its headquarters in the Member State concerned .
We are afraid that removing this obligation of pursuit by the Member State in question will limit the effectiveness of the Commission proposal because the new offences are very often transnational , particularly when they are committed via the Internet .
The Commission hopes , however , that the evolution of this dossier will above all allow the entry into force of the amended framework decision in the very near future .
Updating our legislation is truly worth all our effort and I thank both Parliament and the Presidency for doing all they can to achieve this result .
We do need this new tool .
I now come to the report by Mrs Roure who , in her very strong defence , has made a firm case for Parliament 's wish to have a meaningful framework decision that opens the way for further progress .
The framework decision must indeed promote police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters by giving it the effectiveness conferred by genuine legitimacy and by respect for fundamental rights , particularly the right to respect for private life and the right to the protection of personal data .
Common rules for the processing and protection of personal data , processed with the aim of preventing and fighting crime , can help to achieve these two objectives .
Mr Jouyet , it will not surprise you to learn that the Commission is disappointed with the rather limited scope of the framework decision .
We intended to go further , but I know the current Presidency largely shares this view .
The text of the framework decision now covers only cross-border exchanges of personal data , and that is why we wanted to go further .
Meanwhile , the processing of personal data by these authorities at national level is not being harmonised at European level .
These activities will still be covered at national level by national data protection legislation .
It is quite true , Mrs Roure , that the Member States have all acceded to the Council of Europe Convention 108 on data protection .
Nevertheless , I am among those who think we should go further .
The subsequent evaluation of the application of the framework decision , to which Mr Jouyet referred , is obviously one way of reviewing the application of the rules in the framework decision , and also of checking that the principles of purpose limitation and proportionality , which you were quite right to mention and are essential in this area , are indeed being respected .
It is true that a revision , an evaluation clause , would , in the light of the assessment made by the Member States , certainly make it possible to extend the scope of this data protection .
What is certain , and there is no need for me to insist on this , since the Presidency has just alluded to it , is that the text will be important not only for Europeans but also in our negotiations with third countries .
We will be in a much stronger position , particularly in negotiations with the United States , - which I have not lost sight of - if we can lay claim to a data protection measure that truly responds to the needs and expectations of our citizens .
That is why I hope the Council will push on with this dossier and we can reach agreement .
This is a first step , Mr Jouyet , but this step still needs to be sufficiently significant .
That is my wish .
In any case , Mr President , I will be pleased if these two proposals and two reports - which are of great interest and value as far as the Commission is concerned - enable us to reach an agreement , which I would really like to happen .

Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs for the report by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on this matter .
I would like to thank the Committee on Legal Affairs for the support that it gave me and to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Lefrançois and say that in conducting this task she has been open to understanding and dialogue in order to seek a consensus , which on this matter is absolutely essential .
Ladies and gentlemen , this proposal for a framework decision could be seen as unnecessary .
The Council of Europe has already taken up the issue in its Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism , recognising the three types of criminal offence that the Commission includes in its proposal : public provocation to commit terrorist offences , recruitment for terrorism and training for terrorism .
However , it is just as true that it adds value , as it contains a better definition of terrorism , and is more comprehensive , as it includes a significant list of penalties .
I would like to say in all sincerity that this action by the Commission is necessary and that it is an extremely valuable contribution .
There is no need for concern about fundamental rights , and there is no conflict with freedom of expression .
Ladies and gentlemen , in Spain , the terrorist group ETA is not on the European Union list of terrorist groups because of what it says , but rather for what it does , because it uses extortion , kidnapping , violence , terror and death in order to achieve its ends .
This is why it is on the list ; not because of what it says , but because of what it does .
In the Spanish Parliament there are pro-independence groups that speak quite legitimately , advocate independence , and are naturally not in any way pursued for doing so .
It is not about establishing crimes of opinion ; it is about cooperating in using modern techniques and effectively combating terrorism .
Allow me to remind you that yesterday , in Spain , an honest person , a member of the armed forces , an officer named Juan Luis Conde , was murdered by the terrorist group ETA using the cowardly method of a car bomb .
The European Union needs to speak with one voice on this , firmly and competently .
We need to be capable of establishing types of criminal offence that are not cumbersome , because if the courts consider that there are difficulties , presumption of innocence will always prevail , and we must not waste this opportunity .
ETA and all the terrorist groups in the world should know that the European Union is speaking to them with one voice , they should lose all hope , they should be certain that the democratic weight of the Union is going to fall on them and that we shall not give up until they are entirely excluded from the life of our countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , we have before us today two very important reports .
They are unusual for their balanced approach and because they are the outcome of broader collaboration on issues which have generally been agreed on combating terrorism , and the protection of human rights , along with personal data , of course .
Terrorism is the scourge of our age .
It is hydra-headed , inhuman , barbarous and unrelenting .
We therefore need to combat it by all lawful means , while always bearing in mind that human rights must not be violated .
That is exactly what Mrs Lefrançois 's report achieves .
What has been said is that the proposal to combat terrorism is based on the Council of Europe Convention .
However , we have chosen to alter the definition of ' public provocation ' so that it is legally more comprehensible in all countries .
We talk about ' public incitement ' , which is much more in keeping with the spirit of the Convention and the aim we wish to pursue .
Our concern when discussing this report was centred on the issue of human rights .
We conducted extensive discussions , settled on a form of wording and included provisions to ensure the balance that I have mentioned .
Anything extra will probably upset this balance and any attempt to further define terrorism is asking for trouble : it was no easy task for Europe to arrive at a definition .
I was in the Council of Europe for three years .
We tried to find a definition of terrorism and did not succeed .
Now that we have arrived at this definition , there is no need to go against it .
In any case , on the issue of human rights , there is paragraph 10 of the introductory part of the proposal ; it deals extensively and thoroughly with the specific rights being protected : the right of assembly and of trade unions , and all related rights .
There is therefore no need for any further efforts in this direction .
To conclude , let me add that all this is in good hands .
However , there is another area we should look at : we should turn our attention to the societies that nurture terrorism .
We should talk to reasonable people , to the moderate elements , so that the moral support given to terrorists in these societies can be removed .
We should direct our efforts , thinking , programmes and campaigns towards this .
( Applause )


Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Mr Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , after seven years of combating terrorism I believe that we are now skilled in cataloguing the risks of terrorism , its effects and its devastating consequences .
I also believe that one of the most dramatic of these consequences is a loss of balance - a loss of a sense of balance in reacting to the threat of terrorism .
This balance is necessary for investigating not the superficial but the deep causes underlying this violence , and is vital for putting in place preventive and punitive policies , without abandoning the fundamental principles of our legal culture .
This is a valuable but difficult balance , because it has to be translated into rules that do not leave any margin for discretion .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative to revise the 2002 framework decision , provided that attention is paid to the very timely recommendations that have been made in the two reports we are debating today .
The first recommendation , Mr Jouyet and Mr Barrot , is that we must avoid the culture of suspicion , because basing our society on suspicion , and dreaming up integration and immigration policies drawn up on the principle of mutual mistrust would be a gift to terrorism , since terrorism 's aim is above all to create divisions .
This is why , when discussing terrorist offences , and the concept of provocation - which is a concept that seems to us both general and subjective - we prefer the legally more consistent and more specific concept of public incitement .
I believe that it is a less confusing and less subjective principle , and this is not a terminological issue , Mr Barrot , but a substantive issue : provocation lends itself to abuses , to excesses , it also lends itself to excessive attention to the socially emotive , which would often dictate excessive and confused reactions .
All this leads us to the second risk that we must avoid : interpreting the fight against terrorism as grounds providing justification for revising , reducing and altering the scope of fundamental rights .
From these two reports we expect a clear and unequivocal signal on this point : this is the challenge which we are called upon to tackle as legislators : combining the fight against terrorism and acts that prepare the way for terrorism with respect for the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and especially freedom of expression and freedom of association , without which our cultures would return to the age of barbarism .
Mr Barrot , we must tell the truth : the risk is that we will turn the fight against terrorism into a conflict between cultures or religions , that we will speak racist language ; this is quite a real risk , as demonstrated by the meeting in the last few days in Cologne , with the irresponsible participation of a Member of this Parliament , Mr Borghezio .
It should thus be said strongly , and said here , and said by this Parliament : fascist intolerance has nothing to do with the war on terrorism !
The valuable work done by the two reports that we are debating here also takes this approach : combating terrorism , preventing terrorism 's desperate violence , but at the same time ensuring that there is the right balance between the need for safety for our citizens and their freedoms and fundamental rights .
On this point , Mr President , Mr Jouyet and Mr Barrot , we call for vigilance from the Council and the Commission and we promise that this Parliament will do its utmost to work together with you .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commission Vice-President , with their reports , Mrs Lefrançois and Mrs Roure have done a great deal of work , and I have also been delighted to have been able to work together with them as they did so .
We have achieved a lot and also made a big difference .
I regret that Mrs Roure 's report is still stuck in the Council even though we have revised it .
In this regard I feel the things Mr Jouyet spoke about are lacking somewhat , namely that we seize on topics and declare them a priority .
We also heard this repeatedly and most recently from the German Council Presidency .
Unfortunately , it has just not been translated into action .
Parliament cannot be satisfied in the long run purely with lip service .
With regard to the report by Mrs Lefrançois : there is definitely something remarkable in this report that none of you has yet addressed .
It implies that we have here one of the rare cases in which we are harmonising substantive criminal law - quite clearly beyond the field of the environment .
This is something that goes way beyond what the European Union has been doing until now .
In civil law we have seen it in cross-border matters .
However , harmonising substantive criminal law goes much deeper than has been broached here .
Hence the Commission understands perhaps why we are conducting such an intensive discussion on public provocation or incitement .
' Incitement ' is a normal judicial term in every Member State .
The member states of the Council of Europe decided on the term ' provocation ' as a compromise .
This also includes countries such as Russia .
I do not believe that we have to discuss whether we all have a common legal basis with this .
I have also continued to make it clear in discussions with Mrs Lefrançois that , from my national perspective alone , I have a problem with the term ' incitement ' , as it is also worded here , because the fact that an incitement can be punished without there being a premeditated unlawful predicate crime is alien to our system .
In that the clause allows for incitement or provocation , both these terms are at worst even a bluff .
They both fail to show premeditation on the part of the perpetrator .
It is solely dependent on the perception of third parties whether what someone has said could be a serious provocation to commit a terrorist offence or not .
At the moment I am wondering where you draw the line between the terrorist and the irate citizen around the regulars ' table who is denounced by his neighbour .
In this respect we must also touch upon the existing legal systems .
I know that it is different in some respects in Spain , but this is so that it can combat home-grown terrorism .
Believe me , I am thankful that I am young enough not to have lived through the bad times of the RAF in Germany , but then , too , appropriate laws were discussed .
Of course countries must act exceptionally in special cases , but in the last seven years we have also seen that much of what was decided at the outset in a frenzy of activity must now be retracted .
In this respect I am also glad that we have been focusing on people and fundamental rights across party lines in this report .
With regard to the Roure report , it is much more critical that the Council takes action .
We must not fool ourselves with regard to the Treaty of Lisbon .
We all want it to stand until the European elections in 2009 , but we also know that I want never gets .
We now have to try to weave this report into these discussions - particularly with regard to the talks currently being conducted by the Commission with the United States on an EU / US data protection agreement .
Indeed , the two cannot be allowed to exist independently of each other .
Hence I should like us not only to seize the political will , but ultimately also to take a political decision , to enable the Framework Decision on data protection to finally come into force .
The Commission and Council are striving , with an incredible amount of activity , to take action in the field of the economic protection of personal data .
When we see what is happening in the United Kingdom , Germany and other Member States , where there are cases of loss or theft of personal data administered by public authorities , we have just as urgent a need for action here .
This is ultimately more than ever about citizens ' rights , as they are not able to prevent their government behaving in this way .
With enterprises , the citizen is still able to choose a different one in case of doubt .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Vice-President of the Commission , as well as the rapporteurs for what I consider to be very important reports .
When we discuss issues with regard to terrorism and data protection - sometimes when you look at the substance of the debate within Parliament - there appears to be a conflict taking place between those who want to give more protection to individual rights and freedoms and more protection to the general populace from the risk and threat of violence or even incitement to violence , as some of my colleagues have already mentioned .
To that extent , when we move forward with regard to these proposals , we should be certain that the legislation which we are proposing , which we are amending within this Parliament , has a definitive legal basis , so that when it comes into operation it is above challenge and above rebuke .
One of the difficulties we face is that , because of the framework decision , because of the legal basis - or the lack of a legal basis - with regard to certain aspects of that framework decision , we could be leaving ourselves open to being accused of being hypocritical , merely appearing to act without actually taking any decisive action .
If you look back over the history of the cooperation in judicial matters and police matters that we have instigated here within this Parliament , 90 % of it has been predicated on the basis of mutual trust between the different authorities at Member State level .
That has been the only effective way of finding a mechanism to move forward , because , even though you may put in agreements or decisions , unless the authorities in each Member State are willing to work with each other and exchange that information , then there can be no real meaningful cooperation or movement forward .
We have to be very careful with regard to the issue of data protection and the personal data which is collected , because many of us know that , in our own Member States , there are countless agencies , both of a national and a local level , that retain data on every single person .
The biggest scare there is at the moment in the United Kingdom has been this issue of identity theft , and big concerns because computers are lost that contain information from state agencies - whether it is social welfare , defence or police agencies - personal data , information that you would never individually give out to anybody .
Yet there appears to be no protection for that data .
That is why we have to be careful at this level - at European level - that we are creating a European framework decision that will allow cooperation between Member States , but which does not impose these controls on national Member States .
The reason I say that is because there are greater protections available to individuals to challenge national authorities when they misuse , abuse or lose their data than would be available in this framework decision , and in many ways , if we force this framework decision on protection of data to apply to national data as well , we will undermine the rights that already exist .
Because we are moving forward with a new plan at a European level , there is some leeway for a slightly more fluid response to the difficulties we are facing with regard to the protection of the data .
However , to be certain for this legislation to be effective , not only must it be clear and definitive with regard to the role that it wants to carry out , but it must also have the trust of the people that it will protect them and not abuse them .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am convinced that the Council genuinely wishes to improve the security of citizens and also that it sets store by civil rights .
You may well welcome the present reports with enthusiasm , but if you have read them carefully you will have noticed that the conclusion we draw is totally different from your own .
As a matter of fact , we believe that the proposals you have adopted are simply inadequate , and that they threaten to infringe civil rights .
How come we assess things differently ?
First of all , parliaments traditionally pay more attention than governments to civil rights , which constitutes a problem when it comes to decision-making .
In particular , however , Parliament wants to look at the impact of these decisions on society in the longer term .
Viewing the relationship between government and citizens from a historical perspective , we see that the government has the monopoly on the use of force , and citizens have fundamental rights that cannot be violated by the government unless this is necessary , effective and proportionate .
Yet if too often citizens see government action that is neither necessary nor justified , their trust in and therefore cooperation with that government will wane , and then we shall really have a massive security problem in the long term .
Trust is hard to gain but easy to lose .
In my opinion , the proposal on data protection fails to offer the intended protection , and the Council is on thin ice with its extension of the framework decision .
Starting with the report by Mrs Roure , I should like to thank the rapporteur most warmly for all the years she has spent steering this report through Parliament .
In particular , I should like to put a series of questions to the Council .
The proposal relates to police and judicial cooperation in Europe ; that is , to services concerned with security .
However - and the President-in-Office may be able to contradict me here - I understand that it is now specified that the Council does not consider itself bound by these proposals if essential national security interests are at stake .
What interests are we talking about here , and can you give an example of a matter that would induce you to simply throw this framework decision in the bin ?
Another point , which Mrs Roure herself has already broached , is that of sensitive data .
There are some data I can understand the Council wanting ; but can it explain to me on what kind of occasion it would stand to benefit from knowing whether a person was a trade-union member ?
I should like you to give me an example of when it would be useful to know whether a person was a member of the Trade Union Federation ( FNV ) in the Netherlands .
Is this supposed to indicate recalcitrant behaviour ?
Under what circumstances would this be relevant , for goodness ' sake ?
People 's sex lives ?
If we are talking about active paedophilia , fair enough : this is a crime and can of course be recorded .
For what kind of things do you actually want more information , however ?
Regarding the transfer of data to third countries , I can still recall a hilarious moment during the German Presidency when a representative of the Council stated that it was sometimes indeed necessary to transfer data very quickly to Iran .
He had the whole House gaping ; surely he could not mean that - transferring data to Iran !
I put the question now , therefore , whether that Council member will guarantee that sensitive data will not under any circumstances be transferred to Iran .
Could you perhaps also give me the article number on which you base that guarantee ?
Although I consider the level of protection insufficient , I do welcome the objective : better cooperation between police and judicial services at European level ( this has been known to malfunction even at national level ) .
One key word when it comes to improving this cooperation is ' trust ' - here , too , it is a matter of trust .
My accusation is that the Council is failing to work hard enough to increase this trust and thus also cooperation .
After all , trust needs to be based on something , such as substantial data protection or rights of suspects that befit our rule of law - but you fail to deliver the goods .
You have now been working on the procedural rights of suspects for my whole term of office and still nothing has emerged .
In addition , where you could really help move cooperation forward , you fail to do so .
Instead , you present the crude Framework Decision on combating terrorism .
Mrs Lefrançois has produced an apt report on this , for which I should like to express my warm thanks to her , too .
My question remains : what problem is the Council actually trying to solve here ?
Incitement to violence is banned in all Member States , and that is the way it should be - but now provocation , too , is being criminalised .
What constitutes ' provocation ' ?
Someone writing that the United States is a rogue state , an axis of evil that must be combated ?
If that person also writes : ' those who are not for us are against us ' , is that provocation ?
If a Western man deliberately makes an anti-Islamic film with the aim of offending people , is he provoking an attack ?
Am I myself being provocative now ?
Unclear legislation is bad legislation .
You have my support for criminalising incitement to violence at European level too , but not by this means .
If one compares all the language versions , it is not even clear whether it is ' provocation ' or ' incitement ' that is being discussed .
A woman may dress provocatively , but that does not mean she is inciting rape .
Article 1 ( 1 ) is alarming in that respect , as it states that a person can be convicted of terrorist offences whether or not he or she directly advocates such offences .
As far as my group is concerned , that is really going much too far .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , owing to the short time available to me , I should like to discuss only the report by Mrs Roure .
When we talk about the processing of personal data in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters , I should like to say very clearly that I am of the opinion that we need uniform European regulations .
In recent years , several projects concerning the processing of these data have been launched , in particular the second generation Schengen Information System and the Visa Information System ( VIS ) .
These data are also relevant , however , in relation to the proposal to exchange criminal record data among Member States and even the introduction of a European PNR system .
A high level of data protection is in the interest of every citizen and , in my view , can be guaranteed only by uniform regulations at EU level .
The President-in-Office has said that the present Council Decision was the best solution that could be reached .
I have to tell you , President-in-Office , that I am disappointed with the Council 's new proposal , as Parliament 's key demands have not been taken into account , and I think it provides a level of data protection that in some respects still falls below that of Council of Europe Convention 108 .
Incidentally , criticism of the proposal is shared by all groups across their dividing lines , and I think that this unequivocal message should give the Council food for thought .
In particular we should ensure that the Framework Decision is also applied to national data processing ; otherwise the point of the entire proposal is called into question .
I should also like to emphasise what our rapporteur , Mrs Roure , has said , namely that particularly sensitive data categories - that is , data revealing a person 's ethnic origin , political opinion or religious conviction - should not be processed .
If we are to allow any exceptions at all to this principle , it is essential that the approval of a relevant judicial body be obtained beforehand , for example ; this data category should not simply be processed automatically .
The Council has been promising Parliament for a long time that it will adopt this Framework Decision .
I think it is high time now that the Council finally kept its promise , and indeed with a Framework Decision worth the paper on which it is printed .
I support all the amendments that Parliament proposes in the report , as I think we need the highest possible level of data protection and this is not yet guaranteed by the Council Framework Decision that now exists .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , these Council decisions are part of the process of harmonising our national justice and legal systems into a common EU system .
Already any EU citizen can be extradited from one EU country to another by means of a European arrest warrant with minimal safeguards .
Even when a national legal system or national government knows that a gross injustice is being done , it cannot prevent it .
Under the new rules on trials in absentia , we can now be tried and sentenced in another EU state without even being aware that this has happened , and then face extradition and imprisonment .
We can be fined or have our property confiscated , again without our own national legal systems or governments being able to prevent it or protect us .
Under the Lisbon Treaty a European public prosecutor is planned , with wide-ranging powers to investigate and prosecute those charged with offences against the Union 's interest - aided by Europol , whose officials have immunity from prosecution for anything that they do or anything that they say in the course of their duties .
And , of course , we have the European Union 's own paramilitary police force , the European Gendarmerie , being constructed in Vicenza , which will have the power to cross borders to suppress civil unrest in EU Member States .
All this is being done in the name of protecting us from terrorism ; but what is actually happening , of course , is the never-ending mission of the European Union to increase and entrench its own power and dominion in every area of our national lives .
Terrorism is indeed a real threat , the single biggest source of which in the world today is the ideology of fundamentalist , literalist and extremist Islam .
But terrorism should be combated by national governments working in cooperation with each other , not used as an excuse to increase the power of the European Union .
( NL ) Mr President , it is often heard from various quarters that the fight against terrorism is threatening our freedoms - but this is a false dichotomy .
Freedom of expression , freedom of the press and the right to privacy are indeed fundamental characteristics of our Western society but , as the previous speaker has just said , it is these open societies that are currently under threat from an Islamic extremism that incites terrorist acts against these values .
The measures in this report are one step - but only one - in the right direction .
States not only have the duty to protect their citizens against terrorism , but also must be able to take every measure to safeguard public order .
I should like to make a marginal note here , however , as many speakers on the margins of today 's debate have referred to Italy .
Yet the Italian Government has every right to fight illegal immigration and crime in such ways as it deems necessary , provided this is justified by objective , legitimate factors .
In addition , last week 's disgraceful hearing in Rome , at which a few extreme left-wing Members of this House accused the Italian carabinieri of torturing Roma children , was an insult to the Italian people and did not befit this House .
I hope , therefore , that the President of the European Parliament will apologise to the Italian Government on behalf of us all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to speak at this stage because unfortunately I have to go on to participate in an interinstitutional dialogue .
I apologise to Parliament and the rapporteurs for this .
I just wanted to respond to the group leaders by saying , firstly , regarding the report by Mrs Lefrançois and following the speeches particularly on the distinction between ' incitement ' and ' provocation ' , that the Council 's text copies Article 5 of the Council of Europe Convention in order to prevent differences in application .
We think that we should trust judges to apply this criminalisation reasonably and - as Mr de Grandes Pascual quite rightly said - taking due account of context , particularly as regards Spanish terrorism .
Lastly , I would like to point out that the Council 's text largely takes account , on the one hand , of the freedom of expression clause in Article 2 and on the other , of the proportionality clause in Article 14 .
Regarding the report by Mrs Roure , I would like to say that I also agree with Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Alvaro : it is indeed progress to have regulation in the third pillar that opens up the right of redress .
I have also heard all your demands relating to scope , particularly that of Mrs Kaufmann .
France thought the same as the Commission , but we have to be realistic .
We could unanimously adopt a different text .
We would have liked to go further - that is what Commissioner Barrot said too - but only if the scope was extended , which would be a really good thing ; I do not believe we would make this progress in the short term .
There is a compromise to be achieved , a balance to be established .
I agree with Mrs Roure that this is not entirely satisfactory , but it is still progress and we must accept it for what it is .
Anyway , as I said , we also have the evaluation clause .
I invite the Commission , the Vice-President - and I know he will do it - to make the best possible use of this evaluation clause and the provisions on data collection that suggest we will also think about files under national sovereignty .
You mentioned the inclusion of certain data appearing in this decision .
Personally , I would also be glad if the inclusion of religious and sexual data were reviewed or , at the very least , if it were worded better than it currently is .
In answer to Mr Dillen , regarding the Roma : as he knows , the Roma Summit on 16 September demonstrated the commitment of the French Presidency and the Commission to the Roma issue .
The Vice-President was there and we took stock of past measures , to which the Member States can commit themselves in the future to encourage the integration of the Roma into our societies ; an issue which also crops up a great deal on Commissioner Špidla 's social agenda .
That is all I wanted to say in response to the speeches made as part of this very exciting debate .
( DE ) Mr President , Commission Vice-President , President-in-Office of the Council , a word of praise first of all to the French Council Presidency for the fact that we are discussing these subjects together , as they illustrate the balance of the challenge : overcoming a major challenge - terrorism - on the one hand , and data protection on the other .
It is a shame that the President-in-Office cannot be present for the whole time .
That would have been very useful for this debate .
Firstly , with regard to data protection , we have already heard many Presidencies here tell us of major and significant progress .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like to note that our rapporteur , Mrs Roure , has the full support of the entire Parliament on this issue , as we need progress here .
Three items are of particular importance to us .
I should like to emphasise specifically that we must continue to emphasise that we support the exchange of data .
We know from the Schengen Information System that we can trace many criminals by exchanging data , and that exchanging data ensures success and also guarantees security .
Other aspects are important , however : the right of access for citizens is particularly important to me - strengthening citizens ' rights - and the scope , which has already been discussed repeatedly .
Vice-President Barrot has pointed out that it is important to him to have these decisions as backing , particularly during the negotiations with the United States .
I should like to add , however , that if the United States objects that this legal framework unfortunately applies only to European issues , and not at intra-European level in connection with the situation in the Member States , it will have an argument against us , as we do not even dare to implement this legal framework in full in the European Union .
With regard to the fight against terrorism , I think it is a shame that , although the Council is continually launching new approaches here , it is getting nowhere in the practical implementation of many operational measures .
We all remember that it took over a year to appoint a new EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator , Mr de Kerchove , that we acted quickly on data retention but have unfortunately seen delays in implementation , and that within Europol we still do not have a task force , a dedicated department , for this sector .
We must work and fight with greater commitment in this regard , and we should be making operational progress rather than just arguing over wording .
Particularly with regard to Islamic terrorism , we are experiencing the greatest problems with converts - people who grow up in our society , become adults and then convert to the Islamic faith .
We have to ask ourselves here what is going wrong in our societies and what is going wrong in the Islamic environment for these people to become radicalised .
We have to consider this .
In Europe we are able to live in safety also because we have a committed police force , who are to be thanked at this point .
( ES ) First of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent reports , but I am mainly going to discuss the Lefrançois report .
Step by step , always through legislation , we are continuing to close in on terrorism .
The Framework Decision of 2002 enabled us to establish a common definition and legal framework for terrorist offences .
The changes put forward today involve including three new offences to protect ourselves from , in response to old and new terrorist threats , and their increasing use of information technologies , including cyberterrorism .
There is a long chain of terrorist acts ranging from indoctrinating and arousing fanaticism in a child to murder .
This proposed modification is restricted to public provocation to commit terrorist offences , and recruitment and training of terrorists , which now covers traditional and modern methods for sowing terror .
However , we do not distinguish between the methods , but we need to be extremely careful about drawing the line between what is unacceptable and therefore should be punished , and freedom of expression as a fundamental right .
In the case of public provocation , this line is more blurred .
Therefore , intention and manifest danger are essential requirements in order for something to be described as an offence .
Everything else is freedom of expression , which is protected by the Framework Decision itself , Article 6 of the EU Treaty , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe Convention .
In the case of the Convention , what is lacking is that many Member States have not yet ratified it , which is doing little to help the fight against terrorism or to protect freedoms .
Neither the original Framework Decision nor the current amended version are substitutes for the Convention ; rather , its ratification would strengthen European legislation , giving it added value and a more complete legal framework .
As in the Prüm Treaty and many other texts , European legislation does not distinguish between different types of terrorists ; it is just as valid for use within the Union as for international terrorism .
Last year Europol recorded a total of 583 terrorist acts , 24 % more than the previous year , 517 of which were by separatist groups operating in Spain and France .
There were 201 arrests of people suspected of Islamist terrorist acts .
I would like to congratulate the police forces on their commendable work and their efforts to put an end to terrorism and to detain terrorists .
Mr President , unfortunately my country is back in the news .
We have a long and wretched tradition of terrorism .
We know that there is no place for terrorists in a democracy , but nor is there a place for those who encourage , harbour and assist terrorists .
I therefore think that there is another legal concept that would complete our legislation : the criminalisation of demonstrations discrediting or humiliating the victims of terrorism or their families .
It would be good to keep this in mind for the next changes to be made .
I will conclude , Mr President , by regretting that we are unable to apply Protocol 10 of the Lisbon Treaty , which would have speeded up the communitarisation of matters that are so significant and urgent in the minds of citizens .
Mr President , to start with , on a point of order , I would like to ask the presidency of this House to write to the French presidency and indicate that we find it unacceptable that the French presidency is not available for the whole duration of such an important debate .
( NL ) Mr President , terrorism was not invented on 11 September 2001 ; it had always been there .
In addition , as the previous speaker has just remarked , Europol 's EU Terrorism Situation and Trend Report does indeed state that the vast majority of attacks are not committed by Islamic extremists , but by separatists , by forces on the extreme right and extreme left .
What is new since 2001 , however , is that governments worldwide have been seizing on the fight against terrorism to curtail civil rights and freedoms .
I am all for cooperation in the fight against criminals , and I concur fully with the words of Mr Weber , but very often measures , such as the collection of personal data , have been taken for purposes that have absolutely nothing to do with terrorism .
For example , the PNR data are used in immigration control or in fighting ' ordinary ' crime .
In itself this is quite legitimate , but in that case let us call a spade a spade .
The solemn declarations by the Council on civil rights and privacy ring somewhat hollow when the Council is not even here and , in particular , is not prepared to implement the European Parliament 's recommendations , as laid down in the Roure report , in particular .
Perhaps , then , the Council should stop weeping crocodile tears over the Irish ' no ' .
Finally , I have two specific questions .
I should like to ask the Commission - since the Council is not here - for some information on the High Level Contact Group .
After two years of negotiations behind closed doors and without a mandate , US Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff is now urging Commissioner Barrot to sign an agreement in December .
I should like to know whether Commissioner Barrot will be saying ' no ' on our behalf .
My second question is as follows .
Negotiations are being held on behalf of the EU on a system permitting customs - in Europe , and without any explanation or restrictions - to search and confiscate laptops at the border .
I should like to know what the situation is with this .
I think it is important to inform you that the French Presidency correctly notified its apologies in advance of the beginning of the debate and informed us that Mrs Dati was unable to participate in the debate because she was detained for unavoidable reasons and that Mr Jouyet , who was replacing her , was not able to stay .
Your objection remains important , however , and we will pass it on , but I must emphasise that the apologies of the French Presidency were given in advance .
( PL ) Mr President , terrorism is one of the greatest threats of modern times .
The 11 September attacks made us aware of that in no uncertain terms .
Terrorism is based on both a psychological and a social and media effect .
Hence the problem that has arisen of the endless list of questions on how to avert threats of this type , which have acquired a global dimension .
The sowing of fear and terror and attacks on civil society - this is the face of terrorism .
The EU must provide its citizens with a high level of security .
Particular attention needs to be given to terrorists ' use of IT and communications technologies , particularly the Internet , which helps to disseminate propaganda broadcasts and training manuals .
This is what we really need to be countering .
Combating terrorism must become a priority for us in the EU , particularly combating its most threatening variant , Islamic terrorism , the objective of which is the absolute destruction of Western civilisation .
What can we do ?
The choice is simple : either we annihilate terrorism , or terrorism will visit apocalypse on the world .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can hold this debate on basic principles - we have to hold it - but not without discussing a particular instrument .
I am talking about what is referred to as the list of terrorist organisations .
Since the judgment of the European Court of Justice of 3 September , we know that the legal assessment is perfectly clear .
The system of lists of terrorist organisations of both the EU and the UN violates citizens ' fundamental rights and therefore has to be reformed .
What has happened ?
This EU list of terrorist organisations operates in a completely grey area without any parliamentary control .
It is indeed bizarre when we as Parliament hear that a meeting of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council on 15 July - bringing together politicians specialising in agriculture , forestry and rural development - adopted a new EU list of terrorist organisations without debate , and without knowing what was on it .
We know that foreign policy complications result , as international law is being trampled underfoot here in a completely grey area .
We want to change this , and I am asking for your support in doing so . Many thanks .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am also disappointed that the French minister has left , because he could have learned , for instance , that the information that he supplied to us is incorrect .
In fact , Mrs Dührkop is correct in saying that the vast majority of terrorist attacks carried out in the European Union have an independent basis and have nothing to do with Al-Qaida , contrary to Mr Jouyet 's statement .
In that case , we could have removed that suggestive equation , often put forward to us , between Islam and terrorism .
This is a frequent tendency and , unfortunately , it also has its adherents in this Parliament .
I am thinking of the attitude adopted by Mr Borghezio in the recent Cologne demonstration as , if this framework decision were valid , he would certainly be accused of provocation to terrorism .
I would define Mr Borghezio 's activities as provocation , and on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left , I would like to make a formal request for the President of Parliament to issue an official warning to Mr Borghezio .
I believe that the strategy adopted over recent years in the fight against terrorism has been a losing strategy , and has been too subordinate to US interests in the war in Iraq and in Afghanistan , in the formulation of the list of terrorist organisations , and in the restrictions placed upon the rule of law .
There have been too many instances of improper handling of personal data and I believe that we must all work together - and I am just finishing now - to ensure that we do not restrict individual freedoms , to increase democratic areas and to ensure that we do not , in the name of security and the fight against terrorism , help to achieve the very goals of the terrorist organisations themselves .
( SV ) Mr President , Mrs Lefrançois proposes important changes in order to safeguard confidentiality , freedom of expression and legal certainty .
What should be viewed as criminal is incitement , not provocation , to commit terrorist offences .
Protection of privacy must also apply to e-mail and other electronic correspondence and the basic principles of all our legislation , proportionality , necessity and non-discrimination , are emphasised .
Excellent .
But , for there is a big ' but ' : what happened to subsidiarity ?
What kind of terrorism is to be dealt with at EU level ?
A dreadful crime of terrorism was committed in Spain last weekend , and our sympathies go out to the Spanish people , but that crime is not an EU matter .
Neither was the terrorism which continued for decades in Northern Ireland .
Clearly , fear of terrorism is being deliberately exploited to advance EU positions in the fields of justice and police affairs at the expense of the Member States .
Subsidiarity is a fitting subject for political speeches , but does not feature in legislation .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , this weekend the Czech Republic 's Ambassador to Pakistan became a victim of a bomb attack in that country .
Yesterday , three Czech servicemen were wounded in a rocket attack in Afghanistan .
These days , terrorism is having a direct impact on the citizens of my country too .
There is no doubt that this is one of the most insidious and dangerous phenomena of civilisation and that we cannot give in to this cowardly and wicked evil , but must fight it .
The war on terrorism must nevertheless not become an all-encompassing incantation .
Despite all the bloody consequences of terrorism , everyday mistrust and fear for security cannot be placed above freedom .
I therefore reject the European Commission 's proposal that incitement to commit a terrorist offence should be a crime .
The proposal aims to punish verbal and written addresses and thus poses a clear threat to freedom of expression and fundamental human rights .
For me , as a democratic politician , this is unacceptable .
( PT ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start with the report by Mrs Roure , which I once again support in its efforts to reach a political agreement on the proposal for a Framework Decision on the protection of personal data in the framework of the third pillar that is not based on the lowest common denominator , a minimum level of data protection and serious shortcomings .
I should like to reiterate my position , which I have made clear here several times before : it is essential and urgent for a legal instrument to be adopted that guarantees the protection of data in the framework of the third pillar and ensures a level of protection of personal data that is at least equivalent to the level guaranteed under the first pillar by Directive 95 / 46 / EC .
I very much enjoyed listening to Vice-President Barrot 's statements .
He is tuned in to Parliament 's concerns , but I regret that the Council 's empty chair is a living example of the political deafness that has filtered through every presidency .
I am not at all optimistic about the Council 's response .
On the Lefrançois report : in 2002 we adopted a framework decision in which we harmonised the definition of ' terrorism ' and the applicable penalties .
Several speakers have already referred to the Internet , the new information technologies , and the advantages they bring , but also to the use criminals can make of the net .
As has already been said , there are some 5 000 terrorist propaganda sites , which are tools of radicalisation and recruitment , as well as serving as a source of information on terrorist means and methods .
That is why we need to amend the 2002 Directive , so as to create the necessary instruments to deal with this form of cyberterrorism .
I support Mrs Lefrançois ' proposals , which combine the urgency of this fight with the indispensable respect for freedom of speech and association .
Lastly , Mr President , it is very important that Member States ratify the 2005 Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism so as to ensure parallel implementation of both instruments , together with a more thorough and comprehensive legal regime .
( EL ) Mr President , over recent years , discussion of terrorism in the European Commission and the Council has almost invariably sprung from self-evident acceptance of the protection of our fundamental rights .
The almost equally inevitable consequences are perverse legislative proposals that violate these very rights .
A typical example is the proposal we are considering today , to combat terrorism on the Internet .
This is based on the acknowledgement that some terrorists use the Internet to instigate terrorism , and that we must stop them .
However , the proposal concludes with the following extreme measure : to combat terrorism on the Internet , we should imprison any citizen who writes anything that could be interpreted by the police as being intended to encourage terrorism - not even ' instigate ' it , mark you .
Furthermore , anyone directly or indirectly supporting terrorist crimes is guilty .
In other words , anyone who dares to express , verbally or in writing , a political opinion that could be interpreted as supporting terrorism is risking arrest .
The proposal states elsewhere that people can be prosecuted , even if they have no intention of encouraging terrorism with their writings , simply on the grounds that their words , in the opinion of the police , had such an effect .
In other words , one of the fundamental principles of criminal procedure is being completely overturned .
Fortunately , the Lefrançois report is here to restore the self-evident values of a democratic society to this crazy framework decision .
It protects the freedom of the press and the contents of our e-mails from pre-emptive spying by the authorities ; and it expressly states that criminalisation of any kind ' shall not have the effect of reducing or restricting ... the expression of radical , polemic or controversial views in the public debate on sensitive political questions , including terrorism . '
I hope the Council will accept these self-explanatory changes .
No-one in this House underestimates the need to combat terrorism , but when the fight against it gives rise to measures that ultimately gag our democracy , then the European Parliament , quite rightly , is obliged not to endorse them .
This is because - again , one of those self-evident truths that are in danger of no longer being taken for granted in today 's Europe - it is absurd to claim that we are fighting terrorism to ' protect our democracy ' while proposing measures that are contrary to the fundamental principles of democracy .
The moral superiority of democracy lies in the fact that there are many ways of responding and protecting it , but these certainly do not include pre-emptive monitoring of the thoughts and words of its citizens , let alone the pre-emptive gagging or criminalisation of the self-expression of those who disagree with what is self-evident to the majority .
I call on you to support the Lefrançois and Roure reports .
To the Council in its absence I say , take heed .

Mr President , there are fundamental flaws in how the EC is currently proceeding in justice and home affairs , notably the lack of fully transparent and democratic law-making in the absence of the Lisbon Treaty ( I too regret that Mr Jouyet showed his indifference to our views by leaving , whether he apologised or not ) and , secondly , the lack of balance and respect for fundamental rights .
Both are , unfortunately , fully on display here in the two measures being discussed .
The criminalising of ' public provocation to commit terrorism ' - a vague term - risks casting a chilling effect on free speech when the criminal offence of incitement , which we already have , is perfectly adequate .
The other measure gives only weak protection for personal data exchanged ostensibly for law-enforcement purposes , but with massive loopholes .
I can inform the House that , in the UK , the Data Retention Directive - that landmark achievement of the UK presidency three years ago - is being used to give hundreds of non-law-enforcement agencies access to personal contact details .
Local councils use it to check up if parents have lied about living in the catchment area of a popular school - which might be naughty , but is not a major crime .
It is disgraceful the way that interior ministers have left a space for Europhobes like the UK Independence Party and British Conservatives to castigate the whole EU effort on cross-border crime .
We know that a large majority of the European public , including in the UK , supports EU action to catch criminals and terrorists , such as through the European arrest warrant .
However , UKIP and the Tories , who claim to put a high priority on law and order , give a cheery wave goodbye to any criminal who escapes across the Channel .
We should not allow them to get away with their propaganda , especially because interior ministers are doing their very best to undermine public support for police cooperation by their blinkered approach which gives insufficient attention to civil liberties , be this protection from invasions of privacy or the rights of defendants .
EU Governments have stupidly allowed Mr Batten and his ilk a head of steam over the issue of recognition of judgments in absentia by their failure , led by the UK Government , to strengthen defence rights .
Talk about an unholy alliance between the Europhobes and a spineless Labour Government !
Lastly , I want to ask where the justice ministers are in this whole exercise .
They need to get a grip on the interior ministers ' circus and start to construct a real European area of freedom , security and justice .
We need the Lisbon Treaty to get transparency and democracy into this project , and quickly , before the European elections .
( PL ) Listening to this debate , there are times when I get the impression that we are forgetting that the framework decision is aimed at democratic states , at EU Member States with a democracy based on firm foundations .
There is therefore no urgent reason , no urgent need , to constrict the effect of the framework decision by introducing concepts like ' incitement ' or ' genuine terrorist threat ' .
What this is is the culture of suspicion that Mr Fava was talking about , suspicion with regard to the state .
Who should assess how genuine the threat has actually become ?
Does blood have to flow on the streets of one or another European city for us to be 100 % certain that the threat linked to training , to incitement or to provocation has become genuine ?
These and other safeguard clauses may be interpreted with an ill will , at the level of the courts , for example .
They may end up being taken as an expression of an ideology , a false appreciation of human rights , which in this instance would undermine the effectiveness of combating terrorism .
I am appealing to Member States to show more trust , not to weaken the framework decision , and to maintain convergence of the framework decision with the counter-terrorism convention drawn up among the family of nations of the Council of Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , terrorism as an act is to be condemned by all Members present in this House .
However , this should not lead us to make protecting our true security difficult .
In reality , the choices made by the EU to stamp out these hideous crimes leave us divided and deeply uncertain .
Adopting increasingly reactionary measures confirms that we were right to disagree from the outset with the ethos of the whole enterprise , and that we are right to be concerned now about substantial protection for our citizens ' freedoms .
The reform proposals presented call for an even heavier investment in measures and policies that can put innocent people in the dock and bring about their conviction .
On the basis of suspicion alone , they overturn the fundamental legal principle of presumed innocence .
How can public incitement or provocation constitute a crime when it does not have any consequence or lead to any action ?
How far-fetched can the definition of provocation be ?
When can it be considered public ?
When is it genuinely dangerous and therefore punishable ?
The declaratory nature of some of the provisions on the protection of freedom of expression is not enough : what determines the implementation of the proposal is the thinking behind its definitions .
These contravene Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and may lead to the criminalisation of demonstrations , speeches , etc .
In our view , the EU is once again making a choice based on political expediency rather than attempting to protect citizens ' real freedoms .
It is trying to dispel our worries with declarative clauses that are unable to guarantee the protection of those who some wish to see as potential terrorists .
( EL ) What grief , what suffering , what pain , what hate terrorism involves !
Fortunately , we have been taught to hide , to protect ourselves and to hate , for such are our basic rights , and this is what they have been reduced to .
However , we have not been taught a fundamental obligation : not to provoke terrorism .
Terrorism is not a vice ; it may be a criminal act committed in protest , and one committed in vengeance , and it is unquestionably an appalling crime : but it is not a vice .
I have not seen terrorists who are perverts and who die with their victims .
Terrorism is provoked .
Inasmuch as it is provoked by those who provoke and make use of it , terrorism will kill .
We in Parliament must protect Europeans , but we must also protect those who are being killed in Islamabad , in Sharm el-Sheikh , and most recently in Algeria .
It is now Parliament 's obligation to protect those who are not to blame .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , two weeks ago the Chairman of the Muslim Council of Great Britain addressed a meeting in this building , at which he categorically rejected reciprocity between faiths and demanded that the indigenous population had an obligation to welcome newcomers , and that those newcomers had a right to remain separate .
He made no reference whatsoever to weeding out the Islamic fundamentalists in his own community , despite knowing - as he must - that Muslims , and only Muslims , have the knowledge to find and stop their fanatics .
It was not Scottish rugby players who blew up the tube trains in London , nor Welsh farmers , nor even English cricketers .
It was a bunch of brainwashed Muslim youngsters who were looking for 72 vestal virgins in Paradise , believing that they had a God-given right to slaughter non-believers .
We are not fighting terrorism .
We are fighting a war of religion , and it is about time we faced up to that distinction .
Mr President , many colleagues have made wise comments on how to strike the right balance between preventing terrorist acts and safeguarding our civil liberties , especially with respect to data storage and collection .
I would like to raise the issue of what data is being collected on our citizens and how it is stored and accessed .
Let me just give one example of data collection which probably affects most colleagues in this hemicycle .
We frequently travel by air and are customers of airport shops , and any purchase that we make requires the presentation of a boarding pass .
While different tax rates on perfumes , alcohol and tobacco may justify this , have you ever considered why your boarding pass is needed when you purchase a newspaper ?
Who needs to know whether you purchase the right-leaning Daily Telegraph or the left-leaning Libération ?
If it served no purpose , why would someone collect it ?
Secondly , we need to increase safeguards on storage and access to data .
How on earth will we convince our citizens that the sacrifices they are being asked to make with respect to their personal freedoms are justified if government agencies in Member States have mislaid massive data bases , as was the case in the United Kingdom , or even published them on the internet , as was the case of tax records in Italy ?
Just these examples show why Commission and Council should listen to the LIBE Committee , which postulates - amongst others - that processing of data revealing political opinions should be prohibited and that the framework decision should also apply to national data processing .
Only with these and additional safeguards proposed by Parliament will citizens accept the collection of data .
Without this , we will have a European haystack of information with bits of straw blowing around in the wind and without any hope of finding the proverbial needle , that needle which is the key piece of information that prevents a terrorist atrocity .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt at all that we have to continue fighting terrorism with every resolve .
I therefore specifically welcome the fact that we are continuing to develop the necessary instruments and adapting them to the insights we have gained .
One thing must be clear , however : we can win this battle only on the basis of the rule of law .
Abandoning laws and morals only strengthens , not weakens , terrorism .
The actions of the Bush administration have shown us this quite plainly .
Europe can lead by example here .
The safety and freedom of the general public are always connected to the freedom of the individual , however .
You only have to look at the Basque region , for example .
People live in fear and terror , as walking the streets or visiting the wrong bar can have fatal consequences .
It is our job to protect our citizens from such threats .
Restrictions on other personal freedoms are occasionally necessary in order to do this .
Our citizens have to be able to trust that these restrictions are also appropriate , however , and that their data are not being distributed throughout the world by the intelligence services .
In short : our citizens ought not to have to open their eyes one day and discover that Orwell 's visions are no longer a Utopia .
That is exactly what this is about : guaranteeing the safety of life and limb without destroying privacy .
At this point I should like to thank both my colleagues , who have submitted two excellent reports here .
Both make it clear that we are calling for greater efforts by the Council to protect fundamental rights , that we want greater care to be taken and better protection to be afforded when handling personal data .
We shall give our full and total support to the Council for all meaningful and appropriate measures to combat terrorism .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament will always see to it that all citizens can feel safe , whether on the street , at major events or in their home .
Freedom is too precious an asset to have it destroyed , no matter by which side .
We know this well enough from our own painful history in Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , much has already been said , so I will not go on at length about this subject .
I would simply like to draw attention to a new state of affairs : terrorism has introduced something into our society that did not previously exist .
Terrorism has allowed governments and taught states to mistrust not an external invader , but all of their citizens , and that is where the difficulty in governing lies .
There is no exercise more difficult than guaranteeing security and respecting rights .
From that point of view , I would like to say that the reports by Mrs Lefrançois and Mrs Roure provide an extremely balanced synthesis of the progress needed to ensure the protection of citizens and the protection of their freedom .
Arbitrating between these two necessities is something governments do not know how to do .
It is not part of their tradition , and it is something they are currently learning to do bit by bit ; it is certainly an honour for the European Parliament and for this chamber to be the ones putting the stamp of balance on the search for progress in these two areas : the security of citizens and the security of their freedom .
As it is , it seems to me that the framework decision , as amended by the two reports by Mrs Roure and Mrs Lefrançois , is the fruit of several years ' work and is therefore extremely precious .
However , this is only one step along the way .
Governments have to learn how to strive for a balance between governing citizens and protecting their lives .
In this respect we can play a valuable part in helping them to make the decisions required , which in my opinion they are incapable of making alone or of applying within the limits of their national borders .
( PL ) Mr President , terrorist attacks like the recent attack in Islamabad clearly demonstrate that terrorism is in fact a terrifying reality .
We must therefore greet any proposal to combat terrorism effectively , in other words to provide security for the nations of Europe , with satisfaction .
On the one hand the report under discussion here comes out against these objectives , by attempting to clamp down on the phenomenon of terrorism at the incitement stage , while on the other hand it alludes to the rejected Treaty of Lisbon .
The objectives stated in the report and its justification are mutually exclusive .
We cannot combat terrorism effectively without cutting back on or restricting certain citizens ' rights .
This , sadly , is the price we have to pay .
The European Union has so far not taken any steps aimed at coordinating international action and is simulating combating terrorism in a virtual-cum-verbal sphere .
On the initiative of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , a ' Committee on CIA Matters ' was set up in the European Parliament , which has not succeeded in establishing anything and has merely undermined the fight against terrorism .
We must cherish the hope that this time , under the pretext of protecting fundamental rights , we shall not be pushing in a similar direction .
( EL ) Mr President , the proposal of the Council and the Commission , with which the report is generally in agreement , is a profoundly reactionary attack on even the most fundamental civil democratic rights and freedoms .
Its aim is to strengthen the institutional framework of suppression so that it can be used to crush the people 's struggles .
By introducing the new terminology of ' violent radicalisation ' culminating in ' extreme ideologies ' , the proposal arbitrarily criminalises every form of expression , opinion , view and ideological perception calling the exploitative capitalist system into question .
In conjunction with this , an amendment to the European terrorism law adds three new crimes , all related to use of the Internet .
Under this medieval institutional framework , repressive mechanisms are allowed to prohibit and punish the circulation of ideas on the pretext that they foster or incite terrorist acts .
At the same time , according to the same philosophy , forms of struggle and combat that question EU policy and seek to overturn it are considered to be terrorist acts .
The people must respond with disobedience and unruliness rather than accept these reactionary laws .
( PL ) Mr President , we are talking today about the form of the Council framework decision in respect of the protection of personal data processed as part of police and court cooperation in criminal cases .
This is a very important matter that requires profound analysis .
Right at the start of the report , however , there is a reference to the Treaty of Lisbon and the changes its entry into effect will bring about .
May I remind you that , following the Irish referendum , this Treaty is surely defunct , and it is not right to try to tweak things in this way .
The Parliamentary amendments proposed in the report will lead to even greater harmonisation than is proposed by the Commission .
My view is that we should leave it to the Member States to come up with more detailed definitions at national level and not spell everything out in Brussels , and this goes for personal data protection too .
( EL ) Mr President , let me begin by congratulating the two fellow Members who drew up the reports we are discussing today .
Combating terrorism is unquestionably the common , self-evident aim of us all .
Nonetheless , our legal set-up requires individual rights and personal data to be protected .
Thus when it is a matter of Council interference in individual rights , I object completely .
However , let me focus our attention on another fact .
The numerous leaks of great amounts of personal data in several Member States have convinced me , so far , that the protection of such data is ineffective .
Need I remind you of the incidents in the United Kingdom that obliged none other than the Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , to apologise to his citizens ?
Should I remind you that in the United Kingdom , according to a report , half the country 's population runs the risk of forgery and bank fraud ?
Need I remind you that there have already been cases in Germany , too , that are forcing the government to take strict measures ?
I am sure that in other countries , too , there will be similar incidents that I am not aware of .
Thus in view of such occurrences , I am very reluctant to accept the transfer of personal data from one country to another .
I fear that the only result achieved by this procedure will be exactly what the terrorists are aiming for : a reduction in the trust citizens should have in the state .
This must be avoided .
( PL ) Mr President , the law does not define terrorism , but we all nevertheless know what this phenomenon is based on .
Thousands of Europeans have experienced for themselves the atrocities perpetrated by terrorists .
We wish to have a society that is free from the mental contagion that is terror .
This is why we must arm ourselves .
We must arm ourselves against this phenomenon , but we must do so wisely and effectively .
We must combat terrorism , but not according to the retaliatory , albeit biblical , principle of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' .
We are a democratic society , and we have inscribed values on the EU 's standards in which we profoundly believe - these are fundamental rights , respect for human dignity and protection of privacy , which includes personal data .
I therefore thank the rapporteurs for their work .
I am pleased to see the proposal for amendments to the Commission 's conclusions , but at the same time I would like to appeal for efficient and harmonised actions that offer everyone protection against terrorist propaganda and agitation , especially our children and young people .
These individuals , who are most susceptible because they are young , open and trusting , must be protected from the dangerous texts that are being spread via the Internet and other media , often specifically under the banner of freedom of speech .
Incitement is a good word to define such actions , but it is not enough to write it into the framework decision .
We need to set up mechanisms , we need to create an efficient European system and good procedures that will enable what we are today calling a crime to be wisely enforced .
Without such tools , without a common policy on this , we shall not achieve the success we so desire .
( PL ) The debate on what to do about terrorism is becoming increasingly pressing , especially in the light of the tragic events in Pakistan and Spain in recent days .
The European Union , which has chosen as its objective to provide citizens with a high level of security and justice , is currently facing new challenges and threats because of the development of information and communications technologies , including the Internet .
The appearance of new methods used by terrorists , such as the creation of thousands of websites used for terrorist propaganda , demands a firm response from the European Union .
I support the position taken by the rapporteur , Mrs Lefrançois , that the crucial thing is to establish an appropriate legal framework for cyberterrorism with simultaneous protection of the fundamental freedoms and rights of EU citizens as guaranteed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Moreover , in my view it is essential that all Member States ratify the Council of Europe 's Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament defends freedom of speech throughout Europe - including in Cologne , since Cologne is part of Europe - for anyone who wants to speak out against fundamentalism and Islamic totalitarianism , whose ideological basis is not Islam , but the fundamentalist Islam of terrorism .
So enough of censorship - let us defend that right !
Here there are attempts to do furtive deals and defend the right to liberty by giving the opportunity to anyone who wishes to to speak in the mosques in favour of terrorism ; if they include a few words against racism and xenophobia , we can no longer censure them , and we cannot prevent them from spreading their propaganda .
We have been prevented from speaking and that is why I am gagging myself !

Thank you , Mr Borghezio ; I think , or rather , I deduce from your decision to gag yourself that we have reached the end of your speech .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as usual , the reports attempt to combine data protection with the prevention of terrorism .
Of course , we all wish to step up the fight and win the war on terrorism , but frankly I wonder if , since we have both these aims , what we are debating will - as with all compromises - end up toning down the scope of the initiatives .
Well , police cooperation and protection of individual rights are not infrequently antithetical , but here they manage to find a reasonable balance .
What is certain , however , is that citizens of the EU are harassed by continuous , not to say suffocating , restrictions on their privacy , and likewise it is certain that this is totally useless in protecting us from terrorists .
In fact , regardless of the global controls on the communications and movements of persons , terrorists continue to make converts and to sow death .
Unfortunately , our initiatives do not reach as far as the criminal hand of a certain Islamic radicalism , and so we ought perhaps to take a different approach to combating it .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the previous speaker has , I believe , wrongly made a connection here .
What happened in Cologne was not about banning speeches against fundamentalism or speeches by democrats , but the imminent threat to citizens .
These were right-wing extremists , and their behaviour in public was such as to jeopardise public safety .
This is something else entirely and cannot be confused , not even for effect here in Parliament - I find this extremely irritating .
Secondly , the fact that we have agreed on taking action against terrorism here in Parliament is prudent , right and urgently necessary .
Since this is always difficult to balance with data protection , every single decision is insanely difficult for every individual here in Parliament .
However , it is true , of course , that when we see things such as what happened at the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad , or what is happening again now in Spain , when we are constantly being confronted with violence of this kind - and we all know that what these murderers are planning is being planned via modern information channels and then being processed via media using modern information and communication technologies - no other path remains for us either .
The Commission was right to propose that we endeavour to come to Europe-wide agreements on this .
It is a difficult balancing act and will remain so .
First and foremost , however , we have a duty to protect human lives .
To put it bluntly , what use is data protection if people then die ?
Therefore , it is right that we simply take a good look here at modern information technologies in relation to the recruitment , financing and implementation of attacks and the glorification of attacks and come to agreements on how to combat them across Europe , and also supplement national regulations on this with European arrangements and agreements .
This is our imperative duty .
Action needs to be taken here .
It is also , ultimately , a positive advertisement for Europe that we are in a position to resolve such important issues , even if the individual decisions are by no means easy .
( DE ) Mr President , I should first of all like to take the opportunity to offer my warm congratulations to the rapporteurs , Mrs Lefrançois and Mrs Roure , as they have achieved something in their reports that , in my view , is of very particular significance .
Every time terrorism comes up , we have to take great care that we are not serving the aims of the terrorists with the laws we enact , specifically in taking these instruments to our society , which is based on equality , freedom and the rule of law , as this will probably mean they have actually achieved their goal , and none of us wants that .
It is therefore immensely important to me that there will be substantial restrictions on the transfer of data , that sensitive data may be passed on only in very tightly regulated exceptional cases , and that very strict limits can be imposed on the transfer of data to third countries .
In addition , I am of the opinion that the word ' provocation ' is wrong .
It is not appropriate for our constitutional system , and the term ' incitement ' would certainly have been better .
In the same way , it is important to ensure there is freedom of the press , freedom of expression , privacy of correspondence and secrecy of telecommunications .
All I can do now is appeal for this all to happen .
If we had had the Treaty of Lisbon , I would not now need to be making this appeal , as we would be using the codecision procedure .
It is good to see , however , that this has exposed those Members up there at the back on the far right who have cursed the Treaty of Lisbon .
They want fewer citizens ' rights , they want less data protection , they want less freedom and they want a weaker Parliament .
I am sure the electorate will have recognised this next time around .
Mr President , I naturally support the reports but I find discussing the European Union 's combat against terrorism rather strange at this point in time as the presidency has seriously undermined this combat by fixing the People 's Mojahedin of Iran to the EU blacklist of terrorist organisations , against the ruling of the European Court of Justice , the European Court of First Instance and the Proscribed Organisations Appeal Commission of the United Kingdom .
It has emerged that the previous decision to blacklist the PMOI has allegedly been the result of shady diplomatic bargaining incited by petty national interests .
The European Union cannot continue deviating from the rule of law and therefore I call on my colleagues to join the newly-formed European committee for justice under the leadership of Vice-President Alejo Vidal-Quadras calling for the immediate removal of the PMOI from the blacklist .
Mr President , our open democratic societies are a strength , but their very openness can be exploited to become a vulnerability .
It is this aspect which we are discussing today .
Of course , security is not just some technical process .
Security and liberty are complementary , and our strongest protection is a united , cohesive society in each of our nations , based on shared democratic values and mutual trust .
However , in recent years , our institutions and traditional values have been under constant assault from within and without .
At the same time , we have seen the growth of subcultures within our own societies that are scornful of our liberal values , deliberately seeking to establish alternative political and legal structures , sometimes through the use of violence , and sheltering behind our complex and generous legal systems and our liberal view of human rights .
The EU often has not helped .
Unfortunately , it sees every crisis as an opportunity to extend its own powers and rarely asks whether its actions in one area are having a detrimental effect in another .
I question , for example , the open-border policy , the lax approach to asylum and immigration and the attempts to introduce the Charter of Fundamental Rights onto the statute book .
While I am sure we all wish to find ways of combating the threat of terrorism , I am not at all clear why the EU feels it necessary , with its framework decision , to duplicate action that has already been taken in the Council of Europe .
All EU Member States are members of that body , along with 19 other states , and presumably they will already have legislated appropriately .
There is , however , an area of Council of Europe competence which would benefit from review , and I refer to the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) .
This is a convention that was drawn up in very different circumstances , over 50 years ago .
Its judicial interpretation often creates an obstacle to the deportation of terrorists from our countries .
If we want to do something useful , perhaps we could agree that it would be useful to have a fresh look at the ECHR .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , personal data is sensitive information which must be handled extremely carefully .
There must be no gaps in data protection ; it must work properly .
That is precisely the aim of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur to the proposal for the draft Council Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
I also congratulate the rapporteur on the work he has done .
The Framework Decision will have a considerable impact on one of the basic rights of European Union citizens : the right to privacy .
Since the European Parliament has always resolutely supported a strong , protective Framework Decision which would make a high level of data protection possible , the Council should give serious consideration to Parliament 's amendments .
Exchange of personal data should be regulated by a standard code of practice which is easy to understand ; its role must be to provide reliable protection which guarantees respect for people 's basic rights .
Paramount importance must be given to how personal data are in fact to be used .
The processing of personal data which reveal a person 's racial or ethnic background , political views , religious or philosophical convictions , membership of professional bodies , state of health or sexuality must be regulated as strictly as pharmacies are .
It must not be restricted only by a clause saying that it is permitted when essential and that safeguards are sufficiently guaranteed - this is too general , exceptions must be spelled out .
Access to personal data and disclosure of such data must take place within the law , security must be fully guaranteed .
To that end we need a watertight , specific , protective Framework Decision and a control system .
Our role is to safeguard our citizens ' basic rights and at the same time to discourage terrorism .
Let us do both with utmost care .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me thank the rapporteurs for an excellent piece of work which has significantly improved the Commission 's proposals .
I have previously had difficulty in supporting reports dealing with terrorism , despite the fact that I seriously regard terrorism as one of the most important tests of the Union 's credibility and capacity for solidarity and shared responsibility .
With all due respect for fellow Members from Member States which are afflicted by the madness of terrorism , I have to say that our duty to ensure that democracy is never defended by undemocratic means is paramount .
The rule of law must be upheld , along with respect for the privacy of citizens .
The Commission 's woolly formulations on the criminalisation of public provocation , alongside other proposals to extend the coverage to utterances excusing terrorism , are so broad and open to interpretation as to risk bringing the purpose of the legislation - to achieve a common level of protection throughout the Union - seriously into disrepute .
The fight against terrorism must be conducted on a common basis , but with respect for the Union 's various legal traditions and standards and , not least , with respect for democratic traditions and values .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this morning many have spoken here about the war on terrorism , and have gone on to say that it is difficult to wage war on something that is not a concrete entity , does not have an army and does not have a territory , but is simply a tactic .
This strange war has not been won , and it will certainly be difficult to win it , but there have been some positive results , such as the mere fact that the United States has not suffered any more attacks since 11 September .
These successes , however , have come at a price , and I share the concern of Mrs Lefrançois , who considers the dividing line between freedom of speech and law-breaking to be sometimes rather blurred , and can see the risk that efforts to increase the security of European citizens will in practice result in restrictions on those citizens ' rights and freedoms .
It is very difficult to find the balance between these two requirements , partly because we are in unknown territory : terrorism is too recent a phenomenon for us to be able to rely on precedents , or to have experience from which to learn .
There is no doubt that in the name of the war on terrorism illegal acts have been carried out , chiefly by that country which has done most to fight against terrorism , including in our interests - namely , the United States .
This is because there is a price to be paid for keeping terrorism in check , and that is the restriction of civil liberties .
On the other hand , it is easy not to make any mistakes when one does little or nothing .
Hence , in the European Union , if we want to ensure that we have a more secure future , we must do more ; we must improve coordination of action by Member States and the initiatives taken by the secret services and , above all , we must not leave the United States to bear the burden of this responsibility alone .
If we do this , we will perhaps be able to try to make our principles prevail , as well as our ideas about that blurred line between citizens ' security and breaches of human rights .
( RO ) Cooperation between EU institutions in the fight against terrorism must work perfectly , especially as this phenomenon has intensified .
Terrorism has become the main enemy of stability and world peace .
If we think of the events of September 11 or the ones in Madrid and London a few years ago , we have the perfect depiction of terror , fear , and suffering .
In order to safeguard the security of citizens , we need to take urgent action in the fight against terrorism , in close cooperation with local and regional authorities .
No element in the framework decision can be construed as a reduction of or constraint on fundamental rights and liberties , such as the freedom of expression , of association , or of assembly .
The expression of radical , polemical or controversial opinions concerning sensitive political issues , terrorism included , does not fall within the scope of the framework decision .
As long as we keep a balance between respect for liberties and protecting the security of citizens , any initiative should be welcomed .
( SL ) The two reports on the framework decisions form two further pieces in the jigsaw of a broad range of regulations , directives and other documents relating to the fight against terrorism .
I support both reports because I believe we need both framework decisions and because a reasonable balance has been struck between measures to ensure security and freedom of the individual .
I consider that in future the Commission and Council need to pay greater attention to the following issues .
Firstly , the burgeoning growth in anti-terrorism laws and the provision of greater transparency in such laws .
In this regard too , we have unnecessary and impractical laws or provisions in them which need to be rethought or repealed after assessment .
Secondly , the applicability of laws and thus the effective combating of terrorism do not depend solely on sound legislation but also on effective cooperation between the Member States and their police and security services .
Here we have not yet achieved the proper level of cooperation .
We need to examine and compare the control mechanisms available to the European Union and the Member States .
We need to pay particular attention to cases of database loss or misuse , and there should also be a mutual exchange of information on this matter between the Member States .
Finally , we need to do more to raise public awareness to make it easier for people to understand why certain measures are necessary .
Congratulations on both reports .
( BG ) Regrettably , the latest developments in Pakistan come as further categorical evidence of the timeliness of today 's discussion .
This discussion must provide a clear and categorical answer to two questions of principle : in the first place , whether we have really done enough by the proposed document to help the fight against crime , and in the second place , whether in doing so we have respected human rights and have provided adequate protection to our citizens ' personal data .
During its long history , this document has seen a lot of controversy and has undergone a lot of changes , and I would like to give special credit to the rapporteurs for the fine work they have done to achieve , ultimately , in a consensual and balanced text .
Particular attention should be paid to the amendments proposed in Mrs Roure 's report , which require collection of personal data for lawful purposes and observance of Convention 108 , as well as mandatory informing the data subject of the purposes for which the data concerning him are being processed .
Nevertheless , some provisions proposed by the Council give reason for concern .
I entirely back Mrs Roure 's proposal to drop Article 1 , paragraph 1 of the Council Proposal , which practically exempts cases of national security from the effect of the present Framework Decision .
I am convinced that if this provision is kept , the legislative decision on which we will take a vote within hours will make it possible to circumvent the law and even to abuse it because " national security ” is an all too general notion and lends itself to various interpretations .
Recently , for example , there was a case in Bulgaria in which unauthorised retrieval of data , personal data , from the National Health Insurance Fund was attempted , and this attempt was frustrated only by the prompt action taken by the management of the Fund .
The control functions , the powers of the national supervisory authorities and of the European Data Protection Supervisor , must be augmented .
Unfortunately , the analysis shows that these authorities are rather and quite often used only for observance of the specific provisions of the law but actually do not possess any sanctioning or investigating functions .
An increase of these functions must be recommended to the Member States of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to discuss the second report first of all , namely the Framework Decision on combating terrorism .
We know that actions to combat terrorism are needed , as it is a fact that there are over 300 Al-Qaeda initiatives within the European Union and over 500 websites available , which even contain instructions on how to make bombs .
This is clear , and I believe that it is necessary to try to maintain a balance ; that is , to protect fundamental freedoms but also , on the other hand , to take every conceivable measure to prevent deadly terrorist activities .
I should like to highlight one point here .
I believe that the European Parliament would be making a crucial mistake if it were to amend the concepts and replace ' public provocation to commit a terrorist offence ' with ' incitement ' .
This is for the very simple reason that proof of incitement cannot be produced until people have already died - but then it is too late .
Nobody would be able to understand or accept this .
If , however , public provocation is included in this legal act , there is the possibility of intervening if general disobedience to a law is provoked or action is provoked that is punishable in relation to terrorist activity .
This means there is the opportunity to save lives before a terrorist act is committed .
I would regret it , therefore , if Parliament were to take the wrong path here and amend these concepts - for the further reason that the Council of Europe has laid down that the concept of public provocation should exist .
If I have understood correctly , the Council and Commission are also of this opinion , to which we should be subscribing - and this is an appeal to you all - and leaving the term ' public provocation ' in , as this enables lives to be saved before terrorist activities take place .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Roure for drawing up her report on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
There is no question that the swift adoption of a framework decision on personal data protection in the third pillar will help to protect the personal data , private life and fundamental rights of all citizens of the Member States .
This matter is a priority for us socialists .
This is not just because the current legal solutions in this area are inadequate ; it is most importantly because of its significance for everyone living in the EU .
It is my view that the legal act drawn up previously by the Council contained too many gaps .
It guaranteed protection only to a minimal and certainly not an adequate extent .
Because of this , I fully support the rapporteur 's proposed amendments to the Council 's draft , with which we were not satisfied , particularly those relating to the protection of data relating to DNA , health or the sexual orientation of citizens .
All data relating to personal and sensitive spheres of life such as racial and ethnic origin or information relating to religious convictions or world views require special protection and their processing should be admissible only in exceptional situations that are precisely defined in the law , and with the consent of a court .
It is also of exceptional importance that the rapporteur has taken the trouble to regulate the problem of data protection when the data are further processed , passed to third countries or passed to private entities , because it is precisely at these stages that abuse most commonly occurs .
What we need is a precise framework decision that will protect data to an extent that is at least on a level with that guaranteed in the first pillar by the 1995 Directive and Convention 108 .
Mr President , I sometimes fear that the fact that this House so frequently debates terrorism reflects a worrying absence of consensus on our response to it .
Surely the terrorist atrocities perpetrated over decades around the world , including the recent bomb attack in Islamabad , should have opened our eyes to its true , evil nature and the need to stand resolutely and unequivocally against the existential threat it poses to western democracy and way of life .
I welcome , therefore , EU countries working together to define and inflict heavy criminal penalties on those who incite terrorism .
I remember the demonstrations in London that coincided with the publication of cartoons in Denmark depicting the prophet Mohammed .
We , of course , are proud in Europe of our rights to free speech and expression , and protesters carrying placards calling for the beheading of those who insult Islam clearly crossed the boundary between free speech and hate speech inciting violence .
In the UK we have recently been debating limits on pre-trial detention without charge on suspicion of involvement in terrorism .
I am personally of the opinion that we need to give the police and security services the resources they need to protect our citizens , subject , of course , to rigid legal safeguards .
That is certainly what most people in my country and the rest of Europe want , according to opinion polls .
Furthermore , with regard to data retention , I am often dismayed at the way this House takes such an absolutist rather than a balanced approach to civil liberties .
Again , provided there are clear safeguarding rules in place on how the information is shared , we need to support our law enforcement authorities .
Finally , the EU should place Hezbollah on the list of proscribed terrorist organisations .
Not to have done so in the past in the face of prima facie evidence demonstrates an apparent lack of EU resolve that is giving succour to those who would destroy our way of life in a democracy .
Mr President , information exchange between our Member State police forces is essential to combat terrorist threats and indeed prevents atrocities .
Many atrocities have been prevented by such exchanges on my own island of Ireland .
For a long time Ireland and the UK were reluctant to do so due to deep-seated distrust .
The consequences were horrific .
It would be no surprise , therefore , that I broadly support information exchange .
However , I am concerned , as are my colleagues , that the Council 's revised proposals bear insufficient protection for personal data as outlined in Martine Roure 's report .
We will not defeat the likes of ETA and the IRA and others who despise democracy and human rights by undermining our democratic norms ourselves .
I appeal , therefore , to the Commission and Council to take seriously our concerns as directly-elected politicians .
It is essential that the progress of the European Union is not blocked and that we avoid giving the impression that the EU can act beyond the law of Member States .
I had hoped we could have dealt with these matters under Lisbon 's new codecision procedures .
Unfortunately that is not possible right now , but we must continue to work to enhance the legitimacy of this Parliament and the European Union .
We will not do so if we undermine personal rights .
Mr President , I welcome this report .
I want to say at the outset that I strongly support the fight against terrorism , and I have spent all my political life opposing IRA and Loyalist terrorism in Ireland , so please take that as stated .
But we must ensure that we have sufficient checks and balances to protect citizens from state terrorism or abuse of data by the state , the Union , or by journalists , organisations , individuals , or agencies for that matter , those who steal or otherwise come into possession of information which is private and confidential .
The cure must not become worse than the disease .
The storage and disposal of such data is a crucial part of this safeguard .
Any attempt at embarrassing individuals or any form of attempted blackmail - be it political , financial or otherwise - should be a particular offence and should be strongly condemned by all right-thinking people .
The disposal of this data is often left to the private sector to destroy after a certain period of time has passed by .
I , for one , am not satisfied that the private sector , in particular - or , for that matter , the public sector - have in place sufficient safeguards for the destruction of data which is no longer needed in the fight against terrorism .
I believe there should be the severest penalties for those who do not protect private information and leave this open to abuse and misinterpretation , whether those persons are in the public or private sector , and I urge the Commission to take this into account .
Our job as parliamentarians is to ensure that democracy can survive .
We must , therefore , ensure that we have all the tools we need to fight terrorism tooth and nail , but that does not mean we can be careless with the reputations , the confidentiality or the privacy of our citizens , and I urge the Commission to take that into account .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , terrorism represents one of the most serious threats to democracy and to economic and social development in Europe and throughout the world .
Modern information and communication technologies unfortunately play a significant role in the propagation of the terrorist threat .
The cheap , fast , easily accessible and globally available internet is often misused by terrorists to disseminate terrorist information and to recruit new members and sympathisers .
I therefore welcome the Council Framework Decision amending Framework Decision 2002 / 475 / JHA on combating terrorism , among other things because it includes the criminal offences of incitement to commit terrorist offences , recruitment for terrorism and training for terrorism .
I welcome this amendment because I am convinced that it is essential to find an international response to the international threat of terrorism .
No single EU Member State can handle this problem on its own .
There is a need for coordinated efforts by all Member States .
In a democracy , in the democratic Union of European states , however , the fight against terrorism must be conducted within the framework of a democratic rule of law , given human and civil rights .
I therefore support the amendments proposed by our two rapporteurs on the strengthening of just these elements .
In conclusion , I should like to urge all those involved , the Council , the Commission and Parliament , towards the rapid adoption of the compromise proposal .
( RO ) In the third millennium , the beauty of the global village is being threatened by global terrorism .
Since individual countries , owing to the principle of subsidiarity , can control only 10-15 % of cyberspace , the rest being the concern of private entities and families , we believe that a global approach is required for the first time , and the response to global terrorism should be a new concept , " Global care of the global village ” .
Through such an approach and through a strategy for the protection of global cyberspace , the European Union will prove its preoccupation with world security as well as with its own security .
Mr President , in spite of its horrible consequences , international terrorism is still , sadly , a controversial subject .
We want protection , but we protest at the cost and distress to authorities when they propose to implement measures to that effect .
We deplore the terrorist attacks , but we protest at the limitations to the full exercise of our rights , in spite of the fact that we know very well that the perpetrators are abusing our democratic system .
Ideally any limitation of our rights should be compensated by a corresponding increase in our security in the face of terrorist attacks .
Equally , we tend to resist legislative uniformisation against terrorism , although we know that the consequences are similarly destructive .
Furthermore , attacks might increase in frequency when the punishment is milder .
Therefore , to have an effective protection against terrorism , perhaps we should make up our minds and reconcile first these conflicting views .
Mr President , hardly a day goes by without a terrorist act .
Terrorism is a fulminant infection in the body of our society .
Like any infection , if left untreated , it will keep spreading until it incapacitates , or even kills , the patient .
Drastic measures are called for .
Some of those measures are controversial and undoubtedly infringe somewhat on personal freedoms but , on balance , they are necessary .
In an ideal world , strict personal data protection is paramount but , in a terrorism-sick world , concessions must unfortunately be made .
Exceptional circumstances call for exceptional measures .
I feel that this is the spirit in which we must look at decisions on combating terrorism .
If we absolutely have to choose between some minor compromises on personal liberties and a much more effective way of fighting terrorism , it is my opinion that we should choose the latter .
I conclude with the following question : if promoting certain atrocious crimes like paedophilia on the internet is a crime - and rightly so - why should it not be so for promoting terrorism ?

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of pensioners and the pensioners ' party which sent me here to the European Parliament , I would like to express our view on how to combat terrorism : the financial funds of the European Parliament and Europe ought to go in greater measure towards alleviating the sufferings of the people from whom the terrorists receive the greatest assistance .
These funds must be controlled , so that they are used for the benefit of the people and not for the illegitimate interests of certain corrupt leaders .
Therefore , I believe they should be used for the ' Marshall Plan ' proposed by Silvio Berlusconi , Italy 's prime minister , to aid the people of Palestine .
( RO ) I would refer to Mrs. Roure 's report .
The right to the protection of personal data is a fundamental right .
Those citizens whose data are being processed have rights which must be respected both at national level and at EU level .
There are numerous EU regulations and directives which require an exchange of information concerning the offences committed by European citizens in a Member State other than their state of residence .
Cases in point are the Regulation on access to the road freight business , or the Directive facilitating cross-border enforcement in the field of road safety .
All these European regulations require the set-up of information systems capable of relaying notifications and information between the Member States .
All the corresponding IT systems must include a public component as well as a secure component containing data about offences committed in Member States ; the latter should be accessible only to the relevant institutions , and only in compliance with personal data protection regulations .
Mr President , having seen further savage terrorism in recent days in Pakistan , Spain and Jerusalem and , in my own country , several renewed IRA terrorist attempts , none of us can be complacent about the vile scourge of terrorism .
However , it is naive to think that there is a pan-European panacea .
Yes , we need effective extradition and , yes , we need effective cooperation , but legislation so harmonised as to reduce it to the lowest common denominator is more of a hindrance than a help .
First and foremost these are matters for national decision .
The United Kingdom , for example , is attempting to provide for 42-day detention , which is more than I think is necessary , but London , not Brussels , has the right to make that decision .
Under the approach in these proposals , we would soon strip away that discretion from Member States .
That might suit the EU 's expansionist agenda , but it will not defeat terrorism .
( RO ) As a representative of Romanian citizens , I believe that it is extremely important that the European Parliament takes part in the decision-making process concerning the protection of personal data collected in the context of law enforcement .
We should take into account that the European citizens ' right to data protection is fundamental ; but at the same time the institutions involved in the fight against terrorism and crime must have access to such information .
This report plays a particularly important role in the creation of the legal framework laying down the quality , definition and characteristics of personal data and their transfer to third states or individuals .
I commend the provision stating that data should be kept no longer than necessary , and Member States are called upon to put into place the procedural and technical measures meant to enforce these limitations .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleagues , Mrs Lefrançois and Mrs Roure , on their reports , but also to take this opportunity to say that the French police have just arrested a major terrorist , and I therefore congratulate the French Government and the French police .
I think that the political authorities in all countries should cooperate with our police , our judges and our governments .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate the European Parliament as a whole on the high standard of this debate .
The European Parliament is indeed legitimately awaiting the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , but it has demonstrated maturity this morning by producing a very large majority in support of your two reports - the report by Mrs Lefrançois and the report by Mrs Roure .
These two reports seek to find the right balance between collective protection against terrorism , which we need to guarantee for our citizens , and individual protection of our freedoms .
I believe it is there , in this dual balance , that we have to seek the right solutions .
Mr President , I will very briefly sum up the discussion .
I will first go back to the report by Mrs Lefrançois on combating terrorism .
I would just like to say that although freedom of expression , including the right of criticism , is one of the fundamental pillars on which the European Union is built , incitement to racial hatred cannot be considered acceptable under the pretext of freedom of expression .
Racist discourse is an abuse of freedom of expression and cannot be tolerated .
Next , I would like to remind you that the Commission 's proposal was drawn up on the basis of an in-depth impact assessment .
Many consultations were held , and the Commission 's proposal is indeed based on the Council of Europe Convention for the Prevention of Terrorism and we have tried to follow the balanced formulation of offences in the Convention .
If Mrs Lefrançois and the many MEPs who have come out in support of the term ' incitement ' will allow me , I would like just like to spend a couple of minutes defending the term ' provocation ' .
The advantage of the term ' provocation ' is that it is new .
That is why the Council of Europe used it ; its newness means it can have a common and precise definition in the European Union .
Provocation is not a concept open to interpretation .
I believe it can be properly identified through case law .
What is correct is that we want to avoid any kind of terrorist attack actually occurring while criminalising those who , mainly through what they have said , have called for such an attack even if one did not take place , and that is where the problem lies .
I will leave it to the wisdom of the dialogue between the Council and Parliament , however , to find a solution .
I would also like to say that Article 1 ( 2 ) of the current text of the framework decision contains a human rights safeguard clause that concerns - I think Mrs Lefrançois agrees - the whole framework decision .
Lastly , Mr President , I would like to emphasise the value of placing this action to combat terrorism within the integrated institutional framework of the European Union .
By inserting this text into European law , we have a guarantee of its efficacy .
For specific acts , it will give us a uniform legal framework regarding the nature and level of criminal sanctions and jurisdictional rules .
Consequently , it will be possible to apply the European Union 's cooperation mechanisms referred to in the 2002 framework decision .
To sum up , Mr President , while thanking the rapporteur and Parliament again for all the work they have done over the last two years on this important matter , I would like to hope that a decision will now be taken quickly in view of all the work done and the need - as many of you have underlined - to effectively combat terrorism .
Now I come to the second text , which is inseparable from the first , and I think it was a good idea of Parliament to link them together , demanding data protection and protection of personal freedom at the same time .
My thanks , of course , go to Mrs Roure , who has defended this balance , and data protection , so energetically .
It was indeed important for this text to come at the same time as the text on combating terrorism , so that the forces of law and order could have specific rules on data protection in the near future .
As I have said , and I do not want to overstate this , like Parliament , the Commission obviously wanted to go further on data protection .
The Minister , Mr Jouyet , mentioned that the French Presidency had to take account of whether a compromise could be achieved , although it wanted the same thing .
I can simply say , then , that the Commission will try to put the evaluation clause and ' whereas 6a ' to good use .
We are therefore listening to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and will try to take account of your desire for an ambitious revision of the framework decision to evaluate the extension of its scope .
In any case , that is what the Commission can do and what I personally will try to do .
I know the European Parliament would like this revision to take place quite soon .
I only hope the Council will agree to a revision within a timescale that enables the European measure to be sorted out very soon .
That is all I wanted to say , Mr President .
I would also like to make clear to each of the speakers that I appreciated the high standard of the debate on such an important matter - a matter in which Europe must set an example - both by guaranteeing effective collective protection against terrorist threats and also , of course , by remaining very attentive to the protection of individual freedoms and personal autonomy .
I think Parliament has once again clearly demonstrated its maturity and its ability in future to be co-decision maker on this matter .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank all my fellow Members who have spoken this morning for the high standard of their speeches .
The sheer number of them clearly demonstrates the level of interest in this issue .
Without going back over all the various speeches in detail , I would just like to mention three or four of them .
Mr Fava clearly showed what a difficult exercise this is .
We need to avoid a culture of suspicion and mistrust , but at the same time we need to think about the context and to guarantee both the security of citizens and the protection of freedoms .
Mr de Grandes Pascual explained clearly the added value of the definition of terrorism , saying that the definition we were using was more important , and also insisting on the list of offences .
As this is about working together to combat terrorism , we need to send a firm message , while protecting individual freedoms .
Mr Demetriou , you mentioned the scourge that terrorism represents , and which we need to combat .
However , you used the term ' public incitement ' , saying that it was a concept better understood by all the Member States .
Mrs Ludford also shares this concern .
She also felt the term was more appropriate , given that we do need to safeguard fundamental freedoms .
The report is indeed the outcome of a long and tricky negotiating process .
I do believe , though , that we can be satisfied with the result , particularly from the point of view of the balance between combating terrorism and respecting fundamental freedoms .
The report by my colleague Mrs Roure falls firmly within this second category , since the protection of personal data is one of its key components .
I have just one regret , which I know is shared by many people in Parliament , particularly my fellow Members in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance . It is the fact that the implementation of a text with such a big impact on the freedoms of European citizens is not subject to the full jurisdictional control of the Court of Justice .
For this to be the case , it would have been necessary to adopt the framework decision under the Treaty of Lisbon regime .
Even before the ' no ' vote in the Irish referendum and question mark over the entry into force of the new Treaty on 1 January 2009 , the Council clearly had a desire to move as quickly as possible to avoid the switch to codecision .
In the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs we nevertheless tried to work in the most conscientious and detailed manner , while keeping up with the pace set by the Council .
At the vote in committee on 15 July , my draft report was adopted by 35 votes to 4 with 1 abstention , and I hope it will attract a solid majority in plenary too .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would first like to thank all my fellow Members because this debate has shown that the European Parliament was united on a really tricky subject , and we are the representatives of the European Parliament , we are the representatives of the people .
It is worth pointing this out .
Today I am addressing the French Presidency in particular .
We are asking the Council to fulfil commitments made a long time ago by several successive presidencies .
It is absolutely necessary to adopt this framework decision quickly and take account of the European Parliament 's amendments .
The Council must be true to its word .
We absolutely must work in an atmosphere of trust .
That is essential .
I hope this message will be passed on to Mrs Dati , who unfortunately is absent from this priority debate , which we are very disappointed about .
I would also particularly like to thank Commissioner Barrot for his support , which is very valuable to us .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The establishment of a legal framework for personal data protection within the third pillar has been a concern shared by all EU presidents over the last years .
Nevertheless , the framework decision adopted in 2006 was something of a compromise , establishing the lowest common denominator in the protection of personal data .
Therefore , we can but welcome a new EP consultation on the extension of the scope of the framework decision and on an analysis of its impact on fundamental rights .
The main objective of the changes should be to ensure the same level of data protection as for the first pillar ; from this point of view , I regret that the Commission 's initial proposal has been modified by the Council .
Equally regrettable is the fact that the provision concerning the working group of national data protection authorities was removed by the Council , which is a setback in the process of creating an effective personal data protection system .
în scris . - ( RO ) The effective protection of personal data remains a natural requirement of modern democracy .
If under certain circumstances this protection requires the modification of community databases so as to prevent the correlation of certain personal or material information with identifiable persons , we should be aware that the management of this global system for the storage and processing of information implies a state-of-the-art security system .
As real security cannot be guaranteed simply by our endorsement of a set of common principles , I believe that what is needed is a pragmatic analysis of the risks involved by cooperation between the law enforcement and the judiciary of countries with varying levels of expertise in the field .
For the sake of clarity , I would like to reiterate the need of new Member States for a fast transfer of expertise in the field , so as to prevent any prejudice to the global security of the system .
in writing . - ( RO ) Given the growth of terrorism and its inclusion of cyberspace , the possibility of manipulating the masses faster , and the limited possibilities of identifying terrorists quickly enough , I believe that such a decision is welcome in the overall context of protecting the civil rights and freedoms of every citizen and of creating a favourable framework for the quick identification and tackling of crime , particularly of crimes against the security of persons , countries and national infrastructure .
I welcome the decision to consider the objectives set in the framework decision as being of major European interest , particularly as regards common regulations on personal data protection , which will enable Member States to enforce the same rules and principles .
Moreover , I think a recommendation is needed with respect to the classification of information by reference to international classifications , so as to eliminate all the differences between Member Sates and other states in the enforcement of security measures .
There are two basic strategies that should be taken into account in ensuring the protection of data and security systems : " Whatever is not expressly forbidden , is allowed ” , and " Whatever is not expressly allowed , is forbidden ” .
The question of the increased threat to Europe from terrorist acts is one of the most important challenges facing the security of our continent .
Today we are threatened by political terror controlled by states that declare cooperation with us , and groups of a criminal nature , but it seems that the greatest threat facing us is that posed by Islamic fundamentalism .
I am amazed by the lack of concern on the part of those who govern Europe .
Our total openness to an unlimited number of newcomers from Islamic countries , as favoured by socialists and liberals , will bring a wave of tragedies for the Community 's populace in the future .
Unlimited Islamisation of Europe is not on !
Let us give aid to poor countries , but let us not turn our continent into a place where the limits of people 's tolerance are tested .
Newcomers are currently demanding ever increasing rights , and the traditional peoples of Europe have to consent to all of it along with the destruction of traditions that go back many centuries .
This is dangerous .
One example of what this may lead to is Northern Ireland , and the groups warring with each other there are simply people practising different Christian religions .
in writing . - The attacks of 11 September 2001 have utterly changed the world .
The terrorist attacks of that day have not only altered how Americans see and understand the world but have also offered democratic societies all over the world a new perspective on this modern world , in which terrorist threats of attacks such as those that devastated Madrid ( March 2004 ) and London ( July 2005 ) pose a frequent and daunting challenge .
Now terrorists are using modern means of communication , such as the internet , to push for training , recruiting , and planning attacks .
The use of this technology presents a unique threat to the Union , and we should all work together to combat terrorism with all the means that are at our disposal .
However , in order for our democratic society to effectively counter these threats , the fight against terrorism must be accompanied by a strengthening of our fundamental rights and freedoms .
To address the threat of terrorism , it is necessary to have common provisions in the EU , and existing legislation should be amended accordingly .
Modern terrorism has a new way of operating , but it must be fought by the EU with the same strength and determination demonstrated in fighting traditional terrorism .
Mr President , I will be brief .
I speak under Rule 145 to rebut remarks and comments made about me by Dame Sarah Ludford in her speech in this debate .
She said a number of things , but in particular she said that I was ' a Europhobe ' and that in relation to extradition , I would ' give a cheery wave to criminals who made it to the Channel ' .
I would like to correct her factually .
I am not a Europhobe .
I love the continent of Europe , its history , its culture , its achievements as much as anybody , but I am an EU-phobe .
I hate the European Union , which is anti-democratic and undemocratic .
In relation to the European arrest warrant and the trials in absentia , what I want is for an English or Scottish court to be able to consider prima facie evidence against a suspect before granting extradition and , indeed , have the power to prevent it .
They must be able to decide that there is a proper case to answer and that a fair trial will be given .
I do this in order to protect the interests of British citizens , such as exemplified by the case of Andrew Symeou , a 19-year-old London man who faces extradition to Greece on 30 September on a manslaughter charge .
The evidence against him is extremely suspect , and no account can be taken of that or the fact that witnesses have been allegedly tortured in order to extract statements from them .
I understand Dame Sarah 's sensitivity on this issue since her party , the Liberal Democrats , have obviously backed the wrong horse and she fears - quite rightly - the electoral consequences in 2009 .
1 .
Community statistics relating to external trade with non-member countries (
2 .
Protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein (
3 .
Statistical returns in respect of the carriage of goods by road as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission (
4 .
European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) (
5 .
Amendment of Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) No 549 / 69 determining the categories of officials and other servants of the European Communities to whom the provisions of Article 12 , the second paragraph of Article 13 and Article 14 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Communities apply (
6 .
Draft amending budget No 6 / 2008 - executive agencies (
7 .
Follow-up to the Monterrey Conference of 2002 on Financing for Development (
8 .
Internal Market Scoreboard (
9 .
Improving the quality of teacher education (
10 .
The Bologna Process and student mobility (
11 .
Alignment of legal acts to the new Comitology Decision ( Legislative initiative ) (
12 .
Hedge funds and private equity (
- Before the vote :
Madam President , I rise under Rules 9 , 93 and 94 , which deal with transparency , to declare that I have an interest in relation to the issues to be voted and so will not be participating in this vote .
I similarly declared an interest when we considered this matter in committee and did not participate in the discussion or the vote on that occasion .
13 .
Transparency of institutional investors (
14 .
Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 999 / 2001 as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission (
15 .
Waste statistics (
16 .
Adaptation of a number of instruments to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , ' omnibus ' Regulation , Part Two (
17 .
Natural mineral waters ( recast version ) (
18 .
Colouring matters for medicinal products ( recast version ) (
19 .
Foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses ( recast version ) (
20 .
Roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers ( recast version ) (
21 .
Extraction solvents used in the production of foodstuffs and food ingredients ( recast version ) (
22 .
Combating terrorism (
23 .
Protection of personal data (
24 .
Citizens ' petitions during the year 2007 (
- Concerning paragraph 31 :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) In order to take into account recent legal decisions , I am tabling this oral amendment , which I will read out in English :
' customs authorities continue to confiscate , as an extraordinary measure only , the cars of Greek nationals ' , I add , ' provisionally ' , and I add the last sentence : ' takes note of the ruling of the European Court of Justice C-156 / 04 ( 07.06.2007 ) that deems satisfactory most of the explanations provided by the Greek authorities in this case ; welcomes the implementation of new legislation adopted by the latter in the purpose of addressing the shortcomings highlighted in the aforementioned ruling ; ' .
I see no objections to that oral amendment .
- After the vote :
Madam President , looking at our efficient voting time , I think I can make a short but justified remark .
In the name of those who can , and do , read the results on the screen , I would like to express my gratitude for your efficient way of doing that .
I hope that the other presidents - including Mr Pöttering , who is very efficient - will follow that example .
Thank you .
We do our best !
25 .
Hill and mountain farming (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes . )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , this is a report that gives me the opportunity to mention the City of Liverpool , which is in my constituency .
It has enjoyed the benefits of being City of Culture and has performed extremely well in that role , and the people of Liverpool have responded magnificently to it .
Whilst many of the aims of the European Year are laudable in this report , we have to consider the budgetary implications that accompany it .
Excessive bureaucracy and the focus on state-led efforts to foster what is termed ' creativity and innovation ' are not really to be welcomed .
It would be a much better use of taxpayers ' money if we removed these types of promotional exercises and concentrated simply on giving people real choice of decision-making .
( NL ) Madam President , is it any wonder that some Member States are demonstrating aid fatigue - to quote this report verbatim ?
I think not .
Ever more Member States and other donors have had enough of continuing to pump funds into all manner of corrupt regimes that really do not give two hoots about good governance or the prosperity of their own citizens .
Approximately one year ago we learned from an unimpeachable source , the aid agency Oxfam , that the wars in Africa had already cost roughly the same as the hundreds of billions of euros in development aid received by the continent in the last few years .
It is time Africa took meaningful steps in the fields of democracy , good governance and the fight against corruption first of all .
Only then can we talk of highly targeted development aid .
Simply advocating without qualification an increase in development funds and presenting all manner of percentages as dogma is totally irresponsible , and so I voted against this report .
( NL ) Madam President , it is a cliché , but young people are our future , and so I would be the first to admit that the quality of our instructors and of teacher education is extremely important .
The question is , of course , whether it is for the European Parliament to lecture the Member States on this .
Is it for Parliament to express its opinion on the composition of the teaching workforce at all levels of school education in the Member States ?
Must education in the Member States conform rigidly to the ' multicultural society ' - we know what is meant by this - and must education in the Member States conform to the ' gender aspect ' , whatever that may be ?
Must all this be made compulsory in teacher education because Europe says so ?
As far as I am concerned , Parliament can think what it wants , but it has absolutely no competence in this sphere .
Education falls within the competence of the Member States , and that is the way it should stay , in my opinion .
This is known as subsidiarity , and must be respected .
( FI ) Madam President , I wish to say a few words about this report by Mrs Badia i Cutchet on improving the quality of teacher education , which I think is an excellent one .
It is true that teacher education very largely falls within the competence of national governments , and so it should .
Since , however , we have a common aim of promoting pan-European Union competence , knowledge and innovation and of developing the European Economic Area , we need to have certain common rules .
That is why we also need wider forms of cooperation in the exchange of best practices in the area of teacher training , because at present , as we all know , there are differences between the course levels for teachers in the Member States which are simply far too great , according to the OECD 's PISA survey .
This gulf has to be narrowed and we need a mechanism , an open coordination system at EU level , so that all children and young people can receive an adequately sound basic education .
In this respect the report is excellent .
I would urge you all , if you have not read it yet , to read Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's splendid report .
Thank you .
( SK ) I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur for the report on the Bologna Process and its impact on student mobility .
The introduction of harmonisation of the three-cycle system of higher education in the countries of the European Union , quality assurance and , above all , the recognition of qualifications represent a fundamental objective of this intergovernmental initiative .
In today 's vote , I unequivocally supported Doris Pack 's report , in which the rapporteur emphasises the partnership approach and cooperation in policy-making and implementation of the Bologna Process .
This initiative represents an example of dynamic cooperation not only among EU countries , but also beyond .
I also agree with the view that the mutual recognition of qualifications should be further simplified and that the Bologna Process should be more uniform at the national level in Member States .
Support for student mobility is a basic prerequisite for the creation of a European Higher Education Area .
( DE ) Madam President , the Rasmussen report is entitled ' hedge funds and private equity ' .
If we look at the content of this report more closely , it has virtually nothing to do with hedge funds and private equity any more , but now rightly refers to the financial institutions and financial players as a whole .
This is important .
We have proposed a list of items for regulating the financial markets and eliminating the chaos in these markets .
I am pleased that Mr Rasmussen largely adopted our position in the negotiations with us .
Madam President , the European Union is a solution in search of a problem .
Whatever the question is , the answer is always more regulation , and so these recent events in the financial markets have been predictably seized on as a justification for further Brussels rules .
I am reminded of the situation that pertained after the attacks of 11 September 2001 , when a number of proposals for the harmonisation of justice and home affairs , which had been kicking around for years , were repackaged as anti-terrorism measures and , in the febrile atmosphere that followed those terrible attacks , nobody wanted to be seen voting against .
Similarly , a bunch of legislation for which there is really no proportionate need in remedying the problem is now being repackaged as a measure for financial stability , and it would take a brave MEP to risk being seen as a speculator 's friend , as we saw in the result of the vote today .
I must say that , looking at the underlying causes of the recent financial problems , it seems to me that ' too much government ' was the problem , not the solution .
Interest rates were kept at too low a rate for too long , and that was a problem in Europe , in the United States and in Japan .
If too much government was the problem , it is difficult to see how we can solve that problem by additional regulation at Brussels level .

Madam President , in many ways I would echo the comments of my good friend and colleague , Mr Hannan , in relation to the Lehne report , because in many ways the Lehne report is yet another attempt to impose legislation and regulation on the markets .
We should not rush to judgement here .
Nor should we rush to judgement to impose regulation and legislation in respect of markets as a whole in Europe .
Markets , by their definition , are different .
Markets in Europe , in the different countries , are different , and therefore we should not try to impose a blanket coverage of regulation which would apply to all of them .
The essential thing Europe and the European Union has to remember at all times in these matters is that we are in a global environment .
Europe and the individual nations of Europe are competing with the world , and , if we erect barriers against ourselves , then we will damage our own interests and those of the people we represent .
( DE ) Madam President , I am speaking here also on behalf of the Austrian People 's Party delegation .
We voted in favour of this report , quite simply because we have to do everything we can to combat terrorism in good time .
I should like to draw attention to one point , however , against which we would speak out most decisively , as I am of the opinion that Parliament has made a mistake .
We should not be replacing the crime of ' public provocation to commit a terrorist offence ' with the crime of ' incitement to commit a terrorist offence ' , for the very simple reason that proof of incitement cannot be provided until the act has already taken place ; that is , until people may have already died .
We are in favour of the possibility of timely intervention when a terrorist act has not yet been committed - that is , beforehand - so that lives can be saved .
( NL ) Madam President , I am of course in favour of combating terrorism effectively , and I consider this particular field - the fight against terrorism - to be one that requires very intensive cross-border cooperation in Europe .
For once , therefore , I am less in agreement - you could say in disagreement - with the more Eurosceptic voices .
I feel that , in this field , they are playing the national sovereignty card too rigidly .
Having said that , we should have the courage to speak rather more clearly - in this report , too , for example .
Terrorism in Europe originates from the extreme left and / or Islam .
So does incitement to terrorism , and this is taking place not least in some of the mosques , answerable to nothing and no one , that are currently shooting up like mushrooms in Europe .
There lies the heart of the problem of 21st century Europe .
Islam is incompatible with our Western values and freedoms , and I fear that we shall come to heartily regret our open-door and open-border policy .
Madam President , this is an important matter .
It is probably one of the most important matters that we face in the West today - the threat of international terrorism .
I probably depart a little from my own party on this , in that I take the view that , if we have to pay a price in civil liberty to protect the true liberty of our citizens - namely their health , safety and well-being - then that price will have to be paid .
During the Second World War , measures were taken in my country which were not in accordance with civil liberties , in order to protect the population from the external threat .
People accepted it .
We face today , in Europe and in the civilised world , a threat from those who are not civilised and who do not regard human life as sacred and something to be sanctified .
Therefore , if we need to have laws to prevent them doing their evil work , then we should have them and have them speedily .
( PL ) The attacks on the World Trade Center in 2001 made the whole world aware of what a huge threat organised terrorist movements are .
Thanks to access to modern technologies , these groups have got their hands on previously unattainable means of communication , which , in conjunction with black markets for weapons , make them the number one enemy of the democratic world today .
Despite taking firm action , the European Union has not succeeded in protecting itself from such events .
In recognising the particular need to act in order to guarantee the security of EU citizens , I wish to make the point that the best way of combating organised terrorist groups is supranational cooperation between the institutions responsible for security .
The common foreign and security policy has established a good basis for this , and its development is in all of our interests .
( NL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the Lefrançois report .
It is not perfect , of course , but at least it pays attention to the problem of Islamists who incite to violence and call Muslims to jihad .
We all know that there are innumerable mosques that are hotbeds of fundamentalism , where young people are recruited for terrorist organisations and where the faithful are called daily to a holy war on our European values .
It is high time that the final whistle was blown and that tough action was taken against accomplices to terrorist acts , too .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report , quite simply because we have to take every measure to ensure that cross-border police and judicial cooperation is organised efficiently .
To do this we need data exchange , but we have to ensure that there are uniform standards across Europe for this .
What made me uneasy - and against which I should have liked to vote , but there was no separate vote - was Amendment 10 .
Here , Mrs Roure did not want this Framework Decision to be without prejudice to essential and very specific national security interests .
By contrast , I should like framework decisions , too , to naturally be without prejudice to very specific national security interests , which concern the internal security of a country , and to naturally enable autonomous action .
I consider this absolutely vital in the interest of individual Member States .
( NL ) Madam President , this House has just decided by a vast majority , after the committee did likewise , that under no circumstances may racial or ethnic origin or a number of other parameters be considered during the processing of personal data .
In my opinion , the original Article 7 of the Council proposal was prudent and balanced , but Parliament - whose political correctness is legendary , of course - amended it .
Parliament is on the wrong track with this .
Not only the fight against crime , but also any kind of sound management of public affairs requires accurate basic information - and a person 's ethnic or national origin could be particularly significant in this regard .
This has nothing to do with racism or discrimination .
It never ceases to amaze me how the same MEPs who , in a Stalinist way , call for bans on public speaking or even prison sentences or the loss of parliamentary immunity for right-wing dissidents , get cold feet when it comes to common-or-garden data processing - in the context of the fight against terrorism , mark you .
Madam President , today 's vote was an important moment for citizens fighting for their rights , their European rights .
National governments at times abandon their citizens and reject their legitimate claims .
Through petitions European citizens can raise their voice , can hold their government accountable .
Ultimately they can have the justice they deserve .
But this is not an important moment only for the European people : it is a crucial time for the European Parliament too .
Today the European Parliament , by voting in favour of the Hammerstein report , shows its commitment to defend and protect European citizens .
Today the European Parliament has the opportunity to regain at least part of the confidence and trust that some in Europe have lost .
Many of our fellow citizens have worked hard to be in the EU , but membership is not only about duties - it is also about rights .
We are here today to show our commitment to the Europe which our citizens expect from us .
( NL ) Madam President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has just taken advantage of the voting on the Hammerstein report to hold a vote sneakily - on the quiet , as it were - on the seat of the European Parliament , even though this actually had nothing to do with the report as such .
I should like to clarify that I voted in favour of this amendment by the Greens as I agree that the travelling popular theatre that is the European Parliament is already squandering enough of our taxpayers ' money without the monthly migration from Brussels to Strasbourg adding to it .
Therefore , I , too , advocate - and this is reflected in my vote - one seat and one place of work in Europe .
For the sake of clarity I would just add that , as far as I am concerned , there would then have to be an open debate , and that in my opinion this one seat does not necessarily have to be Brussels .
After all , the presence of the European institutions in this city and this region also entails social , political and human costs that do need to be discussed and are on no account to be underestimated .
( PL ) Mountains are an important area of biodiversity , a refuge for many animals and a location for unique plant species .
They are often also called water towers , as they provide the source of rivers .
Their landscape and environmental benefits are valued by tourists all over the world .
The lives of those who dwell there and the agricultural activities engaged in this terrain are , however , far from easy .
In most of the EU 's mountainous regions we are seeing a process of depopulation , a fall in the level of activity of the people who remain there and an abandonment of agricultural activity .
This is particularly true of rural areas that are less attractive to tourists and are forgotten .
Problems include the significant distance from towns , harsh climatic conditions , communications difficulties , high production costs and inadequate access to services of all types , including even education and health care .
Regional disproportions between mountainous and lowland areas are clearly apparent .
There is therefore an urgent need for special support for those known as hill farmers , who not only grow traditionally environmentally friendly produce , healthy foods , but also take care of the environment and maintain cultures and traditions .
The common agricultural policy should do more to support these regions and the people who live there in their struggle against the challenges they face .
Madam President , there is none so blind as those that cannot see .

I notice Mr Hannan and Mr Sumberg have , unfortunately , left the Chamber at this time , but anyone who thinks that there is no financial turmoil should just pick up the newspapers and read , or watch the television .
To believe that the Rasmussen report and the Lehne report did anything else other than try to adequately convey the necessity for us to be able to act and that this has to be done at a collective legislative level is to ignore the truth ; it is also to ignore the reality of a global world economy .
Frankly , sitting back in a little England may help some people relieve their consciences , but it does not help people meet their mortgage payments , it will not help people keep their homes , and it will not keep people in services and in industry .
It is only through the European Union and through activity of regulation , where we are extremely good , that we will be able to do something about it .
It is true that the markets expect us to be delicate , but they do not expect a knee-jerk reaction either .
But the fact is that , if we do nothing and just stand still and say nothing , then , frankly , we will in fact be accused of cowardice in the face of strong tumult and crisis .
Madam President , I fully support the purpose of the Lefrançois report , but in this context I would just like to use my explanation - having supported it and not being in a position to be able to speak on it - to urge Commissioner Tajani to speed up the ongoing bilateral agreements with other third-country airports ' authorities in relation to airport security - which was clamped down on because of the terrorism incidents - particularly bilateral agreements around the whole area of the purchase of duty-free liquids .
It may be a very small issue in the context of the major challenges facing us globally today , but we in the EU have to win the hearts as well as the minds of our citizens in terms of what we do .
Again this summer , when people visited relations abroad or when relations in Australia and the US and other places came to visit Ireland , the UK , Germany and France , they had all their - what they thought were legitimately purchased - duty-free liquids taken from them as they transited in the main hub airports in Europe to their final destination .
This is a small issue - those of us who travel every week will put up with the nonsense of having our lipsticks taken from us , and I am sure it makes a huge contribution to combating terrorism .
I do not want to make light of a very serious problem , but I just want a little sense , rationale and bilateral cooperation brought into this , so that our citizens - our electors - can understand what we do and why we do it .
Madam President , as regards the Hammerstein report I followed the PPE-DE line and voted against the Green amendment about the two seats of Parliament .
I want to explain why I did so .
It is not because I agree with this monthly and sometimes bimonthly trail to Strasbourg .
I understand historically why we have got in the position we are in .
I understand that 12 visits to Strasbourg per annum are part of the Treaty and we are signed in , but in a rational and calm way .
Those of us who have serious concerns about the lack of access , the difficulty of doing work , the need to transport all our files , our staff , the committee staff , Parliament staff , the group staff , to Strasbourg for four days 12 times a year believe it can no longer be justified given the enormous expense .
It is a beautiful building and once they have sorted out the difficulties I feel that we could find another very serious use for that building .
Strasbourg and France deserve no less , but a major institution must be housed in that building .
But to expect us to work efficiently in terms of human resources and costs and to continue this pilgrimage to Strasbourg can no longer be justified , so having voted one way I support those who say one seat for plenary sessions , but please , a rational debate , not a polarised political debate , on the issue .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the report by my German fellow Member Mr Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , amending the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community statistics relating to external trade with non-member countries and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1172 / 95 .

I welcome the Commission 's decision to make legislation clearer , simpler and more transparent ; to adjust the system of extra-Community trade statistics to the changes to be introduced in the procedures regarding customs declaration ; to increase the relevance , accuracy , timeliness and comparability of external trade statistics , and establish a system for quality assessment ; to support the linking of trade statistics with business statistics ; to respond to user needs by compiling additional trade statistics using information available in customs declarations , and finally to control , in line with the European Statistics Code of Practice , the privileged access to sensitive external trade data .
I support the amendments aimed at making greater use of comitology with scrutiny .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this report because the draft regulation represents the legal framework required for improving the quality and transparency of EXTRASTAT ( the statistics on foreign trade between Member States and third countries ) , by including a single customs declaration in customs procedures , so as to simplify data reporting procedures .
The appropriate enforcement of this regulation will make it increasingly possibile to compare foreign trade statistics and to strengthen the control over access to inside information regarding sensitive issues of foreign trade .
in writing . - We have often asked ourselves whether it is worth dedicating a year to a particular topic .
The whole idea is to raise visibility of the topic itself .
It is a way of attracting attention and giving extra focus to a particular subject .
There can be no harm in this .
The idea has become so popular that we have to make a judicious choice when selecting the subject .
It is often a question of priorities .
Creation and innovation are an ideal subject because they affect the very essence of what Europe represents and the direction which Europe has to take .
Creation and innovation cannot be evaluated in a vacuum .
They have to be understood on what they can contribute .
First and foremost is their importance within the manufacturing sphere .
Also , the importance of creation and innovation has to be viewed within the services framework .
It is only through creative and innovative ideas that Europe can remain competitive .
It is only by being one step ahead that certain sectors can survive .
To an extent Europe has recognised the need to invest more heavily in research and development , and this is synonymous with the current subject of creative and innovative ideas .
I voted in favour of the report by my Greek fellow Member Mrs Batzeli , approving the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) .
I support the series of amendments aimed principally at clarifying the objectives of the proposal and making them more concise .
As regards financing , I also agree with the removal of all references in the proposal to the Lifelong Learning Programme so that , where appropriate , programmes and policies in other fields , such as culture , communications , enterprise , cohesion , rural development , research and the information society , can also be used .
I voted in favour of the Batzeli report on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) , as I believe creativity and innovation are essential for Europe to be competitive in a globalised world .
Creativity is a key driver of innovation for both economic and social reasons .
The European Year of Creativity and Innovation will stimulate political debate , alert the public to the importance of innovation and creativity and disseminate information on best practices within the Union .
I also believe it is important that Parliament has opted for co-decision in this area , which will allow it to have influence in this important dossier .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have previously criticised the various campaigns for ' European years ' devoted to various themes , such as intercultural dialogue and creativity and innovation .
These ' European years ' are a charge on the EU budget , hence on the taxpayers , but they have little effect on reality .
If there is a demand for ' European years ' , they should be financed through private sponsorship and not by the taxpayers .
We have therefore chosen to vote against the report presented , even though it only dealt with detailed amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
I voted in favour on condition that the Commission committed itself to bringing innovation to all areas .
During the Year of Creativity and Innovation , innovation should extend to all organisations and institutions , whether public or private , profit-making or non profit-making , and to all aspects of life ; in particular it should promote social innovation and innovation in support of environmental sustainability .
We should also take into account non-state authorities , who have a key role to play in this area .
In addition , a concept of open innovation should be encouraged .
Innovation which , as well as being based on internal capabilities , incorporates all its possible sources - users , suppliers , networks , etc . - and which , going beyond products and technology , includes the intangible and generally manifold aspects leading to value creation .
Finally , we need to extend the culture of cooperation , working in networks and using tools and methods aimed at creating the dynamic capabilities in those networks that will enable them to evolve with their environment , and generate cutting-edge research and visible results in terms of competitiveness and creating value for society .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Batzeli on the European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) .
I regard information and promotion campaigns , events and initiatives at European , national and local level to promote creativity and initiative as extremely important .
Creativity is also an important factor in the development of personal and social skills .
This year of promotion is intended to improve Europe 's creativity and capacity for innovation to enable it to rise to certain challenges of globalisation .
This report underlines the importance of creativity and innovation .
I see this year of promotion as a great opportunity for disseminating information concerning creative processes and various practices .
in writing . - I support Katerina Batzeli 's report on making 2009 the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
The report not only outlines the initiative in more detail , but also adequately attends to the dangers of such European years becoming PR exercises .
In regions in which nature confronts people with difficult basic conditions , they have to act in a creative and innovative manner in order to survive .
The peoples of Europe can therefore look back today on a history of groundbreaking achievements , and specialist firms are in demand worldwide on account of their wealth of ideas .
Europe is also regarded as a cultural stronghold , however - and particular attention should be paid to this in the context of the European Year of Creativity and Innovation ( 2009 ) .
Along with Vilnius in Lithuania , Linz is currently preparing for its role as European Capital of Culture 2009 .
Creative and innovative projects , with the involvement of the surrounding regions , will provide a cultural experience of a particular kind .
It is to be welcomed if , under this prestigious title , whole city districts gleam in renewed splendour , and new building works and projects are started - provided sustainability is not forgotten in the process .
In the EU , emphasis must be placed on ensuring that funds are not blown on one-off events , so that structures set up do not disappear into the ether immediately after the year ends .
A Capital of Culture project is only successful and innovative if culture remains permanently in place in the city concerned .
More importance should be given to this particular consideration in the current report , and so I abstained from voting .

in writing . - I voted in favour of the report by my Spanish colleague Mr Díaz de Mera García Consuegra , approving as it stands the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) No 549 / 69 determining the categories of officials and other servants of the European Communities to whom the provisions of Article 12 , the second paragraph of Article 13 and Article 14 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Communities apply .
The Council Decision establishing the European Police Office ( Europol ) , providing for the financing of Europol from the Community budget , will apply from 1 January 2010 or the date of application of the proposal amending Council Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) No 549 / 69 , if this is later .

To ensure that the Europol decision applies from 1 January 2010 , it was necessary , in good time , to amend Council Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) No 549 / 69 specifying that immunity from legal proceedings does not apply to Europol staff taking part in joint investigation teams set up by at least two Member States at their own initiative .
in writing . - This amendment appears to limit the immunity from prosecution of Europol officials but it only does so for those operating as part of Joint Investigation Teams .
This is a smokescreen to make it appear that Europol officials ' immunity will be limited when in fact Europol 's powers will be extended after 2010 and the immunity of its officials will be even more far-reaching .
I do not believe that Europol officials should have any immunity from prosecution whatsoever and therefore I voted against this amendment .
in writing . - Augustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra 's report on the status of staff regarding privileges and immunities seeks to clarify pre-existing guidelines on the issue .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .



I voted in favour of the report by my Finnish fellow Member Mr Virrankoski proposing to approve Draft amending budget No 6 / 2008 of the European Union for the financial year 2008 , which includes the following : strengthening of the framework programme for Competitiveness and Innovation - Entrepreneurship and Innovation by increasing the commitment appropriations by EUR 3.9 million ; an increase of EUR 2.24 million in commitment appropriations to cover , among other things , part of the rent and related costs of a new ' Arc ' building for Eurojust ; adjustments to the number of posts in three executive agencies ; creation of the necessary budgetary structure to accommodate the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking ( FCH JU ) , which is the fifth joint undertaking to be set up under the Seventh Framework Programme , and allocation of EUR 30 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 1.9 million in payment appropriations .


I entirely share the rapporteur 's view that under Article 179 ( 3 ) of the Financial Regulation , the European Parliament , as a branch of the budgetary authority , should have been informed of the building project for Eurojust , because this has a significant financial implication for the budget .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my Dutch fellow Member Mr Berman on the follow-up of the Monterrey Conference of 2002 on Financing for Development .
We need to constantly reaffirm Parliament 's commitment to poverty eradication , sustainable development and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , as the only way to bring about social justice and an improved quality of life for the one billion people around the world who live in extreme poverty .
The European Union is the biggest international donor for development , providing nearly 60 % of Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) worldwide .
I support the proposal to open up access for small-scale entrepreneurs to micro-credit , particularly farmers , as a means of increasing food production and providing a sustainable solution to the food crisis .
I also welcome the proposal to call on the European Investment Bank to set up a guarantee fund in support of micro-credit and risk hedging schemes that respond closely to the needs of local food producers in the poorer developing countries , but this proposal only makes any sense under a Commission mandate .
In 2001 the EU made a big commitment : to devote 0.7 % of its wealth to development in 2015 .
In 2007 Europe turned its back on this commitment , with a drastic fall in its collective effort .
This adds up to EUR 1.7 billion that the poorest people of the planet will not have received .
EUR 1.7 billion that would have provided healthcare for thousands of children at a time when 11 million people are dying each year owing to a lack of access to healthcare .
EUR 1.7 billion that would have provided access to primary education for some of the 114 million children without it .
The EU 's primary responsibility when it comes to international solidarity is this : to keep its word .
The EU must , however , guarantee the effectiveness of its aid in order to make any real improvement to the situation of the most deprived .
The Monterrey Conference of 2002 prepared a roadmap , particularly concerning the end of ' tied aid ' , the acceleration of debt cancellation initiatives and the introduction of innovative finance schemes like the ' Tobin tax ' .
Six years on , the EU still has a long way to go .
The Doha Conference in a few weeks should enable it to start moving forward again .
Half of humanity is counting on it ...
in writing . - ( SV ) The United Nations Millennium Development Goals Report for 2008 says that the international community must continue to be prepared to take significant responsibility for the challenges facing humanity .
Extreme poverty and hunger , infant mortality , poor maternal health , HIV / AIDS , malaria and other diseases and the lack of universal primary education are just some of the challenges which merit attention and recognition by all countries in the world .
Reflecting the position of Junilistan , the report notes that in many cases these challenges call for international coordination .
However , Junilistan thinks that cooperation of this kind should be channelled through organisations with broad international legitimacy and long experience , such as the United Nations , and not through the EU .
Junilistan also opposes the passages in the report which blatantly advocate direct control of the bilateral aid schemes of individual EU countries .
Aid is and must remain a national matter .
For that reason , Junilistan has voted against the report .
In addition to the many questions and comments that the report 's content ( and omissions ) raise , its condemnation regarding the volume of Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) should also be highlighted :
' ... notes the alarming decrease in EU aid in 2007 from EUR 47.7 billion in 2006 ( ... ) to EUR 46.1 billion in 2007 ... ' ;

' points out that the EU will have given EUR 75 billion less than was promised for the period 2005-2010 if the current trend continues ' ;
' Expresses serious concern that a majority of the Member States ( 18 out of 27 , especially Latvia , Italy , Portugal , Greece and the Czech Republic ) were unable to raise their level of ODA between 2006 and 2007 and that there has even been a dramatic reduction of over 10 % in a number of countries such as Belgium , France and the United Kingdom ; ... ' ;
' Observes that the 2007 decreases in reported aid levels are due in some cases to the artificial boosting of figures in 2006 by debt relief ; ... ' ;
' Views as totally unacceptable the discrepancy between the frequent pledges of increased financial assistance and the considerably lower sums that are actually disbursed ... ' ;
Words that speak for themselves ...
I voted in favour of the report .
Funding development aid is not an easy task .
It is not easy to explain to European taxpayers why their money is being handed out so far from its country of ' origin ' .
On the other hand the demand for aid funds , arising both from a desire to implement the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) and from promises made earlier , is huge .
On an EU scale , the attitude of certain states is becoming a particular problem .
Some Member States , such as France and Great Britain , have cut back their Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) .
It does not require much effort to imagine what a very disincentivising effect this has on countries that are less wealthy than these , in which development aid is only just beginning to appear .
We also need to take a good look at the way in which aid statistics come about .
Each country would like to allocate as much outlay as possible to the category of development aid .
This leads in effect to some pretty ridiculous situations .
In my country , Poland , a report was published last week on aid in 2007 .
It transpires that the greatest beneficiary of Polish aid was none other than China .
This is not because China is the poorest country in the world ; nor is it because China has become a priority country for Polish development aid .
China has become the greatest beneficiary of Polish development aid simply because an export trade contract with that country has been included in the category of development aid .
in writing . - A common European position is needed on the effectiveness , transparency and flexibility of the way development assistance is financed before the Doha Conference on Financing for Development in late November .
Thijs Berman 's report goes some way towards helping achieve that goal .
I agree that reform is needed to secure greater representation of developing countries to the IMF and World Bank .
Indeed , I further agree with the rapporteur 's calls to encourage Member States to adequately prepare a timetable to reach the target of 0.7 % of Europe 's GNP going to public development aid in 2015 .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( NL ) The members of the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the European Parliament voted in favour of the Berman report , one of the reasons being that it makes useful comments about the possible role of the European Investment Bank in developing countries .
However , the members of the VVD distance themselves from the 0.7 % target for development cooperation laid down in this report .
It is not the quantity but the quality of development cooperation that counts .
in writing . - Turbulent global finance has put the governments of the Member States under serious strain .
The Estonian Government , for example , has been struggling for months to draft a balanced budget for the year 2009 .
Although I supported Thijs Berman 's report , I have serious doubts about reaching the targeted Official Development Assistance level in the next couple of years .
As the EU has no command of coercive measures regarding development aid , it would be naive to expect that the Member States would significantly increase their contribution when experiencing financial uncertainty .
The European internal market is one of the most important achievements of the process of European integration .
Only a well-functioning internal market can guarantee competitive conditions for businesses activities and assist the development of the European economy .
The internal market scoreboard is an instrument that makes it possible to monitor progress in the introduction , proper transposition and correct application of directives relating to the internal market .
Analysis of the data contained in the internal market scoreboard provides some exceptionally interesting information about the work of Member States in introducing EU legislation .
It is a typically political instrument that should , however , not be treated lightly , but should serve as an instrument encouraging responsible individuals to carry out more rapid and proper transposition .
This particularly concerns the new Member States , where the deficit as regards transposition of law is often greater than the objective stated by Heads of State or Government .
The internal market scoreboard should also be used more frequently in discussions about the state of the internal market .
It is therefore essential to come up with a more accessible form of scoreboard that could also be used by citizens interested in internal market matters .
The rapporteur has drawn attention to the fact that certain directives , such as the Services Directive , are more important for the effective functioning of the internal market than others .
I share the rapporteur 's view on this and as a result I think that the European Commission should take notice of indicators that better reflect the immediate significance of directives for businesses and citizens .
in writing . - ( RO ) Through my positive vote today for the internal market scoreboard , I am expressing my support for the timely enforcement and accurate transposition of internal market directives into national law , because these directives constitute the prerequisite for the effective working of the internal market , and for promoting competitiveness as well as social and economic cohesion within the EU .
The two scoreboards , those for the internal market and consumption market , respectively , jointly contribute to the improvement of the internal market , which is beneficial to consumers .
The scoreboard should encourage timely and accurate transposition , but at the same time it should become a tool enabling policy-makers to identify barriers and fields that require new initiatives .
I hope that the result of today 's vote will lead to the strengthening of the SOLVIT network and that Member States will promote the services of this network for the benefit of consumers .
Member States must also make sure that SOLVIT centres are adequately staffed , so as to reduce the length of time required for examination and to solve complaints at a faster rate .
in writing . - A priority of all education ministries must be the recruitment of the best candidates to the teaching profession .
The profession has to be sufficiently attractive .
Teachers must benefit from remuneration which reflects their importance to society .
Investment in education is never wasted .
More resources have to be allocated to teacher training .
The profession has to be fulfilling .
It has to be seen as a good career .
Supporting teacher education through the Lifelong Learning Programme is essential .
A certain freshness is achieved through teacher exchange programmes between schools in different countries .
The place of a teacher is in the classroom .
Bureaucracy in the form of increasing levels of administration and paperwork result in less time spent by teachers with their pupils .
An added concern is violence in school .
Aggression in schools , either by pupils or their parents , is on the increase .
All efforts must be made to curb violence and aggression in schools .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my Spanish fellow Member Mrs Badia i Cutchet on improving the quality of teacher education and I strongly support the analysis that ' raising the quality of teacher education leads to substantial gains in student performance . '
I fully agree that providing more and better-quality teacher education and recruiting the best candidates to the teaching profession should be key priorities for all education ministries .
There is an urgent need to encourage mobility and the learning of foreign languages .
However , we should also be promoting excellence in native languages , since this is what enables pupils to acquire other knowledge more easily .
All this cooperation will be very useful when the time comes for organising school exchanges ( of pupils and teachers ) , regardless of the level of study , based on the model already used for the Erasmus programme for students .
in writing . - ( NL ) As a former teacher at what was known as a multicultural problem school in Antwerp , I can only welcome the rapporteur 's expression of concern about the quality of teaching in the EU .
However , it is for the individual Member States and not the EU to work out what can be done about the quality of teaching .
If there is one field in which the principle of subsidiarity and respect for the diversity of the various cultures must hold , then that is most certainly education .
Education does not have to be multicultural as stated in this report ; it only has to be of good quality .
In my experience in Flanders , for example , I have seen all too often that it is the multicultural ' concentration schools ' - those with a high proportion of migrant children - that bring quality down .
Ideological blinkers are not the way to remedy this .
I therefore voted wholeheartedly against this report .
I voted in favour of the Badia i Cutchet report on improving the quality of teacher education as I believe that improving education in the European Union is a key factor in promoting high-quality education and training , which in turn contributes to job creation and boosting Europe 's competitiveness and growth , in line with the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
On the subject of violence in schools , I should like to reiterate the rapporteur 's recommendation on the need to create the tools and procedures to tackle the phenomenon , for which cooperation between teaching staff and parents needs to be stepped up .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote ' no ' in the final vote on this report .
This is an extremely important matter - so important that it must remain the political responsibility of the Member States and their devolved authorities .
The Member States must have exclusive responsibility for the organisation of education and the content of training provision .
This is another attempt by the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education to meddle in an area which currently does not fall within the Union 's responsibilities , but which some want the Union to become involved in for the good of us all .
This own-initiative report is a waste of taxpayers ' money , which the European Parliament should have nothing to do with .
in writing . - The Badia report has much to commend it .
The quality of teacher education has direct and important impacts upon our children 's education and EU-wide cooperation to ensure a high standard of teaching is to be encouraged .
I do consider , however , that decisions relating to curriculum content and the governance of schools should be taken within the cultural and political context of different nations ' separate education systems .
At times the Badia report tended towards prescribing issues on an EU-wide basis , and I accordingly abstained on the final vote .
in writing . - Maria Badia i Cutchet 's report has my support .
To preserve the high quality of our respective education systems we need to have well-trained teachers .
Teacher training must develop in tandem with the demands of the modern classroom and I believe that this report recognises this fact .
in writing . - The report from Ms Badia i Cutchet on improving the quality of teacher education today touches on some important issues .
The report is right to point out the need for adequate remuneration for teachers along with adequate training and teaching equipment .
Ultimately , however , it is up to the national governments who fund our education systems to manage the education of our children .
In Ireland , children today are still being taught in prefabs instead of proper , safe buildings .
The pupil-teacher ratio remains too high to allow for the best possible education of our children .
These problems need to be tackled first and foremost in Ireland by means of adequate investment in the short- and long-term .
The development of information and communication technologies is currently imposing greater demands upon the teaching profession since the educational environment is becoming more and more complex and varied .
I voted for Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's report which deals with the Commission 's communication entitled ' Improving the Quality of Teacher Education ' .
The communication assesses the current situation in the EU as regards the education and training of teachers .
The report reflects upon the various options in EU Member States .
Within the Union , there are more than 27 different teacher training systems , but the challenges facing teachers are essentially common to all Member States .
Teachers are required to have a quality of teacher training which has a direct effect not only on pupils ' level of knowledge but also on the formation of their personalities , particularly during the first years of their school experience .
Teachers are also subjected to enormous mental stress , leaving them little energy for self-education .
In the past , teaching was a respected and valued profession .
Today , the teaching profession is not attractive .
Teachers , most of whom are women , do not enjoy the corresponding level of social recognition , status and , above all , remuneration .
For example , in my country , Slovakia , teachers ' pay is way below the national average .
I believe that the report will attract the attention of Member States , ensuring that the teaching profession is properly appreciated .
We are voting today on two reports that appear to be mutually complementary : Mrs Pack 's report on the Bologna Process and Mrs Badia i Cutchet 's report on improving the quality of teacher education .
The objective of these two initiatives is to improve the competitiveness of European education , and consequently to increase the potential and competitiveness of the European Union as a whole .
Placing the emphasis on education is an excellent way to go , but neglect is easy .
In many countries we are dealing with all the fundamental sins of the teacher education system .
There is a lack of incentive and motivation for the best graduates to choose the teaching profession ; the status of teachers ( especially at primary and secondary level ) is frankly low , teachers are poorly paid and there is no investment in their development .
The relationship between the quality of teacher education and the quality of teaching , and consequently the level of knowledge of pupils , is obvious .
Neglect in this area may therefore have disastrous consequences , not only cultural , but also economic .
The recommendations for Member States that are contained in the report seem to be the right ones , and these are : employment of the best candidates , improvement in status , teacher recognition and remuneration , investment in training at all stages of an individual 's career , exchange of best practice among the 27 different education systems in the EU , and an increase in schools ' powers .
A high level of teaching is an essential element of a high quality of education , which should be a crucial factor in Europe 's long-term competitiveness and its capacity to create new jobs .
It transpires from the Commission 's analysis that :
• on-the-job training is compulsory only in 11 Member States ( Austria , Belgium , Germany , Estonia , Finland , Hungary , Lithuania , Latvia , Romania , Malta and the United Kingdom ) ,
• where there is on-the-job training , this usually lasts less than 20 hours a year and never exceeds five days a year ,
• only half of the states of Europe offer new teachers any form of systematic assistance during the first few years of employment ( e.g. induction into occupation , training , pedagogical care ) .
If pupils are to be suitably prepared for life in the EU , teachers should be required to apply the latest educational methods .
An improvement in the quality of teacher training may guarantee that the EU has the highly-skilled employees it needs in order to tackle the challenges of the 21st century .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my excellent German colleague Mrs Pack on the Bologna Process and student mobility .
I share my colleague 's view that an increase in student mobility and the quality of the different educational systems should be a priority of the Bologna Process beyond 2010 , which aims to establish a European Area of Higher Education .
To encourage student mobility , a whole series of measures needs to be taken since the problem of mobility goes beyond the scope of higher education and concerns the scope of social affairs , finance , immigration and visa policies .
Special assistance must be provided to students from disadvantaged groups in society by , for example , proposing inexpensive and decent accommodation .
I support the introduction of a single European Student Identification Card in order to facilitate mobility and to enable students to get discounts for accommodation and subsistence , culture and transport .
in writing . - The aim of the Bologna process , launched in Bologna in June 1999 , is to establish a European Higher Education Area by 2010 .
The main objectives of the process are the reform of the higher education system and the elimination of remaining barriers to the mobility of students and teachers .
I voted in favour of the report since I agree that our universities need an innovative and methodical curricular reform that would better support student mobility and the transfer of qualifications .
Also , I support the rapporteur 's recommendation to obtain reliable statistics on student mobility and the socio-economic profile of students .
Next year 's 10th anniversary of the signature of the Bologna Declaration signals the need to redefine the aims of the Process .
Seriously redefining these goals will require reflection on how the Bologna Process has been implemented in the Member States .
We will need to examine whether the policies followed in the name of Bologna have actually led to the desired consolidation of a European Area of Higher Education that can meet the challenges of competitiveness on an international scale .
I support this initiative - it is a tangible contribution towards identifying problems and challenges that have arisen over 10 years of implementation on the one hand , and issues that need to remain priorities on the other .
This is the case with student mobility , the cornerstone of a richer and more competitive education and an essential contribution towards developing the concept of European citizenship .
It is essential to call on the Member States to assess the impact of this Process as regards ensuring that young people are adequately qualified and prepared .
As our rapporteur points out , we must not lose sight of the goals of the Process or of the notion of students being at the heart of all questions concerning their education .
I voted in favour of the Pack report on the Bologna Process and student mobility as I believe that high-quality , effective and innovative European higher education that is accessible to every European citizen is vital for the European Union to continue to be competitive and successful in the face of the demands of globalisation .
With this in mind , I believe measures such as promoting reciprocity in terms of the flow of students , ongoing training of teachers in the various areas of study and developing means of financing student mobility are essentials for achieving the Bologna Process objectives .
Although the rapporteur says she is particularly concerned about student mobility within the European Union and considers that Member States should be supported in their efforts to modernise and innovatively reform their respective higher education systems , the fact of the matter is that the entire report tackles this question by focusing on the Bologna Process and on what is deemed absolutely necessary in order to face the challenges of globalisation , insisting that the process should be deepened .
We therefore abstained , as we disagree with this analysis .
However , we do agree that it is time for reflection and debate on the Bologna Process , in particular to try to determine how education systems have changed and how these developments and changes have affected the quality of higher education in the various Member States .
Access to high quality education must be an option for every citizen , regardless of their citizenship , country or area of birth .
In addition , mobility can have extremely positive effects , not only for the individual taking part in a mobility scheme , but also for higher education institutions and society as a whole .
Moreover , its social dimension should not be forgotten , as has happened up to now .
in writing . - ( SV ) This own-initiative report from the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education , as usual , exceeds the Committee 's competence in putting forward new ideas on how the EU should become more involved in education .
This is a field which currently falls within the responsibility of the Member States , and that is the way we think it should remain .
Among other things , the report proposes the introduction of a single student ID card in the EU .
We find it hard to believe that these proposals in themselves would increase mobility for students ; they are more likely to increase the bureaucracy associated with student activity .
The rapporteur also writes in her explanatory statement about the need for a legal framework for students at EU level .
These proposals seek to circumvent the arrangements agreed in the EU regarding the levels of political responsibility for various policy areas .
We have therefore voted against this report .
Next year 's 10th anniversary of the signature of the Bologna Declaration signals the need to redefine the aims of the Process .
Seriously redefining these goals will require reflection on how the Bologna Process has been implemented in the Member States .
We will need to examine whether the policies followed in the name of Bologna have actually led to the desired consolidation of a European Area of Higher Education that can meet the challenges of competitiveness on an international scale .
I support this initiative - it is a tangible contribution towards identifying problems and challenges that have arisen over 10 years of implementation on the one hand , and issues that need to remain priorities on the other .
This is the case with student mobility , the cornerstone of a richer and more competitive education and an essential contribution towards developing the concept of European citizenship .
It is essential to call on the Member States to assess the impact of this Process as regards ensuring that young people are adequately qualified and prepared .
As our rapporteur points out , we must not lose sight of the goals of the Process or of the notion of students being at the heart of all questions concerning their education .
The aim of the Bologna Process is to establish a European Area of Higher Education by the end of 2010 .
It is intended , among other things , to help students choose from the rich educational assortment on offer .
The introduction of three cycles of education , educational quality assurance and recognition of qualifications and study duration periods are crucial to the functioning of the Area .
Clearly the attractiveness of the European Area of Higher Education will be greater , the better and more evenly spread the quality of education in the different Member States .
It is therefore crucial to support Member States in their efforts to modernise and reform their higher education systems .
All European citizens must have the opportunity to access higher education , regardless of their citizenship , country or place of birth .
Increasing student mobility is one of the anticipated benefits of the Bologna Process .
Mobility has a positive impact not only on individuals who move , but also on higher education institutions .
Exchange of views , heterogeneity and drawing on the experience of others are , after all , components of the academic experience .
We should not forget either that there is a social dimension to this : mobility provides for the acquisition of invaluable and rich experience in the sphere of scientific , cultural and social variety .
in writing . - ( RO ) Although I voted in favour of this report , I would like to point out two issues that need to be carefully analysed and regulated by the Commission .
First of all , we need to look at the geographic distribution of scholarships granted through the Lifelong Learning Programme .
Most of the universities that benefit from student exchanges are concentrated in the old Member States .
At the same time , the number of students in the new Member States is much lower .
The Commission should take urgent action , such as by accrediting an increased number of universities capable of participating in academic exchange programmes , thus increasing the attractiveness of new Member States as destinations for students from all over Europe .
The Commission must also make sure that a proportionate number of students from each Member State get the opportunity to have a European scholarship .
Secondly , I believe that article 11 of the report should be applied to all Member States , notwithstanding its recommendation status .
This period of academic mobility , be it for a term or for a year , can contribute significantly both to the knowledge and to the personal development of young Europeans .
However , I must add that the inclusion of such a provision should be accompanied by corresponding financial support for the Member States .
Various sectors that are critical of the Bologna Process consider that the change will cause university education to become elitist .
This report calls for special assistance to be provided to students from disadvantaged groups in society by , for example , proposing ' inexpensive and decent ' accommodation , and taking into account that extra support after arrival is often necessary .
Although I tabled an amendment on this point to extend it to all expenditure , in other words , so that the assistance is not limited to accommodation , I think that the report is based on a concept of universal education that is accessible to the whole of society .
In the voting Mrs Pack and her report on the Bologna Process and student mobility received my support .
This is a good , business-like report .
In the EU today we continue to see inadequate outlay on scientific research and academic education .
The Bologna idea , which is already nine years old ( and currently unites 46 countries ) , should lead in 2010 to the appearance of a European Area of Higher Education .
The underlying principles of this process come down to three priority fields of action . These are : the education cycle ( which covers three stages : bachelor , masters , doctorate ) , provision of high-quality education and recognition of qualifications obtained and periods of higher education study .
What is needed , then , is multiple and cohesive actions in all Member States , including in our universities .
Evaluation systems in the form of what are known as ECTS points should be clear , understandable and unified .
This will enable us to sustain the potential for the flexible and mobile education of young people at a variety of academic centres and the very necessary exchange of professorial-level staff .
Although higher education does not form part of EU competence , we must nevertheless - while maintaining the independence of Member States in this matter - strive for close cooperation and coordination .
We must also remember to provide EU citizens with equal opportunities to access education at as high a level as possible , and this requires both organisational changes in the education system and appropriate financial outlay .
in writing . - Doris Pack 's report ' The Bologna Process and student mobility ' is a constructive contribution to the debate on student mobility .
The ability for students across the EU to be able to move freely between Europe 's borders must remain a core element of the Bologna process .
Students from all backgrounds should have the opportunity to benefit from the wealth of cultural and intellectual opportunities the EU offers .
I therefore voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
The objective of making it easier for students to choose from a wide range of high-quality courses as part of the Bologna process is , of course , to be welcomed .
The EU has also placed an important emphasis on student mobility , and furthermore wants to improve the mutual recognition of training .
The fact that not everything is running smoothly in this regard as yet is beyond question .
Not only are there serious problems with recognition , some courses converted to bachelor 's and master 's degrees are supposedly so specialised that a change in the place of study - either at home or abroad - is no longer possible , which runs counter to the objective of a European Higher Education Area and of increasing mobility .
Critics also believe that the ECTS ( European Credit Transfer System ) is being administered so differently from country to country that achievements are barely comparable any more .
In this respect , the intention to take stock provisionally will be beneficial , and so I , too , voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the report on " The Bologna Process and Student Mobility ” for several reasons : the Bologna Process was one of the most revolutionary elements in the world market of education and training .
The labour market itself was not ready for such a change .
It is still not fully receptive to the 3-cycle educational system ( bachelor , master 's degree , doctoral degree ) in the 3-2-3 structure ; on the other hand , before the new system was applied , enterprises often hired undergraduate students .
Another element of progress was student mobility in European schools and the common degree system , facilitated by the ETCS .
The success of these mechanisms has been proven by the tendency of major universities around the world of moving students to several geographical locations , particularly where they have older branches .
Another revolutionary proposal is that of ECVET ( European Credit system for Vocational Education and Training ) , meant to transfer , acknowledge and accumulate the results of learning acquired by an individual in formal , non-formal and informal contexts , with a view to obtaining qualifications , irrespective of the time spent learning or acquiring these skills and apritudes .
This is a worldwide trend .
Mrs Pack deserves our thanks for her contribution to the development of and creative reflection on the Bologna Process , which is an initiative enabling students in Europe to choose their own educational path and career without reference to state boundaries .
This initiative , which enhances the competitiveness of the European education system , enriches the nations themselves through cultural and scientific penetration .
Clearly questions of the content of education and raising its quality at every level currently lie in the hands of the EU Member States .
In this respect there is still much to do .
Mobility , and increasing it at European level , which is the principle motif of Mrs Pack 's report , happens , in Poland for example , on the principle of the outflow of a valuable workforce , which quite often cannot be recovered .
I agree with the report 's thesis according to which the most important thing is student mobility , with the creation of a system of incentives and facilitations , so that young people may take advantage of offers to study wherever they like .
One particularly important matter , though , would appear to be that of fully educated and developed people returning to their country in order to make use of their potential in their country of origin .
This is definitely a challenge for the new Member States and I think that prudent continuation of the Bologna Process is a step in this direction .
A united Europe is not just a matter of a single currency , free movement of people and a common market in goods and services .
It is also , or even primarily , the intellectual , cultural and social dimension of Europe .
The intergovernmental initiative known as the Bologna Process , which began just under 10 years ago , is chiefly aimed at making it easier for students to choose courses of the highest possible quality .
One of the most important elements in the idea of setting up a European Area of Higher Education is increasing student mobility and the quality of education , as these are what specifically create the opportunity for personal , social and scientific development .
I think that , in striving to improve the quality and attractiveness of education , what is important is actions taken at both European level ( the European Parliament treats mobility as a priority issue ) and national level .
We must bear in mind that in the European Union higher education is not among the duties of the European Commission .
The content and organisation of studies remain within the remit of the individual states , which is why their role , and that of the universities themselves , is so great .
They should place emphasis on the need to create European curricula for doctorates , and make an effort to provide special assistance to students from social groups that are in an unfavourable situation .
Another important aspect is dialogue and a two-way exchange of experience between businesses and universities , so higher education institutes should strengthen cooperation with the private sector with a view to discovering new and effective mechanisms for co-financing student mobility .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my Hungarian colleague Mr Szájer containing recommendations to the European Commission on the alignment of legal acts to the new Comitology Decision .
For the sake of quality legislation , it is becoming increasingly necessary to delegate to the Commission the development of the non-essential and more technical aspects of the legislation , as well as its prompt adjustment to take account of technological progress and economic change .
However , this delegation of powers must be facilitated by giving the legislator the institutional means to scrutinise the exercise of such powers .
It should be noted that the current alignment of the acquis with the Comitology Decision is still not complete , since there are still legal instruments that provide for implementing measures to which the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny should be applied .
I support - and to my mind this is essential if European democracy is to function properly - the granting of additional resources in the European Parliament for all comitology procedures in preparation for the eventuality that the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , but also during the current transitional period , in order to ensure that every comitology procedure between the three institutions functions satisfactorily .
I agree with the report when it says that for the sake of the quality of legislation , it is increasingly necessary to delegate to the Commission the development of the non-essential and more technical aspects of the legislation as well as its prompt adjustment to take account of technological progress and economic change .
However , such delegation of powers must be facilitated by giving the legislator the institutional means to scrutinise the exercise of such powers .
Parliament should be the guardian of this scrutiny , something which , despite the subject having been discussed for so many years , has still not been completely resolved .
There are still parliamentary committees that have been lacking information in decisions taken under the comitology procedure .
Parliament therefore needs to remain very vigilant .
It is very important to further examine how the supervisory structures in the European Union can be improved .
However , the report by Mr Rasmussen concerns the recommendations to the European Commission on hedge funds .
On procedural grounds , I do not support the amendments by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to the recitals .
The recitals are not the place to draw up value judgments on the current situation on the financial markets .
I voted against Amendments 6 to 10 inclusive this morning not because I oppose European supervision of financial markets , but because this report is not the right place to launch this initiative .
I would advocate that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs deliberate upon supervision of financial markets and the desirability of reinforcing this at European level .
If a good report is presented on this , there is every likelihood that I shall yet be able to support this initiative from the Greens .
in writing . - ( HU ) Contrary to expectations , the financial crisis that started in America last year , triggered by the unregulated , speculative financial processes there , has now , far from abating , shaken the whole world , including Europe .
The current crisis requires a long-term change of paradigm by European decision-makers in two areas , so that in future they will not only reduce the danger of a financial crisis but also promote stable economic growth .
The developments in America have demonstrated that the market itself is not capable of dealing with these and similar crises .
It is therefore necessary that we create , as soon as possible , the central European financial supervisory authority which was proposed by the Hungarians last year and was subsequently embraced by the French Presidency and which would , among other things , see to it that such risky , speculative transactions in the banking and financial system can be subject to conditions that can be monitored and calculated .
This would be the prerequisite for Europe gradually to take over America 's broken role in the world of finance .
In order for the European economy , which has also been hit by the current crisis , to get on track for the growth it wants as soon as possible , it would be necessary to bring funding for real economies to the fore as soon as possible , instead of the risky , speculative transactions of the finance and banking world .
A prerequisite for this is that the European Central Bank should not only , as up to now , concentrate on fighting off inflation , but also promote the recovery of the real economy using preferential interest rates .
We voted against this report as , notwithstanding the odd token gesture and criticism in relation to the financial crisis , it does not include any specific measures to effectively combat the increasing financialisation of the economy , unregulated speculation , the proliferation of financial instruments and products to secure ever-greater speculative profits , nor does it decide on an end to tax havens or banking secrecy .
As we stated in the plenary debate , it is always the same people who will suffer the consequences : workers who lose their jobs and the general public who have to pay more interest , including here in the European Union , particularly in countries with weaker economies , as is the case for Portugal , where the debt ratio is around 120 % of GDP , while household debt is roughly 130 % of disposable income .

We therefore stress the priority of supporting the creation of jobs with rights , production , solving poverty , improving the purchasing power of workers and pensioners , supporting quality public services and increasing low-interest credit facilities to support micro , small and medium-sized entrepreneurs .
in writing . - ( SV ) Hedge funds and private equity are high-risk investment vehicles .
In order to restore confidence among investors , among the public and - not least - among the supervisory authorities , operations must be subject to both transparency and satisfactory legislation .
Junilistan welcomes many of the points and proposals for action contained in the report .
Despite this , we have chosen to vote against the report in its entirety .
We have done that because the report gives preference to measures at EU level , despite the fact that it ought to be obvious to everyone in this situation that solutions to the potential risks associated with such vehicles as hedge funds and private equity should be sought primarily at global level .
in writing . - It is regrettable that the report by Rasmussen on hedge funds and private equity has been watered down following the compromise negotiations between the three largest groups in Parliament .
It is also regrettable that the amendments tabled by the Greens and the GUE / NGL group , which were taken directly from the Rasmussen draft report , were not adopted during the plenary vote .
For example , one of the paragraphs which has been weakened from the original draft emphasised the need for enhanced appropriate levels of transparency towards the public , investors and supervisory authorities , including , in the future , any new EU supervisory body .
In spite of this , we decided to support the report in the final vote .
This is due to the urgent need and necessity to counteract harmful financial speculation and instability in the markets .
In this respect , the report could be seen as a step in the right direction .
in writing . - The Rasmussen report comes at an appropriate time in the week following the financial turmoil which saw Scotland 's oldest bank being sacrificed by , in the words of Scotland 's First Minister , " spivs and speculators " .
The Scottish financial sector has been let down badly by the UK 's regulators and I support tighter regulation of the market .
I voted in favour of the report which contains a number of recommendations which are worthy of consideration and look forward to the day when independent Scottish regulators will work in this area in cooperation with our EU partners .
in writing . - Both global and local financial markets are developing complex financial instruments , making it very difficult for financial institutions to develop adequate regulations and supervise systems .
As a result of this , there are possibilities for actions which are not transparent and cases of speculations by financial market participants , which lead to the perversion of the financial markets .
In this regard , I support Amendment 2 tabled by the Greens group , which calls for substantial reinforcement of the European Regulatory and Supervisory Framework in order to maintain financial stability .
in writing . - It is regrettable that the report by Rasmussen on hedge funds and private equity has been watered down following the compromise negotiations between the three largest groups in the Parliament .
It is also regrettable that the amendments tabled by the Greens and the GUE / NGL group , which were directly taken from the Rasmussen draft report , were not adopted during the plenary vote .
In spite of this , we decided to support the report in the final vote .
This is due to the urgent need and necessity to counteract harmful financial speculation and instability on the markets .
In this respect , the report could be seen as a step in the right direction .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the hard-won compromise negotiated by the three political groups in this Parliament and I am pleased with the comprehensive , balanced content of the report .
The rapporteur had tried to place the burden of the financial crisis with hedge funds and private equity , but these products are neither the origin nor the catalyst of the current crisis , and I congratulate the rapporteur on having recognised this and put it right .
The recommendations we are making to the Commission are intended to cover all relevant actors and financial market participants and to close the loopholes in existing regulations to address and combat those practices that contributed to the property market collapse in the United States becoming a global financial crisis .
We are thus addressing bad risk management practices , the lack of transparency of certain investment products and conflicts of interest in credit rating agencies , which are the main causes of the financial crisis we are currently experiencing .
in writing . - Colleagues , the recent financial crisis has many victims , of which HBOS - who last week were taken over by Lloyds TSB - was one .
To see such high-profile casualties is not only destabilising for the world economy , but for those who entrust their money and their future to these companies .
What the world has learnt from the last few weeks is that our approach to market regulation is outdated .
We need global measures to regulate a globalised financial system .
The EU and the European Parliament therefore has a significant role to play in resolving the root causes of the crisis and must act responsibly by voting in favour of Mr Rasmussen 's report .
In encouraging hedge funds and private equity firms to be more prudent and transparent in their dealings , the EU will help construct a solid framework that will help restore much-needed stability to the financial sector .
in writing . - It is regrettable that the report by Rasmussen on hedge funds and private equity has been watered down following the compromise negotiations between the three largest groups in the Parliament .
It is also regrettable that the amendments tabled by the Greens and the GUE / NGL group , which were directly taken from the Rasmussen draft report , were not adopted during the plenary vote .
In spite of this , we decided to support the report in the final vote .
This is due to the urgent need and necessity to counteract harmful financial speculation and instability on the markets .
In this respect , the report could be seen as a step in the right direction .
However , a stronger hand is required in applying these ideas .
The secretive nature of many hedge funds is unacceptable as the system as it currently stands does not allow for transparency for the public .
It is therefore difficult to assess the nature of hedge funds , and their capacity to contribute to sustainable social cohesion and economic stability cannot be ascertained by citizens .
The concerns mentioned in this report , which are accompanied by due acknowledgement of the importance of the financial products in question , lead me to agree on the whole .
Bearing in mind that we are going through a period of obvious turbulence in the financial markets , it is important to react firmly , but also calmly and with knowledge of the facts .
Much of the economic success of recent decades in Europe , the United States and in fast-growing economies is precisely because of the agility of the financial markets .
In terms of the corrective action the current system needs , it is important to tackle the roots of the crisis , but without wiping out the virtues of the system .
This is how the European Commission needs to understand this call for action by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) The role of the European Parliament in the EU system is to be the voice of the people .
This voice is strengthened in particular by the work done in the Committee on Petitions , which takes up questions arising from citizens ' initiatives .
A good example is the ' One Seat ' campaign - to move the seat of the European Parliament from Strasbourg to Brussels - which was taken up for formal discussion through the efforts of the Committee .
Certainly , some recommendations to the Member States are rather extreme and some proposals are not very well considered .
Nevertheless the work of the Committee on Petitions is a crucial part of the work of the EU on behalf of citizens , which for me was a crucial factor in my decision to support this report .
The financial world is rocking on its foundations .
Ordinary American taxpayers are paying the price of a rescue plan ( USD 700 billion ) whilst those who caused the problem are getting off scot-free .
In the form of the Rasmussen report , the European Parliament had an instrument with which to do something to improve scrutiny of certain areas of the financial sector : hedge funds and private equity .
With the crisis now so urgent , we had an opportunity to call on the European Commission to introduce strict legislation .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance therefore tabled various amendments to this report but , since these were rejected by Parliament , we voted against the report .
There is to be no European authority to monitor the financial sector , no European legislation on the registration and monitoring of hedge funds , no limit on private investment companies taking root excessively .
In the very week when the capitalist system is on the point of imploding , the European Parliament has missed its opportunity .
We Greens are signalling that we shall continue to devote ourselves to severely curtailing a free market whose only objective in speculating seems to be to make the fastest possible profit for a small group of people .
This is socially and economically irresponsible .
I have always been in favour of market liberalisation , as , in my opinion , it is the main prerequisite for competition among market participants , which is always beneficial to consumers , enabling them to choose and purchase goods at the lowest possible price .
However , in voting for the transparency of institutional investors , I support the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , who is asking the Commission to propose certain standards to prevent investors from ' robbing ' companies ( the case of the partial sale of companies ) and abusing their financial powers so that companies encounter problems in the future and there is no benefit either to the company itself or its employees , creditors or business partners .
In my view , the European Commission should investigate the measures implemented by the Member States to prevent the partial sale of companies .
in writing . - I support the general approach of Klaus-Heiner Lehne 's report on the transparency of institutional investors .
Recent events in the financial markets point to the need for global action to improve market regulation .
Well-functioning markets depend on the respect of transparency across the board , and this report is a step in the right direction .
I voted in favour of its recommendations .
The acute and ongoing crisis of casino-style capitalism is burdening American taxpayers and the entire world economy because of the failure of the profiteering games played by companies .
Radical changes to the regulatory legal framework for the inspection of transparency and audits are needed .
The Commission must act immediately and propose a comprehensive framework for a common model of transparency .
The policy of less legislation has failed miserably .
Transparency should be a guiding principle in how markets operate - financial markets in particular .
However , this should not be the only consideration , lest the principle should become the rule , confusing the desired result ( healthy and efficient financial markets ) with the proposed means of achieving this ( sufficiently regulated and supervised markets ) .
In the context of the current political and economic debate on financial markets , it is important for the Commission to interpret this recommendation in this sense , committing itself to defending the quality of European financial markets .
Let us not forget that the greatest economic benefits for society stem from the smooth and fundamentally free functioning of these markets .
in writing . - ( SV ) Transparency is crucial to restoring confidence in the financial market .
Recent months have shown what problems can arise in a complex and fast-moving market if there is no possibility of understanding and following advanced products as well .
There have certainly been problems in the OTC market , but there must also be transparency in other areas of the financial market .
In the light of this broad complex of problems therefore , I chose to abstain in the vote since the amendments which would have given the report the breadth it needed were not adopted .

I voted in favour of the report by my Hungarian fellow Member Mr Hegyi , amending the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council modifying , as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission , Regulation ( EC ) No 999 / 2001 laying down rules for the prevention , control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) .
I support the proposed amendments aimed at using the regulatory procedure with scrutiny to adopt certain measures concerning products of animal origin derived from or containing ruminant materials .
The same goes for assessing whether the level of protection applied by a Member State is equivalent , by way of derogation from Regulation ( EC ) No 999 / 2001 , as regards measures following detection of the presence of a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy ( TSE ) .
We voted in favour of this report as Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy ( TSE ) , commonly known as mad cow disease , is a serious threat to our health .
As we know , this deadly infectious disease spreads through a protein which can be found in infected meat and causes deterioration of the human brain .
It has been possible to reduce this epidemic , thanks to strict European regulation .
In this report , the rapporteur builds on the work of the previous rapporteur by adding new elements to be regulated by the regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
We therefore agree that the Commission 's proposal should be amended so as to guarantee that controls are not reduced .
We have to be extremely cautious to ensure that the regulatory procedure with scrutiny does not slow down the implementation of measures against this disease .
We also have to avoid creating loopholes in the legislation when granting derogations to Member States .
Hence the importance of this report .
Let us hope the European Commission bears it in mind .
After the well-known scandals concerning this disease , the public in the Member States rightly needs and deserves this transparency .
in writing . - Gyula Hegyi 's report on amending Regulation ( EC ) No 999 / 2001 as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission seeks to propose amendments to the regulation on transmissible spongiform encephalopathy - a deadly disease spread by infected meat .
Updating the regulatory procedure associated with this issue to one that involves the European Parliament more is a positive step .
The report therefore has my backing .
Every year the EU has to contend with two billion tonnes of waste , 40 million tonnes of which are hazardous waste .
The quantities of waste products similar to domestic waste produced probably constitute the major part of this together with industrial waste , even though the latter does , of course , contain a disproportionately higher risk potential .
The statistics reveal all this , which is why the EU has set itself the lofty aim of reducing the amount of waste to be disposed of by 20 % by 2010 .
In any case it is to be hoped that , in the agricultural waste sector , for instance , the need to obtain statistical data does not end up tying our farmers up with red tape .
Since I was not able to find any indication of this in the report , I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this report because , through this new legislative proposal , the Regulation on waste statistics is adapted to comitology , that is to regulation by control .
The European Parliament 's resolution also calls on the Commission to submit the evaluation reports on pilot-studies in time , in order to avoid the double reporting of data concerning waste statistics .
in writing . - ( RO ) Insufficient data on waste generation and management prevents the European Union from enforcing a harmonised policy regarding waste .
Statistic tools are necessary for an evaluation of compliance with the principle of prevention of environmental degradation as a consequence of waste usage and the monitoring of waste at the time of generation , collection and disposal .
Member States have recognised that there are insufficient statistical data and that the definitions contained in this report are not enough to lead to comparable results between the states .
This is why data collection can be done much better at Community level , in line with the principle of subsidiarity .
As far as agriculture , fisheries and forestry statistics are concerned , we should take into consideration the degree of coverage by this Report of the treatment of agricultural and biological waste .
Therefore , there are several essential issues that need particular attention in order to ensure the accuracy of data and consequently the harmonisation of statistical information at Community level .
in writing . - ( LT ) The spectrum , like other natural resources ( sun , water , air ) , is a public asset .
Market mechanisms themselves , despite being an effective means of generating optimal economic value ( private and public ) , cannot satisfy general interest and generate public assets , which are vital for the creation of an information society .
Therefore , the coordination of political and market measures is a must .
Better coordination and a greater level of flexibility are necessary in order to make full use of this limited resource .
However , it is also necessary to maintain the balance between flexibility and harmonisation in order to achieve the added internal market value of the spectrum .
The spectrum does not recognise national borders .
To enable Member States use the spectrum effectively , better cooperation must be achieved within the EU , especially in the area of the expansion of European service and negotiations on international agreements .
Although the management of the spectrum remains within national competence , it is only EU principles that can ensure that the EU 's interests are defended worldwide .
I am in favour of the further protection of economic interests in locations where mineral water is exploited , as guaranteed in the European Parliament 's Directive on the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters .
The income obtained by districts and businesses , particularly in the Małopolska province , constitutes a significant contribution to the development of the region and its attractiveness as a health resort and tourism destination .
It is worth pointing out that these areas are often agricultural and have little opportunity to generate income because they are located in hilly and mountainous terrain , although they conceal beneath their surface very valuable mineral and spring waters with therapeutic properties .
The EU mineral water document specifies a Europe-wide standard on natural mineral water .
This regulation determines the conditions under which natural mineral water is to be recognised as such and lays down guidelines for the use of mineral water sources . Specific rules for supplying the market with mineral water are also laid down in the guidelines .
The discrepancies in these regulations interfere with the free movement of natural mineral water , creating different competition conditions , which have a direct impact on the functioning of the internal market in this product .
In this particular case the existing obstacles could be removed by each Member State agreeing to accept mineral water recognised by other Member States in their territory with the introduction of general guidelines on meeting microbiological requirements for the product , which would determine the name of a certain mineral water brand .
The principal aim of any regulation on mineral water is to protect consumers ' health and prevent consumers from being misled by information on the product , thus guaranteeing fair trade .
in writing . - Needless to say , roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles are an important ingredient for the safety of drivers , passengers and pedestrians .
They are also essential in the fight against climate change in terms of CO2 emissions .
On the other hand , the Government of a country has the obligation to provide a framework which contributes to the health and safety of drivers , passengers and pedestrians .
Malta and Gozo have one of the highest densities of private cars per capita .
Cars in Malta are extremely expensive , due to a high registration tax .
This is making it very difficult for citizens to change to more efficient cars .
The Government must address the issue of car registration immediately and should do so in the next budget .
People use private transport because the situation of public transport is not acceptable .
It is about time a general overhaul of public transport was carried out .
In addition , the state of many of our roads is terrible .
The allocation of Structural Funds by the EU for 2007-2013 is 53 % .
Under the circumstances all major roads have to be brought up to standard .
in writing . - UKIP considers terrorism as a major problem .
We simply do not believe that the EU should decide about the actions to be taken to fight terrorism .
We feel nation states are best placed to decide appropriate security measures trough intergovernmental cooperation .
in writing . - British Conservatives supported the report whilst having some reservations with regard to the necessity of the EU 's involvement in this area , given that there is already in existence a Council of Europe Convention covering the same issues .
We favour close cooperation between Member States but also in the context of a global approach to the war on terror .
We are , however , unconvinced of the effectiveness of ' one size fits all ' approaches at a European level .
I voted against the proposal to insert a new offence of ' provocation ' or ' public provocation to commit a terrorist offence ' into European law in implementation of the Council of Europe Convention because I believe that the definition put forward by the Commission is too vague and is based on purely subjective elements , jeopardising human rights and fundamental freedoms , particularly freedom of expression in Europe .
In fact , any public statement , or any statement reported in the media , or any message posted on the Internet that might in some way - whether directly or indirectly , on the basis of ' intent ' and with ' the danger that such offences may be committed ' - be considered incitement to commit a terrorist offence , will be made a crime at European level .
The declared objective is to come down on ' terrorist propaganda ' on the Internet .
The rapporteur has attempted to clarify the European Commission 's text in order to make it more respectful of human rights , seeking to introduce greater legal certainty .
Despite this , I believe that we should reject this proposal , partly in order to send a clear signal to the Commission and the Council , which have already announced that they do not wish to accept Parliament 's proposals .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Freedom of the Press Act represents fundamental values in Swedish society .
We cannot accept laws to combat terrorism which are at variance with the Swedish Constitution .
There are many other ways and possibilities by which to achieve the same aims .
The proposals we voted on today do not offer any scope for an opt-out which would allow us to retain our legislation in Sweden .
We support the improvements which the European Parliament has proposed but cannot support the proposal as a whole .
Since a settlement in line with the Swedish Constitution has been reached in the Council , however , we choose to abstain instead of voting against the report .
The Lefrançois report proposes a number of good measures to improve the efficiency and coordination of the fight against terrorism within the EU .
I therefore voted in favour of it .
The ETA attacks a few days ago and the murderous attack in Islamabad have demonstrated that we can never be too vigilant and efficient in this fight .
Cross-border cooperation in the fight against terrorism - which , nowadays , is mainly Islamic in origin - is essential if we want to achieve results .
However , we cannot disregard past mistakes either .
After all , for years the Schengen area has been offering potential terrorists and criminals an ideal environment to carry out their criminal plans , often with impunity .
There is an urgent need for Europe to reflect on its open-border policy and the pernicious consequences of this policy with regard to immigration , crime and Islamic extremism .
If not , the framework proposed here will also prove worthless .
I voted in favour of the Lefrançois report on the proposal for a Council Framework Decision amending Framework Decision 2002 / 475 / JHA on combating terrorism , as I believe we need to adapt the instruments for combating terrorism to the new information and communication media available to terrorists .
Revising the EU framework decision will allow the inclusion of the concept of terrorism in specific preparatory acts , such as recruitment and training for terrorism and public provocation to commit terrorist acts , which will become criminal offences in all Member States .
It is also important to highlight the important amendments tabled by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , with the aim of guaranteeing the fundamental freedoms of speech and association .
The current international and Community legal framework includes a set of instruments that are more than necessary for combating real terrorism and the organised , violent and transnational crime that is associated with it .
The aim of this proposal is to step up the set of security measures , which , on the pretext of the events of 11 September 2001 , have put citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees at risk .
This proposal , as the rapporteur herself points out , puts forward ambiguous definitions that do not safeguard respect for fundamental freedoms .
As in ' Framework Decision 2002 / 475 / JHA on combating terrorism ' - with its definition of ' terrorism ' - once again the possibility remains open for implementing security measures and criminalising individuals or groups who speak out against or write about State terrorism .
This proposal does not represent any added value in combating real terrorism and the associated transnational crime and in fact poses genuine threats to the security and fundamental freedoms of citizens in the various Member States .
As we have pointed out , rather than security measures we need to tackle the real causes fuelling terrorism .
As we have already stated , ' we will not trade freedom for security , as we will be left with neither ' .
We therefore voted against the report .
On Saturday 20 September a suicide bomber caused a lorry to explode in front of the Marriott Hotel in the heart of the Pakistani capital , reducing it to a burned-out ruin and killing at least 60 people .
This attack was attributed to the Pakistani Taliban linked to Al-Qaeda .
On Sunday 20 and Monday 21 September it was the turn of ETA , the Basque separatist organisation , to spill blood in three attacks .
The preparations for these attacks are thought to have been made in France .
Terrorism has no borders , and the Schengen area offers it the perfect cradle in which to recruit , indoctrinate and make the logistical preparations for attacks .
In France the Interior Minister Michèle Alliot-Marie said on the subject that ' French prisons are a hotbed of recruitment for radical Islamists . '
An honest admission !
It is a fact that terrorism has many causes , but today they mainly lie in the armed combat of radical Islam .
Curiously , there are no legislative texts aimed at detecting and preventing recruitment in prisons or in certain so-called ' sensitive ' neighbourhoods .
The European Union intends to give itself a body of legislation to combat terrorism .
( Explanation of vote cut pursuant to Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Lefrançois , since a central tenet of the fight against terrorism has to be the prevention of terrorist offences .
Provocation to commit a terrorist offence , recruitment for terrorism and training for terrorism are three preparatory acts that are also to be regarded as offences .
In so doing , however , fundamental rights must continue to be protected .
I therefore voted for the use of the term ' incitement ' rather than ' provocation ' , since this is more accurate and gives less leeway .
Action must be taken against the Internet as a virtual training camp , as the new information and communication technologies mean that it is becoming increasingly easy for terrorists to disseminate their propaganda .
The EU must counter terrorism clearly and decisively , and the adoption of the three new offences is an important step in doing so .
Freedom of the press , freedom of expression and the right to respect for the privacy of correspondence and secrecy of telecommunications , which also includes e-mail and other kinds of electronic correspondence , should not be curtailed , however , and so I support the amendments by Mrs Lefrançois .
We certainly have sleepers within the EU , who could become active at any time .
It should not be forgotten , though , that terrorists do not appear from nowhere , but come into a country and grow up in an environment hostile to that country .
If the EU really wants to pursue counter-terrorism effectively , it has to grapple with measures to counter the formation and expansion of parallel societies and suchlike , instead of condemning wholesale those who highlight the problems of coexistence with migrants .
Equally , counter-terrorism should not lead to a stealthy cutback in citizens ' rights , which even the European Court of Justice recently brought into the arena , or result in the fight against crime receding as a result of the obsession with terrorism .
If we bear in mind that Islamist zealots are at the forefront of the terrorist threat , cracking down on Islamist preachers of hatred and criminalising terrorist camp training at European level is long overdue .
On this note , I voted in favour of the Lefrançois report .
in writing . - ( RO ) The recent attacks in the Basque Country show once again that terrorism is a daily reality and that we need effective instruments to fight it .
The Council 's new framework decision on fighting terrorism is certainly a step forward and I welcome its adoption .
I am surprised that the commemoration of 7 years since the New York terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 went unnoticed by the European Parliament .
We should try not to forget the victims of those attacks , and we should have stressed that Transatlantic relations are a priority among the day-to-day tasks of the European Parliament .
Legal clarity of the legal framework for combating terrorism is just as necessary as clarity and determination in this whole regard .
In this sense , the Commission 's concern about the mechanisms , means and methods involved in recruiting terrorists , particularly those who are recruited in European countries - who are often born and bred here - is understandable .
In this area , we need to ensure that police authorities and the State have the necessary means to act , preferably in a preventive way .
Actions aimed at combating this phenomenon that do not involve police or judicial authorities are also relevant .
It is a question of ensuring that , alongside the reaction of the legal system , there is also an alert and attentive political system that can take action , whether by strengthening integration , promoting the voice of the moderate majority , or tackling the marginalisation associated with illegal immigration .
For all these reasons , the political authorities need to be attentive and active .
Whilst it is impossible to prevent all acts of terrorism , it is possible to avoid an environment that promotes , provokes and fuels terrorism .
One of the main aims of the European Union within the framework of a policy for a common area of freedom , security and justice is ensuring the security of its 500 million citizens .
To achieve this , the European Union and its states must face up to modern terrorism .
The most controversial issue in the content of the proposal to revise the Council framework decision on combating terrorism is the demand for the introduction of the concept of public provocation to commit terrorist offences .
There is a very fine line between freedom of speech and breaking the law .
We cannot allow a situation to develop where increasing security causes a restriction of citizens ' rights and freedoms .
For this reason I take the position that it is indispensable to ensure the highest possible legal level for the framework decision under discussion , and this should primarily be done through a tighter definition of the concept of public provocation to commit terrorist offences .
The newly created document must be clear and harmonious from a legal aspect in order to make it an effective instrument in combating terrorism , while at the same time providing a high level of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The attacks in Madrid and London have shown us what an important problem terrorism is for the EU .
The year 2008 reaped an enormous harvest , beginning on 1 February with the attack in Baghdad during a funeral , which caused the deaths of 30 people , and ending on 20 September with the attack on the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad , in which over 60 people died and over 250 were injured .
There have been as many as 49 terrorist attacks in total during 2008 .
For the sake of comparison it is worth adding that this is the same number of attacks that took place between 2002 and 2007 ( inclusive ) .
One of the most effective ways of combating terrorism is to eliminate its causes .
This is why I think that the European Union should apply every effort to combat terrorism on a global scale , with respect for human rights .
The EU should make Europe safer by enabling its citizens to enjoy freedom , security and justice , which must to a large extent depend on the will of the Member States .
I voted against this report out of absolute conviction .
The Roure report demonstrates for the umpteenth time how political correctness is blinding Europe .
It is evident that , in the fight against crime and the fight against terrorism , the government has the right to gather as much data as possible on potential suspects , including ' ethnic ' data .
Even the rapporteur admits this .
However , why should the civil authorities not process data in other fields too - while respecting personal privacy - if this guarantees good governance ?
Why , for example , should the Italian Government not take the fingerprints of illegal immigrants if this is the only means of identifying them ?
The original Council proposal on the matter was sufficiently balanced .
Similarly to the left , taking action against dissidents throughout Europe like a full-blown thought police - as a Fleming I know a thing or two about that - the intention here is to act as a watchdog of civil liberties .
It is too ridiculous for words .
Bearing in mind that this is a case of the Council ' consulting ' the EP , we would like to emphasise that although we have supported amendments put forward by the EP , even though they water down previously adopted positions , we believe that this proposal falls far short of what is needed in the area of ' protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ' .
In addition to other crucial aspects in our negative assessment of this proposal , we highlight the fact that it does not rule out , even though it attaches ( pseudo ) conditions , ' the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs or trade-union membership and the processing of data concerning health or sex life ' , which is unacceptable !
As was pointed out in the debate , it is a proposal based on a lowest common denominator for an issue of such overarching importance as safeguarding the rights , freedoms and guarantees of the citizens of the various Member States , that is below what is laid down in other legal instruments , particularly those of the Council of Europe .
Ensuring the protection of personal data is an urgent and indispensable issue .
It cannot be achieved through a legal instrument that - because of its gaps and flaws - does not guard against the possibility of non-compliance or non-protection .
That is why we abstained .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Roure , which guarantees a high level of data protection with regard to the processing of personal data .
Combating terrorism should not be at the expense of citizens ' fundamental rights , which is why it is imperative to guarantee the protection of personal data .
The Council 's agreement has some deficiencies and therefore cannot guarantee this .
This report remedies the shortfalls and modifies the Council 's agreement to the effect that the use and dissemination of personal data is more strictly regulated .
The report words the proportionality and purpose of data processing more precisely , imposes stricter controls on transfer to third countries , and calls for a group of experts , which is to function as both supervisory authority and performance location .
The lengthy discussion in the European bodies shows the contentiousness and sensitivity of the subject .
Reaching agreement on it is difficult , but should not lead to a superficial result or the watering down of data protection in the EU .
Personal data must always be handled with extreme care and with every possible safeguard .
in writing . - While the measures put forward by the Commission in this Framework Decision fall short of what I would have liked to see , I supported the general principle of setting a minimum level for personal data protection .
The Civil Liberties Committee of Parliament did some good work in improving the proposal , which I hope will be taken on board .
Sinn Féin supports the highest possible level of data protection for citizens and will continue to support any measures which improve the privacy and rights of citizens in this field .
The Council 's proposal can on no account be accepted in its present form .
Its forfeiting of the protection of personal data is unacceptable .
A comprehensive legal framework on personal data is needed to ensure that there is substantial protection and no processing of such data by the state or by individuals , at either international or national level .
The European Parliament 's criticisms and recommendations on the Council proposal are generally a move in the right direction , but they are not enough .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats chose to vote for Amendment 1 to the Report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2007 .
The reason for this is that we think the European Parliament itself should be able to decide on its own seat .
However , we think that , in the interests of our climate and environment and on economic grounds , the European Parliament should only have one seat : in Brussels .
in writing . - The Petitions Committee of the European Parliament performs an invaluable service to the European Union citizens , channelling their concerns to the Commission , questioning national , regional and local authorities on irregularities in the application of EU law , and taking on instances of violations of citizens ' rights .
The sharp increase in the number of petitions received by the European Parliament last year illustrates both the citizens ' growing awareness of how Parliament can serve them and the need for the Committee to be adequately funded and staffed .
No less than 65 petitions concerned Ireland in the year 2007 , and the country has been visited by a Committee fact-finding mission due to the breach of EU Directives concerning water and the environment .
I am convinced of the crucial role of the Petitions Committee as a resort for citizens faced with breaches of rules , as well as a bridge between them and all levels of administration and government within the EU via their elected MEPs .
This report deserved an abstention .
It is a good thing , of course , that European citizens are able to petition the authorities - including their ' European authorities ' - but I regret the federalist undertones of this report .
One example is the completely irrelevant way it extols the Charter of Fundamental Rights chiselled into the Treaty of Lisbon .
Another example is its call for even greater efficiency - read ' interference ' - towards Member States on the part of the Commission .
The way in which this report has been used to argue in favour of one European seat , to be located in Brussels , also disturbs me .
Naturally we are all sick of the waste of money caused by the ' fragmentation ' of the European Parliament , but this one seat could of course just as easily be located in Strasbourg .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report is in fact an activity report from the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
But , since the report refers at several points to the Treaty of Lisbon in glowing terms and in the hope that it will soon be ratified , we have chosen to vote against the report in its entirety .
Our fundamental view is that the Treaty of Lisbon has been rejected , since voters in one Member State and in one referendum said ' no ' to the Treaty .
Yet there are many more Member States in which there is no doubt that a majority of voters would have rejected the Treaty of Lisbon if they had been given the chance .
That ignorance , which the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions shows at various points in its report , is something we cannot endorse .
As regards the question of a single seat for the European Parliament , we back the principle that it is for the Member States together to decide on the seat of the European Parliament , but we also think it reasonable for the European Parliament to express an opinion on the matter .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Mr Hammerstein 's Amendment 1 to his own report .
We have today discovered that next month the European Parliament will once again embark upon its monthly trek to Strasbourg at a cost of billions of euros to the taxpayer .
We must end this travelling circus , and Parliament itself must be at the heart of the debate .
I voted in favour of Mr Hammerstein 's report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year 2007 , as it provides a transparent presentation of the positive effects of this committee 's actions .
The committee itself , chaired by Mr Libicki , has shown through its actions that it is very much needed .
It enables EU citizens to submit petitions concerning breaches of their rights as citizens by public authorities in the Member States .
Rule 191 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure states that ' any citizen of the European Union ... or ... person residing ... in a Member State shall have the right to address , individually or in association with other citizens or persons , a petition to Parliament on a matter which comes within the European Union 's fields of activity and which affects him , her or it directly . '
I consider the provision of the ePetition database to be a significant achievement in the work of this committee .
Thanks to this database it is now possible to gain online access to all documents relating to each petition .
Mention should also be made of the significant rise in the number of petitions submitted electronically .
Last year this amounted to 42 % .
The Committee on Petitions cooperates well with the relevant departments within the European Commission and with the European Ombudsman , and also with the appropriate representatives of the Member States and regional and local authorities , in providing appropriate explanations .
The fact-finding visits by committee representatives are very helpful to its work .
The well-functioning secretariat does a lot to increase the effectiveness of its work .
in writing . - ( LT ) The signatures of more than 1 million EU citizens have been collected in support of the EU-wide citizens ' initiative calling for one permanent seat for the European Parliament .
This gave the people involved the right to submit a petition to the Committee on Petitions to appoint a permanent seat for Parliament .
In my view , the European Parliament 's existing system of working arrangements is inefficient and involves unjustified financial expenses .
Taxpayers ' money is being wasted instead of being put to good use with the aim of creating added value for citizens .
Back in 2005 , during the preparation of the report on the European Parliament 's budget , I suggested that the European Parliament work from a single seat , thus eliminating travel expenses and enabling Parliament to save on financing travel by its Members and staff .
However , in today 's vote I am not supporting the amendment tabled on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance on a permanent seat for the European Parliament in Brussels .
In my opinion , it is not right to presume that Brussels should exclusively be appointed as the permanent seat of the European Parliament .
This is a matter that falls within the competence of the Member States .
in writing . - I welcome the report 's acknowledgement of the rising significance of the Committee on Petitions .
This year has seen a 50 % increase in the number of petitions received compared to 2006 .
I also recognise the rapporteur 's concerns about the length of time taken by the Commission and the Court of Justice to resolve cases referred to the Committee .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I welcome the Hammerstein report on the Petitions committee today .
In particular , I welcome the report 's taking to task of the Irish government on many issues .
The Irish government 's decision to push ahead with the M3 motorway through the heart of one of our most historic national sites is unjustifiable .
The project should be abandoned or re-worked to protect our national monuments .
The campaign must continue in Ireland and Europe to make sure that this happens before it is too late as the government is trying to ensure .
I have voted in favour of the Hammerstein report on the work of the Committee on Petitions .
It supports the work of that committee , which is one of the primary channels of communication between citizens and the European institutions .
The effectiveness of the Committee on Petitions in negotiating and supporting citizens ' causes needs to be improved by strengthening its institutional role and further improving its cooperation with the European Commission , the European Ombudsman and the authorities of the Member States .
in writing . - The failure of Parliament to support Amendment 1 on the issue of the one seat is disappointing .
This is the second Strasbourg part-session which we have had in Brussels , and we have proved that we can meet effectively and vote in Brussels .
We no longer need to hold sessions in Strasbourg .
I encourage colleagues to sign Written Declaration 75 calling on Parliament to meet in Brussels and end Strasbourg sessions .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote against the report , since we are opposed to the introduction of special support for hill and mountain farmers in the form of a dairy cow premium .
Although we welcome a comprehensive strategy for hill and mountain regions , increased support to the dairy sector is not the right way to go .
If the aim is to reduce the share of the common agricultural policy in the EU budget as a whole , transfers from the first to the second pillar are also not appropriate .
The report on the situation and outlook for hill and mountain farming identifies , if only in a piecemeal way , the specific problems faced by farming and stock-rearing in those regions .
Among other things , these are inaccessibility , high transport costs and difficult soil conditions for crops etc .
However , the report does not mention the responsibility of Member States and the EU for the lack of infrastructure , and for the substantial absence of specific measures .
Such measures should be aimed at minimising the natural disadvantages of these regions in producing and marketing agricultural products , and at making good use of comparative benefits .
The EU uses vague wording and empty expressions of good intent .
Whatever measures are taken turn out to be ineffective and fail to halt the depopulation of these regions .
The same unproductive stance is maintained in the report , which tries to whitewash Community policy .
It contains no mention of the steady reduction in EU agricultural funding , the fiscal budgets and the negative impact of the CAP .
On the contrary , the EU is merely repeating the same old measures , which it is trying to adapt to the framework of the forthcoming CAP health check .
An essential pre-condition for improving living conditions , and increasing agricultural income in hill and mountain regions , is the struggle of the farmers themselves against the CAP , and the demand for special funding for hill and mountain regions in a bid to improve infrastructure and support the agricultural production process .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wants to bestow favours on all the special interests it comes across in this sector .
If special provision now needs to be made for hill and mountain farmers , the question arises whether special measures and agreements need to be drawn up to protect agriculture in Norrland .
We are strongly opposed to this report on grounds of principle .
Junilistan notes once again that it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have codecision powers on the EU 's agricultural policy .
If it did , the Union would be caught in a trap of protectionism and costly subsidies to all the various groups involved in agriculture .
The members of the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the European Parliament voted in favour of the Ebner report , one of the reasons being that it gives a good impression of the specific problems of hill and mountain farming .
However , the members of the VVD do not agree with the provisions of the report that anticipate the decision-making procedure in respect of the CAP ' health check ' , particularly the plea for a 20 % national reserve .
in writing . - This report highlights the key role mountainous regions play in terms of the environment , agriculture and even culture and tourism .
Most importantly , it is recognised that these areas are essential for maintaining pockets of biodiversity and the implementation of a forestry strategy .
However , these unique areas can also present significant challenges for people living and working in them , especially in terms of infrastructure , communications and high production costs .
It is for this reason that these areas deserve a coordinated and integrated strategy , much like the approach which relates to the European Union 's coastal regions .
Of course , sheep farming is intricately linked to agriculture in these areas , and it must be recognised that sheep grazing is especially important for their environmental stability .
However , although this industry is currently facing many challenges , the Commission has aggravated the situation with its recent proposal on electronic tagging .
Moreover , although special assistance for sheep farmers is urgently required , unfortunately it does not seem to be forthcoming .
in writing . - I and my British conservative colleagues welcome the focus that this report places on mountain and hill farming , which does need specific measures to ensure that environmentally beneficial farming practices can continue in such regions .
Unfortunately the Ebner report calls for a number of measures using primarily the first pillar , including the introduction of a dairy cow premium for mountain areas and for the upper limit of resources under Article 69 to be raised to 20 % .
We do not favour the introduction of new coupled subsidies within the first pillar .
They are not consistent with the ongoing reforms of agricultural policy and do not offer good value for money for the European taxpayer .
The challenges faced by these regions can best be met through rural development funding in the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
For this reason we will not be supporting this report .
I voted for Mr Ebner 's report because I consider it an important signal from the European Parliament to the mountainous regions of Europe .
I base this on personal experience as I live in a mountainous region in northeast Slovakia , in the foothills of the High Tatras .
I have undertaken a few studies on the attraction of life in mountainous regions .
I thank the rapporteur for incorporating into the report my draft amendments which I submitted to the Committee on Regional Development and which received support when the committee voted .
Mountainous regions can provide quality agricultural produce and more diversity of agricultural products in the European market and there is therefore a need for greater coordination of rural development and structural support for the development of common programmes and maintenance of other activities , such as the exploitation of biomass and agri-tourism , thus increasing the incomes of local people .
Mountainous regions have a constant requirement for sustainable , modernised and multifunctional agriculture .
Sustainable forestry exploitation will make it possible to produce energy using wood residues .
The preservation of certain animal and vegetable species , upholding traditions , ecological activities and tourism will make a contribution to the fight against climate change by protecting biodiversity and capturing CO2 through permanent grassland and forests .
I am convinced that mountainous regions require new means of protecting their territory against flooding with the emphasis on flood prevention , whilst farmers and foresters could support anti-flooding measures by means of the direct area-related payments which they receive under the common agricultural policy .
in writing . - I support this report looking at promoting sustainable development in mountainous regions .
The move to a more market-orientated CAP means that mountainous regions , where agricultural production is less competitive , are not only facing new challenges but also , I believe , new opportunities .
Mountainous regions may not be able to adapt as easily to competitive conditions and may entail extra costs so that they cannot produce very competitive products at low prices , but the focus needs to be on exploiting the resources available , including the beauty of the natural landscape to attract tourists , and exploiting the potential competitive advantage of these regions , including the array of regional and traditional products , the wealth of traditional knowledge and manufacturing procedures , which give their products competitive edge .
I differ from some of my colleagues here in the European Parliament in that I do not believe the solution to the challenges facing mountainous regions is to throw more CAP money at these regions .
Where there are clear public benefits to supporting farming in mountainous regions , such as environmental benefits , I believe that public funding under the rural development pillar would be more appropriate .
Exploiting the potential of mountainous areas is key to their sustainable development , not simply throwing more public money at them .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.00 and resumed at 15.00 . )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system - Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector - The liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of an accident - Port State control ( recast ) - Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Directive recast ) - Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Regulation recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 05719 / 3 / 2008 - C6-0225 / 2008 - for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 59 / EC establishing a Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system ( Rapporteur : Dirk Sterckx ) ,
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 05721 / 5 / 2008 - C6-0226 / 2008 - for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the fundamental principles governing the investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector and amending Directives 1999 / 35 / EC and 2002 / 59 / EC ( Rapporteur : Jaromír Kohlíček ) ,
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 06389 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0227 / 2008 - for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of accidents ( Rapporteur : Paolo Costa ) ,
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 05722 / 3 / 2008 - C6-0224 / 2008 - for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on port State control ( recast ) ( Rapporteur : Dominique Vlasto ) ,
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 05724 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0222 / 2008 - for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations ( recast ) ( Rapporteur : Luis de Grandes Pascual ) , and
the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position ( 05726 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0223 / 2008 - for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations ( recast ) ( Rapporteur : Luis de Grandes Pascual ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , the question we must ask ourselves is whether , nine years after the accident involving the Erika and almost six years after the one involving the Prestige , we are prepared if anything like this should happen again .
This is the real question before us .
Is everything in order ?
Do we have a sufficient number of experts who are independent enough to take decisions ?
Can they work quickly enough ?
Have we finished all the preparations enabling them to call on other specialists or on relief workers to resolve the matter ?
Is the crew properly treated in such a case ?
Is compensation paid out ?
Do we know enough about the ships travelling along our coasts ?
These are the questions we asked after the Erika and also after the Prestige .
At that time , the Commission lost no time in presenting proposals in this regard , and we also put a few things down on paper - which we now need to refine .
We have had a first reading , to which the Council responded in the form of a common position - a particularly disappointing one .
However , to my great satisfaction I must say that , since then , we have held informal talks with the Council - first with the Slovenian Presidency and now , particularly , with the French - that have produced very good results .
As regards the competent authority , we are almost there .
We have a good text down on paper that I would at all events advocate to my fellow Members .
There is an authority that is involved in planning , is permanent in nature , has the necessary expertise and can take independent decisions to improve the accommodation of ships .
We have also made progress in the field of vessel monitoring , not only by means of ordinary radar , but also by satellite .
We have more detailed information on the cargo and know who is responsible for providing this information .
Monitoring also applies to fishing vessels , so that the safety of small vessels can also be increased .
We have worked out the measures to be taken in the presence of ice .
We have made progress , therefore , but we are still not completely finished .
What remains to be resolved ?
The tendency to regard crews as criminals , compensation in the event of financial losses for ports , and compulsory notification for bunker fuel .
After all , small quantities of this highly polluting fuel can sometimes do very great damage to the environment - as was the case , for example , with the Tricolor accident off the Belgian / French coast , where 180 tonnes of fuel , although a very small amount , caused fairly considerable damage .
President-in-Office , I should like to express my appreciation for the work that we - Parliament and the Council - have managed to do together in connection with my report , and I wish to encourage Parliament and the Council to continue in that vein .
This brings me to the two texts on which we have no common position .
As rapporteur for one of the texts , I would urge the Council to adopt a decision on the two missing texts , too .
I know that the President-in-Office is working hard on this , but the two issues of the financial responsibility of shipowners and the task of flag states are regarded by Parliament as an essential component in order to reinforce maritime safety .
The International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea ( ' HNS ' Convention ) , for example , must be ratified by all Member States if a proper system for the accommodation of ships is to be developed for the various Member States and for the Union .
Parliament urges the President-in-Office to do everything possible to ensure that the Council adopts a decision on these two texts , too .
If it does not , we shall have a very serious problem ; the likelihood is that Parliament will regard everything we have achieved , however much I value it , as unsatisfactory .
I would ask the President-in-Office to keep up the good work , therefore .
Parliament - this rapporteur , in any case - is behind him .
Let us continue to work to achieve the best possible result for maritime safety .
I do not see Mr Kohlíček in his seat .
We will move on to the other rapporteurs , and if he arrives in time we will give him the floor .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we were in this Chamber in April 2007 for the first reading .
Now it is September 2008 , and I do not think that the time has passed in vain .
There have been many developments , many advances have been made , and I remain confident that we will be able to go the last mile that we still have to travel for the completion of a major task , that of giving all European citizens , and non-Europeans too , in fact all those who sail on Europe 's seas , safety conditions that are certainly better than the existing ones .
I would like to call to mind not only the Erika or the Prestige , as mentioned by Mr Sterckx , but - and this is the task that I have set myself for my report on the sector - I would also like to say that we must avoid tragedies such as that of the Princess of the Stars , with 800 deaths in the Philippines , as well as the ' mere ' 4 deaths recorded in the collision between a container ship and a hydrofoil on the Strait of Messina or again the ' mere ' 2 deaths a few days ago among those on La Besogne , which hit a bateau mouche in Paris .
To sum up , there are risks on all waters , and we need to take action on all waters .
The direction is very simple , though : it seems to me that we cannot put ourselves in the position of regretting not having taken the decisions required in the face of accidents that recur .
I would like to make the point again - these decisions relate not only to the protection of the environment , shores and seas , such as Erika and Prestige , but also to the protection of human lives such as in the serious accidents that have , through luck , up until now taken place on seas far from us - recently - as well as those incidents that seem smaller .
I gave just two examples : one on the Strait of Messina and the other on the River Seine a few days ago .
My report also contains a strategy , which I believe we should all adopt : making the best use of all European competences in terms of environmental protection and consumer protection .
In this case , that means protection of lives , of individuals , and protection of safety and security to improve on the current situation .
We need to be careful , however : we need to use the competences that the Treaty allows without any absolute transfer of further sovereignty , and without taking away any area from the Member States that , as we believe , and as we want to believe , fully share this objective .
From this viewpoint , then , I think that we ought to continue to work in the area to which my report relates to find mechanisms whose scope can be extended in ways that nobody can reject , and to find gradual methods of implementation over a reasonable period that will allow everyone to adapt over time , without demanding that things should happen overnight .
On the limitation of liability , we need to find a way to combine certainty on the part of the shipowner regarding the liability it is assuming and the amount of damages that it might incur , with certainty on the part of potential victims that they will receive compensation .
We therefore need to come up with some solutions that take up the option of moving around the upper or lower limits - which are currently fixed - that we want to or will be able to impose .
We need to ensure that better information is given to those who travel on our vessels and we need to make it possible for action to be taken immediately when accidents happen , including through advance payments in limited , appropriate cases , which can be verified .
I believe that on these issues we can find an agreement very easily ; we can find a way to respond to those points that still remain and close the dossier .
The fundamental point remains , however : we must not permit ourselves to tackle just one point , but we need to close the issue and to be able to say to European citizens that we are working on all fronts and in all sectors .
I will not repeat the issue relating to the two - let us say - reports that are missing , the two provisions that are missing .
I would like to tell the French Presidency that it has made an enormous effort and I am sure it will continue to do so .
Personally speaking , and as regards Parliament , I can assure you that in any case we will work every day , at all times , from now until 31 December this year , to ensure that the dossier can be closed under this presidency and that it can be closed in the best way possible for all those who are watching us .
I am convinced that in the end we will all be able to feel proud of having made progress on maritime security in Europe , with nobody feeling - how shall I put it ? - that they are losing any responsibility that they want to exercise directly .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to begin , may I just remind you all here that maritime safety must remain a priority on the European political agenda .
We cannot wait for another major accident to happen at sea to make us realise that maritime safety is a priority for us as political leaders , and also for the population , which will no longer put up with seeing its coasts polluted , not to mention the fact that these accidents constitute an environmental catastrophe and cause financial disasters .
The first reading in Parliament was in April 2007 .
It has taken the Council more than a year to advise us of its Common Positions and this has only been on five of the seven texts in the package .
I must admit that I find this quite difficult to accept .
It can , of course , happen that some issues raise major problems and it can be difficult to reach agreement .
At least we agree on the package of legislation , which is indeed complicated , but I see few valid reasons to prevent agreement on technical yet concrete texts that actually form a very coherent whole .
As I recall , a year ago we were all very happy - even pleased with ourselves .
Clearly , along with my fellow Members , I would like to know why it has taken the Council so long to look at this dossier , and I would also like the Council to tell us what prevented it from reaching agreement on two important proposals , namely shipowners ' civil liability and flag state obligations , particularly because the flag state text is the natural complement to my report on port state control .
In view of this , it is quite easy to see how the interaction of one text with the other texts fully justifies this ' package ' approach and the need for agreement on all of them .
I may sound a bit harsh , but I want to know what is going on .
However , I applaud the genuine efforts made by the French Presidency of the EU , which has tried to resolve the blockage and revive discussions on the two proposals currently missing : those of the Savary and Fernandez reports .
It has not been a lack of progress on each of our texts or individual difficulties with each proposal that have prevented us from reaching agreement with the Council , but the fact that two proposals are not in the package at the moment , which obviously presents a problem for all the rapporteurs .
Personally , I believe we will soon come to an agreement on each of the proposals , because we will have to , even if the conciliation procedure is used .
Anyway , I know that the French Presidency is working on it and I hope it will succeed .
I am not particularly concerned for my report on port state control because I know that at the end of our informal trialogue many problems were resolved .
Apart from various differences in formulation , three major differences with the Council remain , for which my preference was to reinstate Parliament 's First Reading position .
The first point was the application of the Directive to anchorages , which is a key issue for maritime safety .
We must include anchorages in this text .
I believe we are sending the message of a firm and consistent policy .
Ships that are not up to standard must not be able to escape inspection , regardless of their shipping route and where they are calling in European waters .
The second point concerns the application of permanent bans .
Once again , I believe this is a measure that should be kept as a deterrent for bad behaviour .
This measure should , in fact , be used only rarely because there should be few vessels that meet its conditions of application , but it must exist for vessels that are not up to standard so that these vessels are not likely to present new problems and leave a feeling of impunity .
The third point concerns the flexibility measures for the application of the inspection system .
At First Reading we chose flexibility mechanisms based on specific circumstances ; for example , inspections missed because bad weather prevents inspections from being carried out , or where safety conditions are not met .
The possibility was included of postponing the inspection of a vessel from one Community port to the next .
The Council wants more .
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , Mr Bussereau , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are returning once again to the debate that we brought to a close at first reading a year and a half ago .
We are doing so with more reasons than we had then to be pleased with the results achieved , which were the fruit of the cooperation and consensus that exists in this House on such a sensitive issue for the public as safety on our seas .
However , I regret that our pleasure is not complete or as we had hoped , as despite the fact that we have all learned lessons from the past , with the tragic examples of the Erika and Prestige disasters , which are still very recent in our eyes , and despite the need to act now and not wait for the consensus that always follows disasters , the attitude of the Council has unfortunately prevented us from being able to bring the matter to a close today with the adoption of the eight proposals that make up ' the third package ' on maritime safety .
This does not prevent me from recognising and expressing thanks for the will of the French Presidency , as it has taken the baton from the Portuguese and Slovenian presidencies , and has set the right pace in the Council , with the sound intention of reaching an agreement on a package of proposals that should be treated as a whole , as we all agree , because there are overlaps between them , and all those in the maritime transport chain are involved .
There is therefore no room for discussing , as unfortunately many , or at least some governments think , whether any of these proposals are unnecessary or inappropriate .
Each and every one of them is essential .
Based on this , I call on the Council not to let slip away a precious opportunity for us to conclude this matter in conciliation , which some of us will come to with our homework almost done , as the informal trialogues that have been held so far , and the complete consensus that exists with all the shadow rapporteurs , have produced very satisfactory results and could provide a good basis for the final agreement .
Having said this , ladies and gentlemen , there is still an issue that concerns me greatly , which I would like to mention , as it concerns an essential aspect of the package , in our opinion .
I am referring to the independence of the organisations and authorities created specifically for the purpose of adopting the best possible decisions in the shortest possible time .
In this respect , I am specifically talking about the independent authority to be created to make what is always a difficult decision : to accommodate a vessel in distress in a place of refuge .
Ladies and gentlemen , there would be no point in creating an authority that is independent from the influences of political power if it is not provided with the necessary resources and decision-making capacities , but what is even more serious is to invest it with powers if , when the moment of truth comes , it is only left with one option : compulsory accommodation of the vessel , even if it does not have insurance or guarantees .
That being the case , the entire burden will fall on the Member State concerned , which will end up being the victim of the ecological and social damage that may be caused by accommodating a vessel in a place of refuge , as well as having to cover that damage .
So I say yes to creating this authority , but it should be given powers , and a vessel in distress should be accommodated only if the prior assessment of the situation leads to the conclusion that this is the best decision , and the risks are contained .
I must tell you that I am not alone in this battle , as the European association that represents all of our ports has also protested greatly about this .
Having said this , I thank Mr Sterckx for his persistence in this difficult undertaking , in which he has had to fight a battle .
I particularly welcome the progress made with the ship monitoring tools , which are essential for reducing risk situations .
As far as the differences are concerned , there will be time in conciliation , and we will make every effort to reach compromises ; I have no doubt that we will reach them .
Finally I will move on to my report .
Having been examined by the Council , what was previously only a proposal for a directive has been split into two legal instruments , a proposal for a regulation and a proposal for a directive , and the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism felt that this was the right thing to do .
Our view of the common position is therefore positive , as it largely accepts the line advocated by Parliament : being able to strengthen the monitoring mechanisms for recognised organisations through the creation of an assessment committee of an independent nature with permanent powers and which acts autonomously ; achieving a more flexible , fair penalty system , which is ultimately more effective , as it punishes those who do not act as they should , but does so based on the seriousness of the violation committed and the economic capacity of the organisation ; finally , having managed to make progress on the very thorny issue of the recognition of class certificates , setting out the conditions under which the recognised organisations will have to recognise each other , without putting maritime safety at risk , and using the most demanding rules as a reference point .
In any event , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that there is a solid basis for a final agreement , and that together we will find a sound solution for all the people of Europe .
rapporteur . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in all sectors of transport there has long been careful investigation of the causes of serious transport accidents .
Individual Member States view such investigations and the determination of technical causes as an essential component of accident reduction .
The only exception up to now has been maritime transport .
There are of course some framework regulations , but maritime transport and shipping are far more complex than other types of transport when it comes to establishing which state is to be responsible for investigating the causes of accidents .
A ship owner need not be the operator of the ship and the two of them may come from different states .
The seafarers may be multiethnic and multinational .
Passengers may also be of different nationalities .
The same goes for the cargo and for the client commissioning the voyage .
A ship sails from a port in the territorial waters of one state to another , on the way passing through the territorial waters of other states or international waters .
As if this were not complex enough , some states have subordinated the investigative bodies we are calling for to different state organisations .
They are therefore not even organisationally independent .
The investigation of accidents in the field of maritime transport has been discussed with shadow rapporteurs and with the Presidency .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism decided that it is desirable to retain the basic outlines of the draft directive .
This involves standardised investigations in accordance with a common methodology , whereby deadlines for determining which state is going to conduct an investigation and for the submission of a final report must be laid down .
It is of course open to discussion as to what classes of accidents are to be compulsorily investigated in accordance with the methodology adopted and as to how precisely the organisational independence of the investigative body is to be defined .
During discussion of the materials , we reached agreement that the conclusions of a technical investigation may be used for further , for example criminal , investigations .
The details of a technical investigation must , however , remain confidential .
It was also clarified in committee that it is not possible to ignore the provisions requiring fair treatment of seafarers on ships which have been involved in maritime accidents , unless this is prevented by the inclusion of such provisions in other regulations .
There is also agreement that the independent investigative body must comprise experts from several countries and that individual states may reach mutual agreement on representation in the investigation of maritime accidents .
I should like to emphasise that one of the main aims of the maritime package under consideration is to strengthen the responsibility of the flag state .
It is therefore appropriate that the proposed wording relating to the rapid notification of technical shortcomings identified should remain part of the directive , as should specification of the ships to which the directive relates .
I do not think it would be a good idea , following the experiences with tanker accidents on the Spanish coast , for it still to be possible for several technical investigative bodies to be able to work in parallel .
If the European Commission does not feel itself to be sufficiently competent to decide on the conduct of investigations , then the only option is for such decisions to be taken in the European Council .
I certainly consider the launch of several parallel technical investigations to be a poor solution .
The still incomplete investigation into the accident involving the tanker Prestige shows where such a buck-passing dispersal of responsibility for an investigation leads .
It is right that the whole maritime package should be discussed at the same time , thus avoiding differences in the definitions of individual concepts in the various component directives and thus enhancing the clarity of the resultant materials .
I believe that , even with the directive on maritime disasters , we can reach a sensible compromise which will be practicable and will make a contribution to a reduction in the likelihood of occurrence of further maritime disasters and perhaps to a thorough re-examination , including of the technical aspects .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow you will vote on the third maritime safety package .
As you know , the maritime economy provides jobs for approximately 3 million people , making it a key sector for the European Union .
There were seven legislative proposals in the package sent through by the Commission in early 2006 .
They aimed to introduce measures for preventing accidents at sea and to establish measures to be taken following accidents - that is , to analyse the causes and compensate any victims .
The priority of the package is ensuring the safety and quality of shipping , while respecting the environment , as well as improving the competitiveness of the European maritime sector .
The Council , Parliament and the Commission all support the objective of promoting maritime safety .
At the Copenhagen European Council in 2002 , the Council welcomed efforts to improve maritime safety and recalled the European Union 's determination to ' take all necessary measures to avoid a repetition of similar catastrophes ' to the Erika accident .
The Council can also have no qualms about accepting many of the demands expressed by Parliament in its resolution of 27 April 2004 .
However , there are still some differences over the third maritime package , and these will require further consultation between the parties .
Since the package was presented by the Commission , through the work of several presidencies - most recently the Slovenian Presidency - the Council has adopted six Common Positions on the following proposals : investigation of accidents , classification societies , port state control , traffic monitoring , and the Athens Convention , all while taking account of European Parliament opinions such as those adopted in April last year .
Since the start of its term of office , the French Presidency has been making a major effort to reach agreement in Parliament at Second Reading on these six texts , for which the Common Positions were communicated by the Council in June 2008 .
During informal contacts with the rapporteurs during the summer months by the President of Coreper , real progress was made on each dossier , the purpose of which was to reach rapid agreement on these texts .
In a recent letter , Mr Costa , you described this as ' substantial progress ' .
Furthermore , as you know , in accordance with the commitments I made last April , the Presidency has energetically and enthusiastically revived discussions in the Council on the last two texts on civil liability and flag state obligations .
This revival was very necessary for maritime safety and , Commissioner , also came in response to constant requests from your Commission .
You know this item was put on the agenda by the Presidency at the informal meeting in La Rochelle , to which I had invited the European Parliament representatives Mr Costa and Mr Savary , who were kind enough to attend .
You know we are currently continuing with the technical aspects of the work so the Transport Council can look at it at its next meeting , planned for 9 October .
Let me be frank with you : in view of the momentum this has triggered , I would have hoped we might avoid going to conciliation .
Nevertheless , here we are .
We must now make sure we do not lose the momentum , and above all we must not give the impression that all this progress and effort has been in vain , because this would send a poor message to the public .
For this reason , in parallel with the work going on in the Council on the last two texts , the Presidency is still happy to maintain informal contact with each of the rapporteurs on the first six texts in order to reach agreement on the content .
I particularly wanted to share this analysis with you , and I will tell the Council about it at its meeting on 9 October , when we will be looking at the last two texts .
The Council will decide what its position is regarding conciliation on the first six texts .
Mr President , I really hope that Parliament , the Council and the Commission can find a way forward for close cooperation on these dossiers .
I think we have very nearly reached a final agreement , something we are all longing for .
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and thank you in particular to my colleague .
After so many years of being an MEP , I am pleased to be here in the Chamber .
Mr President , Mr Bussereau , ladies and gentlemen , how could I not share the concerns and aims that have emerged from the outset of the debate on this maritime package ?
Our concern and the concern of Parliament , which represents the peoples of Europe , is to provide guarantees or to seek to provide guarantees to European citizens that tragic events such as those we have unfortunately had to witness a few kilometres from the coasts of Europe do not recur .
There have been accidents such as the more recent one , although it was less serious , in the port of Tarragona , that confirm that our undertaking is right , that confirm that we need to give answers to citizens .
Of course , it is impossible to prevent accidents from happening , but we must certainly do all we can to prevent them , through legislation , and through political action .
How can we do this ?
Firstly , we can do so by making life more difficult for unscrupulous operators , with more rigorous , systematic checks in all EU ports and also with more effective provisions regarding the taking in of a vessel in danger to a place of refuge , and finally through more rigorous control of the organisations authorised to inspect vessels and issue security certificates on behalf of the Member States .
In brief , we need to improve the way in which we tackle the consequences of accidents , obtaining fair compensation for passengers or their families or for the maritime community , and learning more thorough lessons from the investigations that take place after accidents .
This is one of the important issues - understanding what happened in order to prevent it happening again .
It is these various aspects that you will have to deal with , once the Council has decided on five of the seven proposals in the third maritime safety package .
As we know , the Transport Council last April was not able to consider the proposals relating to the obligations of flag States or the civil liability of shipowners .
We should not underestimate the difficulties expressed by the Member States , which also emerged during the course of the informal Council meeting in La Rochelle - concern about a transfer of competences to the European Union for subjects covered by international conventions and the fear of an increase in the administrative burden of checks .
We sought during the Council meeting in La Rochelle - at which Mr Costa was present - and by ' we ' I mean the Commission and the President , as well as the French Presidency , which I thank for the work it has done in coordination with the Commission to try to get the whole package adopted speedily , without abandoning two legislative texts that we all consider to be very important , as Mr Bussereau stressed .

I really must warmly thank the French Presidency for the action it has taken , its attempt to mediate , and its wish to involve Parliament in what is a very delicate and also very difficult legislative decision .
Certainly , I cannot say that I am satisfied with the situation as it is today .
There are two issues that are at risk of being put to one side , and they are of extraordinary importance .
The Commission wants the whole package to be adopted , and we will work and persist in attempts to reach an agreement .
Europe cannot permit itself to fail to give concrete answers to its citizens ; we must have an aim that is simple but binding : that all vessels flying flags of Member States are fully compliant .
Our concern must be to guarantee , in addition , that the victims of maritime accidents receive adequate , uniform compensation throughout the European Union .
In La Rochelle , we tried to set out on a path that will lead to an agreement between Parliament and the Council .
We are working with the French Presidency , seeking to put forward texts that will receive a positive verdict from the Council and at the same time a positive verdict from Parliament .
Yesterday , I met the Federal Republic of Germany 's transport minister , and urged that Germany should also play its part ; what I am trying to do with all the Member States , in the meetings that I have , is to try to take a step forward by supporting the mediation activity that the French Presidency , together with the European Commission , is attempting .
I understand perfectly that meanwhile Parliament wants to insert into the texts at second reading amendments designed to incorporate the substance of the two proposals that have remained pending .
I back these amendments .
As for the dossiers that are being officially examined , I know that significant progress has been made in bringing the viewpoints of Parliament and the Council closer together and even though it has not been possible to translate this progress into compromise amendments , I am convinced that the rest of the procedure will be considerably facilitated by this progress .
Naturally , I will be able to talk about these issues and the amendments envisaged after having heard what you have to say .

I believe , however , that it is still possible for us to reach an agreement ; it would be wrong to say that negotiations are easy , because they will be complex , but I believe that there is still room to attain an objective perhaps even before conciliation ; certainly we cannot give up until we have made every effort to achieve the objective of the adoption of all the texts that make up the maritime safety package .
Representatives of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , you can count on the active commitment of the European Commission , all the managers and officials in the Cabinet and the Directorate-General that I have the honour of leading and my staff , in order to seek to achieve the objective of a specific answer for all the citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I am pleased to note the common ground - there is actually a great deal - that has emerged in the debate so far .
Our French Council representative , our friend , has said he is of the opinion that we shall still be able to reach agreement by the end of the year .
Yes indeed , let us reach that agreement !
I should also like to thank the Vice-Presidents for the support of the Commission during the discussions between the rapporteurs and the French Council Presidency .
President-in-Office , we wish to acknowledge that you and your colleagues have already made great progress in the individual discussions on the six dossiers .
We are very much on the right track but - and I also say this to you to support your reluctant colleagues in the Council - there is either one package or no package .
I therefore hope that you will make progress in the two dossiers that are still unresolved at the next Transport , Telecommunications and Energy Council meeting on 9 November .
These are not unimportant dossiers .
I do not wish to delve into the details of the civil liability of shipowners , but I do consider it particularly important in the case of the flag States .
It is evident , however , that , despite all their professions to have maritime safety and the safety of seafarers , of passengers and of coastal waters in mind at all times , Member States are shying away from ratifying and implementing very specific obligations or even just the IMO resolutions on maritime protection .
If we want these flag State obligations to become established , if we - Parliament and the Commission - want to be able to put pressure on the Member States - in court if necessary - to fulfil their obligations under the IMO Convention on maritime protection and the protection of coastal populations , the Member States recoil .
Although there are good people who fulfil their flag State obligations , there are some who are very reluctant to comply with the inspection by Parliament and the Commission to ensure they are fulfilling their flag State obligations .
This is unacceptable .
We had the disasters of the Prestige and the Erika , and my fellow Members have also pointed out the disasters of recent times .
We are beholden to people and to the natural environment to ensure that flag States , in particular , fulfil their obligations .
It is bizarre .
In Mrs Vlasto 's sound report , we talk about port State control , which , in theory , is our way of checking the safety of third-country ships anchoring at our shores .
We therefore inspect ships from third countries , but the Member States fear being subjected to the obligation to be checked to ensure they as flag States are fulfilling their duties with regard to ships ' safety .
This is unacceptable .
In this respect , I should like to encourage the President-in-Office effectively to win the majority over on 9 October .
I say ' majority ' , President-in-Office , because it could be , if I am not completely wrong , that majority decisions are possible in the transport dossier .
You may perhaps have to break through the esprit de corps in the Council - if an individual is reluctant , the others will not push him - because this concerns the safety of the natural environment and people and we shall have to reach a majority decision if need be .
I appeal to you to carry on .
We are proud of you - you have fought well in the Council to date .
Please pass on the following message to the Council : we are behind you , and we are ready and willing to achieve good results together with the French Presidency .
However , some do need to budge - including the German Government .
Let us all fight together on this !
Welcome
Before moving on to the next speaker I would like to inform Members that Mr Bronislaw Komorowski , President of the Polish Parliament , is in the official gallery , accompanied by a delegation .
( Applause )
Mr Komorowski has responded to an invitation from our President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , and a moment ago they both opened the photographic exhibition with which we are recalling the career in pursuit of freedom of our dear , much admired friend and colleague , Bronislaw Geremek , who is no longer with us .
Mr Komorowski , we warmly welcome you to this your home , the European Parliament .
Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system - Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector - The liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of an accident - Port State control ( recast ) - Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Directive recast ) - Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Regulation recast ) ( continuation of debate )
Mr President , since I became a shadow rapporteur when the Council swept away my report , I have only two minutes to speak .
I will therefore cut to the chase , firstly to say that I am not addressing the French Presidency , which is supporting us , or the Commissioner , who is supporting us , but the Council .
I am also addressing my fellow Members to thank them for their solidarity , and to say that the Erika and the Prestige were very bad experiences .
The Member States have accused Europe of not doing enough about them .
Now , thanks to Commissioner Barrot , we are attempting to establish , from scratch , an honourable European maritime transport space .
One of the measures we are proposing is shipowners ' civil liability .
What does that mean ?
It means that , at the very least , we are ensuring that all vessels are insured by solvent insurance companies for the damage they cause , at least within the framework of the IMO conventions .
In La Rochelle I was pleased to see Member States who had not joined the IMO suddenly becoming ardent fans of the organisation .
My advice to them is to ratify the IMO conventions , starting with the one on chemicals .
There could be a chemical hazard , a chemical disaster , today , or tomorrow morning .
We would be transported back to the time of the Exxon Valdez .
Practically no Member States have made a legal commitment as regards chemical hazards with the IMO .
That is the first thing .
The second is to create a guarantee and insurance certificate for the European maritime transport space .
We need to have confidence in Europe .
When it forges ahead , it takes the world with it .
We have seen this particularly with the airlines blacklist .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was recently at a symposium looking at whether the Erika was still possible .
Indeed it is , and it was so in the Black Sea on 11 November 2007 , when five vessels sank in the Strait of Kerch with worthless insurance policies .
I genuinely believe we need to sort this out , and that is why I think , President-in-Office , that Parliament 's resistance is not a question of pride .
It is a question of public health and public interest .
We will never accept the blame here for Member States ' negligence if they fail to do their bit .
I am counting on you .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I share the other rapporteurs ' hope that we are close to adopting this important legislation .
I think it strange that it should take the Council so long to come up with a common position on the seven directives that are intended to prevent maritime pollution disasters and also to reinforce preparedness for when things go wrong .
It is regrettable that we have failed for so long with regard to the two directives on the obligations of flag States and the liability of rescue workers .
In my opinion , this too must be included in the overall package .
Several others have said , and I agree , that the French Presidency is making wholehearted efforts to seek a solution , for which I should like to thank the Presidency on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Let us hope that these efforts will be crowned with success .
We all agree , of course , that shipping is a global industry , and so the legislation we adopt must be compatible with the international maritime agreements under the auspices of the IMO and under the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control .
Parliament has supported this all along .
The third maritime safety package is intended to make coffin ships a thing of the past in European waters .
There must be better traffic monitoring , better quality control of ships and better exchange of experience on what constitutes an incident risk .
The issue of ports of refuge has been a bone of contention between Parliament and the Council .
In fact , I myself live near a port that has been designated a port of refuge , and I must give my clear support to Parliament 's requirement that ports of refuge must be protected from an unpleasant additional bill in the event that a ship leaking oil is towed into port .
It is important to ensure that it is not small local communities who are left with the financial burden of any subsequent clean-up operation .
I should like to highlight in particular two directives for which I have been the rapporteur for my group , namely the Directive on port State control and the Directive on the investigation of accidents .
With regard to the Directive on port State control , a consensus is emerging on the principles proposed by the Commission , namely that all ships must be inspected , and that ships in poor condition must be inspected extra thoroughly .
Port State control must meet a suitable standard in order to render controls more uniform in all EU ports .
There are still some sticking points , however .
The Council has not accepted the inspection of ships at anchor , nor is its stance as firm as Parliament 's on refusal of access for the very worst ships .
The ALDE Group fully supports the position of the rapporteur , Mrs Vlasto , and thus backs the reintroduction of a number of first reading proposals .
There are also a few points on which Parliament and the Council still disagree regarding the Directive on the investigation of accidents .
Incident investigations and the communication of their results should ensure that accidents are not repeated .
We have to learn from the accidents that do take place , and as many people as possible must learn from each other 's experiences .
As in aviation , it must be ensured that all parties involved provide as open and honest an account of the course of the accident as possible .
A witness statement to the investigative inquiry must not be used in direct connection with any charge made as , in such cases , the accused must be granted proper rights during questioning .
It is a difficult balance to strike , and there are some suggestions from Parliament 's first proposal that the Council has not accepted , which we are therefore reintroducing .
The main bone of contention , however , is the issue of which types of incident should be covered .
The Council wishes to include only the most serious accidents , but it may well be equally valuable to learn from minor accidents , indeed even near-misses .
In addition , the Council actually wants to give equivalent status to parallel investigations carried out by several countries , whereas we want some clarity regarding which investigation is considered the official one .
It must be avoided at all costs that an accident investigation is politicised and the authorities seek to disclaim responsibility and influence the outcome of the investigations .
The ALDE Group thus wholeheartedly supports Mr Kohlíček 's proposal to reintroduce the first reading proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to express my appreciation to all the rapporteurs on this package for the fact that they are maintaining a consistent approach on this extremely important maritime legislation .
At the same time , I would like to express my group 's fears regarding two points in Mrs Vlasto 's report on port State control .
Firstly , it seems to us that , in relation to small States with small fleets , recital 13 was much better expressed in the common position than in the current version drafted by Parliament 's committee .
The original version said that Member States should endeavour to review the method of drawing up the white , grey and black lists of flag States in the framework of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding , in order to ensure its fairness , in particular with respect to States with small fleets .
To be precise , if a merely mathematical approach is taken , then it is very difficult for a State with a small fleet of just a few ships that is included in the grey area of all these lists to be removed from that area ; what reason do the ships have to become part of the grey list fleet if , in that event , they cannot improve the mathematical proportion ?
I think that the Council common position had a very much more balanced approach towards EU Member States with small fleets .
The same also applies in relation to the indefinite refusal of access , where there should have been a distinction between States on the grey list and States on the black list .
The second point is that I believe that the Council common position also took a more balanced view of the possibility of having exceptions , when inspections need not be carried out , particularly if these take place at night , in a short period of time , and also very far from the shore ; in such a case it is not possible to carry out high-quality inspections in States in which there are severe winters and northern seas .
I therefore call upon you in this instance to support the position adopted in the Council common position on this issue .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the catastrophes associated with the names Estonia , Erika and Prestige have shocked Europe .
The EU must therefore make improvements to maritime safety quickly , efficiently and credibly .
Many seafarers and passengers have lost their lives in the past because the safety regulations and measures were not adequate .
Furthermore , accidents such as these have caused dire environmental catastrophes on the coasts of the Atlantic , Mediterranean and Black Sea .
The ecological damage has been enormous and taxpayers have had to bear the cost , not the polluters .
The European Union 's intention to adopt the necessary Europe-wide and cross-border binding legislation must not be delayed by national interests .
The Council , in particular , should keep this at the back of its mind during the negotiations now pending , as its refusal in particular to instruct independent authorities , with all their expertise in accidents involving ships , to investigate such accidents , is totally incomprehensible .
What is the rule for catastrophes involving aircraft should not be impossible for accidents involving ships .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance welcomes all seven Commission legislative proposals , and we therefore support the rapporteurs ' recommendations on the five common positions , including the split and separate votes on the recommendations of the Costa report concerning inland waterway transport .
This also applies to the Sterckx report concerning ports of refuge .
The specific measures such as ports of refuge , transparency and liability are very important to us .
It is essential for maritime safety that we retain the maritime package as a whole .
We call on the Transport , Telecommunications and Energy Council to adopt a common position quickly within the next few weeks on the two open-ended subjects of shipowners ' liability and port State obligations , in order that the package can finally be adopted as a whole .
The fact that those very Member States want to block European agreements by referring to international IMO regulations who have not yet transposed these into national law themselves is sheer lunacy .
A decision must be taken in the EU before the next shipping catastrophe rocks Europe .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , in shipping , entrepreneurial freedom can lead to dangerous abuses .
Entrepreneurs wanting to keep their costs as low as possible can be tempted to operate ships that are old and dangerous .
These present a danger to the crew and others and a potentially serious threat to the environment .
Poor working conditions , as enabled by opting to register under a flag other than that of the owner 's own country and the real operating base , also lead to abuses .
The operating costs can also be reduced by discarding ship-generated waste and cargo residues into the sea along the way .
To tackle all these abuses it must be possible to ban the ships of malicious entrepreneurs definitively from European ports , and also from anchorages outside ports , and a sufficient number of inspections must be carried out to determine what is wrong .
There must be strict compliance with the port State obligations contained in the International Labour Organization 's Maritime Labour Convention , the ' polluter pays ' principle must hold and all the rules must also apply at night .
All attempts by the Council to treat such entrepreneurs more leniently than Parliament wanted at first reading would have unacceptable consequences .
The Council has rejected the vast majority of Parliament 's 23 amendments with regard to the investigation of shipping accidents , which could jeopardise the independence of investigations .
The Council has applied the brakes in the case of the protection of passengers on board ships , too , having refused to comply with the Athens Convention in 2003 .
The common position of June 2008 restricted liability and the obligation to inform .
The Council does not support the proposals of the Commission and Parliament in the area of disasters at sea , which aim to ensure that ships in distress are always accommodated in a port of refuge in time and that crews are protected from punishment for negligence for which they are not responsible .
All dangerous situations and abuses in shipping must be eliminated as quickly as possible .
For this reason , it is important that Parliament stick to the line taken previously towards the Council at second reading too .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , today is the second time we have discussed the Erika III package in plenary .
Although it is a shame that we are lacking two proposals , I am pleased with the contents of the package in its present form , and I am grateful to the rapporteurs for their work .
There is one part of the package with which I am not satisfied , however .
Two sections have found their way into the Costa report on the liability of carriers of passengers that ensure that the same level of liability is imposed on carriers of passengers by inland waterway as is imposed on carriers of passengers on the high seas .
This is wholly undesirable .
Firstly , there is no need .
There are hardly any known cases of accidents involving the transport of passengers by inland waterway .
Besides , these two sections would sound the death knell for a large number of carriers of passengers by inland waterway , as they would be unable to afford the associated exorbitant insurance premiums , assuming anyone would insure them given a level of liability such as this .
After all , we are talking about smaller undertakings that transport at the most tens of passengers and whose turnovers are not so huge .
It strikes me as abundantly clear and logical that the same level of liability should not be imposed on such carriers as is imposed on large carriers of thousands of passengers by sea .
We must not make ourselves a laughing stock by imposing a sky-high , extremely expensive level of liability on carriers of passengers by inland waterway .
In addition , I am still extremely unhappy about how these sections have once more found their way into the text .
The Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism should never have declared the amendments concerned admissible , as there was already agreement on this matter at first reading between the Council and Parliament .
For these reasons , I have requested roll-call votes on sections 9 and 20 .
I hope and anticipate that many of my fellow Members will back me up in rejecting these sections .
( EL ) Madam President , let me mention the Sterckx report on vessel traffic monitoring and congratulate both Mr Sterckx himself and the Council Presidency on the good progress made in consultations .
At this second reading , the most important point for me is the provision made for vessels in distress to be accepted at designated ports of refuge .
Many accidents causing environmental disasters could have ended very differently had suitable refuge been offered at the right moment .
In order to reach agreement with the Council , there was , on the one hand , a need for an independent committee to take decisions on places of refuge .
On the other hand , it was necessary to agree on a satisfactory system of compensation for ports of refuge in the event of any consequences .
A balanced agreement here is a self-evident requirement .
There has also been a favourable development as regards the Automatic Identification System ( AIS ) within the scope of the SafeSeaNet .
To conclude , let me repeat here that shipping in some Member States contributes substantially to GDP .
As an industry it has a worldwide influence .
For this reason , efforts by the EU to make the seas a safe environment for people and for the ecological system must apply to everyone , not just to EU vessels .
There should be no unfair competition at the expense of European shipping .

( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the shadow rapporteur for the report by Mr Costa and as rapporteur for the ' flag State ' report , I should like to comment on the civil liability of passenger carriers and on the package as a whole .
As regards the Costa report , my focus has been on strengthening the rights of passengers in the event of accidents or incidents , on guaranteeing appropriate financial compensation and timely support to alleviate the consequences of incidents at sea or on inland waterways , where sea voyages often terminate , and also on enhancing the information provided to passengers .
I therefore agreed on keeping these proposals at second reading .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as the package is concerned , I would say that each of the reports stands on its own and each definitely brings added value .
Yet I believe that the package as a whole , including the area for which I was rapporteur - on the obligations of flag States - brings extra added value for maritime safety , which leads me to ask the Council and the Commission , and everyone , for their commitment towards adopting the package .
Furthermore , I really must extend my thanks to the French Presidency for their efforts , following on from the Slovenian Presidency , to move forward in this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is only through an integrated package that we will promote maritime safety .
In this regard , I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the rapporteurs .
Unless we look at the package as a whole , we shall leave here with a ' hobbled response ' , because the only way to stop another ' Erika ' or ' Prestige ' happening again in the near future is to take the package as a whole , and this is the only approach through which we can effectively ensure maritime safety .
Madam President , I represent Scotland , a nation with a long maritime history and a nation with tremendous potential for its future .
Scotland is geographically very well-placed to be developed as a maritime transport hub between Europe and the rest of the world and we have considerable scope to develop additional short sea routes , both for passengers and for freight .
Improved safety is therefore of considerable importance to us , having had our own share of serious accidents involving shipping in Scottish waters .
The carrying of hazardous materials must , of course , be transparently declared and properly controlled .
Crews should have the right to be treated fairly with due consideration for their safety .
We must learn from past failings and ensure that independent investigations are carried out when accidents do occur .
The Scottish Government recently announced that a new operator is to resume a ferry service between Rosyth and Zeebrugge .
I would hope that if we are to move traffic from roads to the sea that the European Union can assist more proactively in the development of such ferry routes .
( EL ) Madam President , the Erika III legislative package on maritime safety comes stiflingly combined with more general EU anti-popular policy , the enforcement of competitiveness and the increase in profits made by shipowners and by EU monopoly groups generally .
The package fails to address the seriously aggravated problems of the safety of human life at sea and protection of the environment .
The Council has refused to accept even the utterly inadequate proposals by the Commission and the European Parliament , which fall far short of real needs .
Complying with the shipowners ' orders and the demands of uncontrolled capitalist profiteering , the Council opposes even the most basic measures to protect the environment and human life at sea .
The Council is trying to undermine every positive measure ; it is systematically eliminating the measures proposed .
It does not tolerate anything that could have the slightest impact on the profitability of companies or impose the slightest restriction on the unaccountability of shipowners .
This is why it has rejected even the inadequate proposals that lay down the flag states ' responsibilities and inspection obligations and the shipowners ' civil liability and financial guarantees .
A serious issue is the enactment of shipowners ' civil liability to compensate the victims of maritime accidents , in accordance with the 2002 Protocol to the IMO Athens Convention , which the governments of the EU Member States refuse to ratify .
Even today we have witnessed attempts to invalidate the relevant proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Costa , on the need to extend this liability for shipowners and outfitters to all categories of ships involved in domestic and international carriage by sea , and carriage by inland waterway .
Madam President , what is this : a bridge over troubled waters ?
For the UK it was peaceful waters until the CFP got to work and near destroyed our fishing industry .
Now you want to ruin our maritime trade .
Seemingly the Sterckx and Vlasto reports just aim to use the automatic identification system , with Galileo , to plot ship movements in EU waters .
That is spying on the movement of every ship in UK waters , in our harbours , at anchor off our shores , no matter what nationality .
The details will be connected to an EU data centre , which like any database is prone to security lapses .
The IMO fears that data of shipping information with cargo details could , in the wrong hands , endanger ships trading with Europe .
Collecting data leads to control systems and the vessels of our trading partners , especially of our Commonwealth , could be ordered away in an EU trade war .
For a nation that relies upon maritime trade to feed itself , this really is the end of independence .
The EU would decide whether Britain eats or starves .
The UK has the greatest interest in these reports , because we trade around the world - we have been doing it for centuries - and every UK MEP represents a region - bar one - with a coastline .
Meanwhile , as the EU erects its protective trade barriers , all its Member States , whether or not they have a coastline , get to have a vote .
I will encourage my government to reject this rotten proposal , for British maritime trade and global maritime trade are under threat from bureaucrats you would not trust with a rowing boat .
Worse , according to Vlasto , the EU will be able to refuse ships access to our waters .
So the EU could decide if foreign warships are permitted to visit - those of our friends and allies perhaps ?
A nuclear-powered ship might be rejected for political correctness , which could apply to the Royal Navy 's nuclear submarines .
Now , they helped to keep the Soviet Union at bay and guaranteed the freedom you now enjoy .
Well , if the EU goes on meddling with powder kegs like Georgia or Ukraine , you might just need that sort of protection again .
What price political correctness then ?

( NL ) Madam President , Mr Clark , you should really examine this proposal thoroughly and not just rabbit on about other matters , as what you are saying is all wrong .
You have really failed to understand that this is about maritime safety .
I shall not take up any more of my precious two minutes with this , but instead move on to the real contents of this package .
The course of this maritime safety package has been turbulent .
We , the European Parliament , are digging our heels in , as we want the whole package .
Yet evidently the Council , too , is digging its heels in .
I am shadow rapporteur for the report on the independent investigation of accidents , and the Council has proved rather less than accommodating up to now .
If , however , both of us now show some flexibility and make some concessions , we should succeed in reaching an agreement by the end of this year .
One of the key points with regard to the independent investigation of accidents as far as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is concerned is that this investigation must be truly independent .
The Council 's position on this point is currently unsatisfactory .
There must also be one person bearing ultimate responsibility for an investigation - as citizens find it very unclear , and lacking in transparency , if three Member States each carry out their own investigation .
One person bearing ultimate responsibility is needed , therefore .
Thirdly , we must not only investigate rare accidents that receive extensive media coverage , but also , as the PPE-DE Group sees it , investigate other serious accidents meriting investigation according to the ground rules of this Directive .
Finally , I concur with what Mr Blokland said about the proposal in the Costa report to include inland waterways in the liability regime .
The PPE-DE Group opposed and continues to oppose this .
I would ask the Council , therefore , to hold firm on this point , and I hope that no qualified majority is reached for Amendments 11 and 20 tomorrow .
( PL ) Madam President , we have been recalling examples of disasters - ones that are known throughout Europe .
I am from Poland , a country that recently commemorated another anniversary of the deaths of dozens of people on board the ferry Jan Heweliusz .
Safety is of crucial importance .
It is good that we are looking at safety as part of a package .
It is a good package , numerically good , with seven regulations .
The safety of people , ships , waters and even the safety of economic trade should be , and is , reflected in this package .
In this regard I consider Mr Sterckx 's report , for which I had the honour of being the rapporteur 's auxiliary , to be a particularly good one .
Yes , monitoring of ships must be carried out .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool is right to say that we need to investigate the causes of potential disasters and prevent disasters from happening .
Moreover , I am of the view that for sailing we should refer to the situation in aviation , in other words investigate near collision situations , because we could gain a better understanding of the mechanisms and causes of the occurrence of hazards .
I do not understand and am far from being able to agree with the position taken by Mr Zīle , who spoke of special , or specific , treatment for small states .
Surely the size of an EU Member State has little to do with the numbers of vessels flying its flag .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , be serious !
Despite a few positive measures , the majority of the reports being proposed to us will never have any more therapeutic value than a plaster on a wooden leg , as far as maritime safety is concerned .
Parliament and the Commission pretend to get cross with the Council , but this play-acting is no more than another crude attempt to bury responsibilities and favour private interests to the detriment of the general interest .
All this will do is give the European institutions even less legitimacy in the eyes of the people if there is another disaster , especially with the knowledge that the European Union is engaged in the WTO general trade agreement , known as GATS , whose Commission on Maritime Transport says that the current maritime transport environmental and safety regulations are excessive and should be relaxed .
The inhabitants of the communities that were the victims of the Erika shipwreck and others will appreciate the EU 's cynicism .
Properly addressing the problems of maritime transport safety means grasping the evil by the root .
We should be attacking the tax havens that allow maritime transport activities to be segmented into a jungle of shell corporations that offer the possibility of sidestepping the regulations .
We need to bring an end to the practice of flags of convenience - including on EU territory - which reduce registration fees and cut crew costs by 60 % on average .
Above all , we need to give new rights to employees as regards safety .
You will never do this , though , because it would mean attacking the very foundations of globalised capitalism .
( DE ) Madam President , some of you are probably wondering , rightly , what a Member from a landlocked European country such as Austria is doing in a debate on deep-sea shipping .
There is no very simple answer to this question , but it can perhaps be stated in a few words why this subject is important to us as well .
Firstly - and this really applies to all the Member States of the European Union , not just to us - the safety and optimum organisation of navigation on the high seas are an important concern for all those involved .
Catastrophic events , and not just those associated with the flowery name Erika , have made this very clear to many of us .
However - and now we come to a very particular point , to which some of my fellow Members have already alluded - the incorporation of inland waterway transport in the rules on liability is a European act of folly without parallel . We should reject it , regardless of whether we hail from seafaring nations or from landlocked countries .
It would entail excessive costs and excessive bureaucracy , and therefore pose a problem overall , for inland waterway transport in Europe , and this is a problem we should not be exacerbating .
Quite the opposite .
We should be establishing rules on liability for inland waterway transport too in the form of a sound special regime , and not artificially subjecting it to the rules for deep-sea shipping .
( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , with the adoption of this third maritime package we are giving a clear response to many of the demands made by European society after the Erika and Prestige disasters , five and seven years ago .
These proposals , which strengthen each other , as many of my fellow members have said , will enable us to make a decisive move in favour of the quality of the European maritime sector , and also , ladies and gentlemen , its transparency .
The proposal for a directive on technical investigations after accidents is the guarantee that we will never again see a spectacle of opaqueness like the one that surrounded the tragic Prestige accident .
The text strengthens the independence of the organisations responsible for investigating maritime accidents and incidents , and the obligation to make the results known in order to improve procedures and exchange good practice .
I would therefore like to congratulate the rapporteurs , because their excellent work has meant that the firmness of our position as the European Parliament regarding these proposals has been made clear .
They are proposals that have no other purpose than to make the European maritime space one of the safest in the world and to contribute to the reorganisation of the European fleets , as well as ensuring that operators take greater responsibility for damage caused to third parties and , in particular , national assets .
( RO ) The third maritime package is the consequence of the collisions involving the " Erika ” and the " Prestige ” , the December 2007 accidents in the Black Sea and the accident in Taragona harbour this month .
These unfortunate events caused immense damage to coastal areas and to the marine environment in particular .
The package deals with the monitoring of traffic at sea , investigations into accidents at sea , the liability of people carriers in case of accident at sea , port state control , common standards and regulations for the organisations involved in ship inspection and control .
I would like to state that the new version of the Paris Memorandum entered into force on 17 September 2008 .
It is essential that all ships entering European harbours should comply with certain safety standards .
Let me remind you that the black and grey lists published on 18 June 2008 on the Paris Memorandum website include one and six Member States respectively .
Therefore , one quarter of the Member States must improve the safety of ships registered under their flags
Irrespective of its technical condition , a ship in danger must have access to a specially designated and equipped refuge area .
European harbours should provide this facility , and harbour administrations should be able to recover the cost incurred with dry-docking and repairing the ship .
I believe that the masters ' liability in the case of passenger freight should apply to inland waterways as well .
I would like to congratulate my colleagues who worked on and negotiated this maritime package .
I believe it to be of essential importance to the economic future of the European Union .

( ES ) The truth is that I would like to congratulate us all on the adoption and presentation of this third package .
I would first of all like to congratulate the Commission and its Commissioner , Mr Tajani , who very early on , as a Roman , showed that he was ready to be sensitive to all aspects related to the sea and its ports ; I would also like to congratulate all my fellow rapporteurs , because the truth is that it is such a complex and broad subject and at all times they have been able to maintain Parliament 's positions , which defend better and greater safety for all citizens in such a complex , tempestuous environment as the sea .
I also think that it is right that we are responding after the various accidents , and that European citizens should see that Parliament and the European institutions not only look after them when there has been a disaster , but that having learned these lessons , they are capable of moving forward and making progress on the legislative aspects .
In this case , I think that they are the aspects relating to safety : specifically safety in terms of the environmental impact , which we could say started the whole movement , but also safety , at present , in relation to the responsibilities of the different actors involved , identifying and clarifying which they are and how we should act in response to them , establishing landmarks for the future fight against piracy , and , even more importantly , making progress with improving the working , social and professional conditions of those who work at sea .
I think that it is precisely on those aspects that we still need to make progress , and we ask the Commission to continue considering them .
All that remains for me to say is that , from our point of view , there are some reservations regarding the guarantees needed in order to ensure that ports of refuge are the ports that we all need .
( EL ) Madam President , the serious maritime accidents we have witnessed on European seas must certainly not be repeated .
In my country , Greece , we had last year 's shipwreck on Santorini , the causes of which have not yet been investigated .
The loss of human life , the considerable damage done to tourism and the environmental time-bomb of the oil trapped in the tanks , are proof enough that we cannot afford to be careless .
The issue of safety at sea is of vital importance .
The Union must not only ensure the sustainability of European shipping , but constantly upgrade it so that it can compete internationally .
Meanwhile , we should not neglect the need to protect natural resources .
If we do not act immediately , we shall undoubtedly have lost valuable time in responding effectively to the consequences of maritime accidents .
In the wake of a maritime accident , systematic technical research carried out on the basis of international rules is an effective way of gaining a better picture of the causes .
The independence of investigating bodies is therefore of key importance and I regret that the Council fails to grasp this .
Another important issue is that of cooperation between authorities , especially when an accident affects a number of Member States .
The question of ports of refuge and of the vessel inspection system is crucial in maritime safety .
It must be extended to ships in transit , which should provide guarantees that they are able to respond in the event of an accident or another such disaster .
I would like to end by congratulating the rapporteurs on their strong position with regard to the Council , and I hope that after the vote the Council , understanding our position , will contribute positively towards completing the legislative procedure .
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner , safety of the maritime transport sector is an important element of transport policy owing to the fact that a large part of the goods are carried by sea and by water .
The increased insecurity , in terms of possible adverse natural phenomena , terrorist acts , deliberate incidents and accidents , increases dramatically the risks to which vessel traffic is exposed .
The adoption of this Directive is an exceedingly important act for the entire European Union .
The replacement of the code , which has been applied on a voluntary basis so far , by this directive enhances the commitments as well as the responsibilities through designation of competent bodies and specific procedures which Member States must prepare , lay down and implement .
The need of Member States aligning their legislation to this Directive raises the requirement for full-scale co-operation in its implementation among states and shipowners , as well as for the achievement of strong control and co-ordination .
I would note two things : the need of more in-depth coverage of interaction with third countries , and the formulation of a clear port policy , because our seas are open and this is very important .
Investigating incidents and their causes and effects is obviously of substantial importance .
This is related to clarifying a number of incidents and , above all , to taking preventive measures .
Several incidents , with lives lost and damage to property and the environment , have occurred in my country in recent years .
This is exceedingly important , and I congratulate the rapporteur on this subject .
( LT ) The safety of sea transport , prompt response to accidents and the efficiency of accident investigations are of vital importance to the countries of the Baltic Region .
The Baltic Sea is secluded and shallow ; its water changes only once every 30 years , which makes it very vulnerable .
With the constant increase in sea transport in the Baltic Sea , thanks to Lithuania 's experience we are aware of accidents at sea being followed by disagreements and mess , which reveals a real lack of relevant rules .
I therefore commend the rapporteur on the very important work carried out .
We should not agree with the Council 's proposal that safety investigations be carried out only in the event of a major incident .
It is not only major incidents that have a disastrous impact on countries ' economies and environment as well as their welfare .
The attempt to minimise the number of bureaucratic mechanisms should not hinder the quality of investigations .
Moreover , it is very important that the same methods of investigating incidents are employed in all the Member States .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have drawn a great deal of encouragement from your speeches .
As almost all of you have said , agreement should soon be reached on the first six texts .
Of course , I am slightly disappointed that we have entered the conciliation procedure , but I am encouraged to continue our dialogue and to bring it to completion .
I have taken your messages on board : you are keen on the liability of states , on the need to be able to conduct investigations in a large number of cases , on the ratification of the IMO conventions especially , and you have strongly reiterated that the package cannot be broken down or chopped up .
I have heard this and I will pass it on to the Council at our meeting on 9 October .
You know that the discussions will be complex , but you have also pointed out that it has taken too long to get where we are today .
However , I can confirm that our determination is strong and it is intact .
I hope that together we can establish a comprehensive , coherent system that ensures the responsibility of each actor within it .
I think that is the price of maritime safety in Europe .
It therefore requires progress on the last two proposals .
As you know , we will be working on it right up to the last moment of our Presidency .
In the words of a compatriot of the Commissioner , Mr Tajani , the chairman , Mr Costa , and Antonio Gramsci , in these discussions we are seeking to balance the pessimism of our intelligence with the optimism of our will .
Whatever the case , I thank Parliament in advance for everything it can do to fuel this optimism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to Mr Bussereau for the commitment that he continues to show .
I would like to go into the substance of the various reports and the various amendments that have been tabled .
With regard to the first vote , Mr Sterckx 's report on the monitoring of maritime traffic , I am very pleased with Parliament 's broad support for the objectives set out in the Commission 's proposal .
The most important provisions in the proposal are those relating to places of refuge .
I fully back Parliament 's attempts to maintain the principle of independence in the decision-making process for accommodating a vessel in distress in a place of refuge .
The amendments , however , that take over the substance of the proposal for a directive relating to Mr Kohlíček 's report , civil liability and the financial guarantees of shipowners , can be endorsed without reservation , except for the two that refer to the establishment of a Community Office for the management of financial-guarantee certificates .
My staff have doubts about the effects of this proposal on the administrative and financial levels , and we will have to examine it more thoroughly .
On the other hand , having read the report by Mr Kohlíček , I am satisfied that Parliament 's support for the proposal on investigations following accidents is not failing .
At times , however , the best is the enemy of the good , and the Commission has shown itself sensitive to the argument that emerged during debate in the Council , namely that in order to guarantee the quality of investigations it is better not to unnecessarily multiply them : what matters is that in addition to cases of very serious accidents , an investigation is carried out in order to draw out useful lessons for the future through an understanding of the accident 's causes .
This aim , which in any case corresponds to the approach adopted by the IMO , is met by the common position , and I am therefore not able to back amendments such as Amendments 7 , 13 or 14 .
Finally , three amendments - 18 , 19 and 20 - are designed to add to the directive a mechanism to resolve any disagreement between Member States regarding a single investigation .
While it is true that the Commission 's proposal , and the common position , in fact , require the Member States to avoid conducting parallel investigations , it is also true that they do not deny the Member States involved the right to carry out their own investigations .
In any event , it cannot be the Commission 's task to act as a mediator between Member States , which are each convinced that they have a vital interest in carrying out an investigation .
What matters , in this case , is to ensure that the investigating bodies are independent .
With regard to the compensation of passengers in the event of accidents in the report by Mr Costa , you know that the Commission is determined to see the rights of travellers strengthened in all transport sectors , throughout Europe .
When presenting this proposal three months ago , the Commission started with an observation : if an accident takes place in Europe on board a vessel on the sea or on a river , the victims will not be properly compensated in so far as the applicable rules differ too much from one Member State to another and in fact also appear to be in the main out of date .
In fact , they make no provision for compulsory insurance , the compensation ceilings are inadequate and the liability systems stipulate that it is the victim who must provide proof that the carrier is at fault and , moreover , this is difficult to prove in the case of the shipwreck of a vessel .
In the face of this observation , the Commission saw just one solution : to seek harmonisation .
This means implementing the Athens Convention ; the negotiations are under the aegis of the IMO , and it means applying it in full to guarantee that all victims receive compensation under the terms set out in the Convention and on the basis of the maximum amounts fixed in it .
The Council has shown that it takes the same view .
All the amendments tabled by the European Parliament aim to improve the future regulation ; we therefore endorse them without any reservation .
With regard to the scope , which ought to be as wide as possible , the difficulties of certain operators of national or river transport cannot , however , be denied .
It would therefore be legitimate to stagger over time the implementation of the regulation in order to allow the necessary adjustments .
I therefore support the relevant amendments .
As things stand currently , the maximum compensation amounts depend on the size of the vessel and the number of victims , and this is unacceptable .
We need to put this right , and one way of doing this is by helping the insurance sector by setting a single maximum compensation amount that will apply Europe-wide .
This is the aim of Amendments 12 , 13 and 14 , ( first part ) , which the Commission endorses .
I am taking a long time , Mr President , because I believe that it is right to give an opinion on the various amendments tabled , and so , if you will permit me , I will take another two minutes .
With regard to the Vlasto report , on port State control , I would like to thank the rapporteur and Parliament for their support for this proposal , which will lead to the implementation of an ambitious new inspection system for Europe .
I would like to make two points on two vital aspects : the first relates to the mechanisms through which to establish in which conditions ship inspections cannot be carried out .
On the one hand , there is the issue of flexibility , which has correctly been said to be justified for operational reasons and already provided for in the directive in force , and therefore in our view this ought to be maintained .
For this reason , I cannot accept Amendments 19 or 23 .
The most important aspect in political terms is that of banning , dealt with in Amendments 31 and 32 .
While the Commission can accept the point of view of the Council , which introduces a less strict system for ships on the grey list , I am nonetheless pleased that Parliament supports the Commission on the issue of a permanent ban .
On the report by Mr de Grandes Pascual on classification societies , I am happy that Parliament accepts the division of the act into a directive and a regulation , as the Council wished .
This approach seems to me to be both fair and rigorous in legal terms .
With regard to the amendments , I would say that Amendments 27 and 28 make changes to the civil liability regime of the recognised bodies , and these seem to us to be inconsistent in practice .
In any event , under the directive , death caused by a negligent act should continue , to be covered by a minimum liability .
With regard to Amendment 1 , which seeks to delete recital 3 added by the Council to the draft regulation , we can accept this .
This recital seems to us superfluous and dangerous ; I would not want our inspectors to encounter difficulties in carrying out their work on its account .
Finally , as I have already said , I can accept the amendments that seek to incorporate into the draft directive some elements from the ' flag State ' proposal .
I apologise for having spoken at length , Mr President , but there were a large number of amendments and I believed it was right to make the Commission 's view known to Parliament .
Madam President , allow me to begin by saying a few words to my Spanish fellow Members about their reservations concerning ports of refuge .
If a competent authority in a Member State takes a decision , there can indeed be a problem with the compensation of ports of refuge to which ships may possibly be taken .
Indeed , this is discussed in my report and , incidentally , is a problem that the Council and Parliament have thus far been unable to resolve between them : one of the difficult problems .
How can it be solved ?
I had a relatively simple solution to this , namely placing financial responsibility on the Member State in that case .
The Council is not in agreement , and we shall have to come up with something .
It is not that we have failed to consider this problem or take account of it , therefore - I just wanted to say that to avoid any misunderstanding .
We are now going to conciliation and , President-in-Office , both the Council and Parliament have the task of ensuring that this conciliation is successful .
We cannot afford to fail .
I must thank you once again - you and your colleagues - for the fact that 90 % of the work is already behind us , particularly on my report .
The vote tomorrow will not reflect this , but , as far as I am concerned , you can rest assured that , for my part , what we have agreed will remain on paper , and that we shall deal with the outstanding points and achieve a result very quickly .
The problem during conciliation will lie with the two missing reports , the two missing texts , and I should like to emphasise once more that ' nous sommes avec vous , nous devons travailler ensemble , le Parlement est avec le Conseil et ça ne se passe pas tous les jours ! '
rapporteur . - ( CS ) Let me please try to summarise why the maritime package should be discussed as a single entity and not as a set of reports from which the Council and the Commission can pick and choose , push some forward , set some aside and wait for the next presidency or the one after that .
First of all , it is essential to establish in the same way , in all cases , in all these reports , to which ships all the proposals apply .
There were differences in the initial reports .
I should like to draw your attention to this once more .
Secondly , safety is indivisible and therefore it is vital to strengthen the responsibility of the flag state .
This responsibility must be clearly defined because , without responsibility on the part of the flag state , it will be impossible to take this package forward .
Thirdly , the fair treatment of seafarers on ships running into difficulties must be generally accepted .
Whether someone has adopted the IMO guidelines or not is immaterial .
Fourthly , the environment is so important that discussion as to who is responsible for maritime transport in the event of problems with one ship or another must cease , and buck-passing must be sidelined .
There will be just one person in each state who decides where a ship in difficulties can go .
Fifthly , if there is an accident , it must be made clear within the timeframe laid down who is going to conduct the technical investigation , which state is responsible , where the final report is to be sent and what the structure of the report is to be , otherwise we are simply playing games .
The independence of the investigative body is an obvious requirement .
Sixthly , if I could ask you , Commissioner and Mr Bussereau , to listen to the wishes not only of the European Parliament , but also of the citizens of the Union and look at the maritime package as a single entity .

Madam President , Mr Bussereau , ladies and gentlemen , please accept a small suggestion drawn from the experience that I have accumulated over this period , although it has not been very long .
I assure you that you need have no fear of conciliation : conciliation is a creative stage that makes it possible to overcome even problems that seem insoluble .
I guarantee you that we will come to agreement even on the limited overall liability that all shipowners would like to have , faced with the need for each passenger to be treated in the same way .
Today it seems impossible , but some effort of imagination that all of us together make will definitely be able to make things work .
In brief , apart from the optimism of will that I shall certainly , with Gramscian memory , instil , I also ask you to adopt the suggestion of the anonymous Frenchman of 1968 - with a little power to the imagination , we will reach some sort of definitive solution .
I must say I am less happy about certain remarks by some of my fellow Members regarding their resistance , which seems to me incomprehensible , to extending the protection of passengers to internal waters too .
I must say , it upsets me to have to openly state the fact - the fact that a child and his father who died on the Seine should receive different protection from what would apply if they had died on the open seas .
This seems to me truly unacceptable , and I cannot believe that Mr Rack , Mrs Wortmann-Kool and Mr Blokland truly meant to make out that the protection of small interests - because what is involved is very small insurance costs for events that , because they are highly improbable , have very low insurance costs - that the small interests of some small operator can undermine a position which I am happy to have heard confirmed by the Commission too , and which it would also do Parliament credit to espouse .

( NL ) Madam President , I should like to voice my strong objection to Mr Costa 's suggestion of a link between people who have died on the Seine and the fact that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is refusing to support his proposals .
This is a link that Mr Costa should not be making , and so I wish to register a strong protest .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , in closing , I can say I have found that this debate today has revealed a common desire to achieve a result .
I think this is very important .
A lot of work has been done , particularly under the French Presidency , and we can be pleased with this .
I hope that after the Transport Council meeting on 9 October , President-in-Office , we will find a solution that everyone supports , without letting anything fall by the wayside .
Parliament is united in support of the package , and I hope we will be successful in ensuring that the package is adopted in plenary .
I would like once again to thank the French Presidency , which has not only showed will , but has also proven its intelligence .
Let us hope that , through its firmness , which has also been set in motion , some governments will not be deaf but will listen to this intelligence , French intelligence , and will cooperate in a measured way in order to achieve the objectives that they and we are committed to achieving .
With regard to the Commission , the Vice-President is aware that we have held some informal trialogues , but that , undoubtedly , what he called incoherence is natural , due to the timing and parliamentary formulas , but it is perfectly rectifiable .
From these trialogues we have reached the goal , in terms of the reports for which I am responsible , of recognised organisations , and there is no doubt that we can reach a consensus on solutions .
Finally , Mr Sterckx made a recommendation to us as Spanish people : for us to have the sensitivity to take on board his proposals .
I ask you to accept that there are deep-seated reasons for our differing positions , but also that this position is not irredeemable and that in conciliation , there will undoubtedly be formulas that we agree on , and that we will be able to accept a formula that everyone can understand that provides a solution not only for the countries that have vessels , but also those of us who suffer because we have coastlines .
( EL ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday , at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - It is important to have common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for relevant activities of maritime administration .
On the other hand , it is important for the European Union to increase the number of ships registered with its Member States .
The ship registers of Malta , Cyprus and Greece have enabled the European Union to remain one of the major global players as far as ship registration is concerned .
Through this the European Union is able to raise standards and maintain a certain scrutiny of their vessels .
Without compromising on safety the European Union has to make sure that the vessels on its members ' books do not migrate to other states , especially those known states which enable ships to fly ' flags of convenience ' .
It must be appreciated that shipping is one of the cleanest ways of transportation .
It is also one of the cheapest .
We must be careful not to overburden this important industry .
All measures taken have to bear this in mind .
Transportation by shipping has to be encouraged and this has to be taken into consideration when regulating on the industry without making any compromises on security , health and safety .
Sea piracy ( debate )
( EL ) The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on sea piracy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on Saturday 14 September - so just a few days ago - a French tuna fishing boat was chased by pirates 420 miles from the coast of Somalia .
This was not an isolated incident .
Since the beginning of July 10 vessels have been captured and 250 seamen have been taken hostage .
Consequently , fishing vessels - and you can understand their reasons - are reluctant to operate , and the 50 or so French and Spanish tuna vessels that used to fish off the Seychelles and Somalia have decided to go back to the Seychelles archipelago .
Apart from the fact that these acts of piracy are on the increase , it seems clear that they are no longer happening just along the coast but are tending to extend further out , to international waters , disrupting not only the activities of fishing and cargo vessels in transit , but also - and this is very serious - of vessels operating within the framework of humanitarian programmes , particularly the World Food Programme , which supplies essential aid to the very many displaced populations in Somalia .
This phenomenon has become a cause for concern at global level .
The French President , Mr Sarkozy , recently said that these were no longer isolated cases but a criminal industry challenging one of the fundamental freedoms , the freedom to circulate , as well as the freedom to conduct international trade .
The French President finished by saying : ' the world cannot accept this ! '
Against this background , in May and June the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolutions 1814 and 1816 .
In response to the worsening of this issue , it is currently working on a new resolution aimed at mobilising the international community to apply existing instruments of repression and prevention more effectively within the framework of the Law of the Sea and Security Council resolutions .
For their part , the EU Member States have already set out to do this and on 26 May expressed their determination to work together to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia .
A crisis management concept was approved by the Council on 5 August .
More recently , at the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 15 September , the Council adopted a strategic military option with a view to a possible naval operation under the European Security and Defence Policy .
I would like to remind you formally that the launch of a naval operation is clearly envisaged , as the French Presidency said last Tuesday to Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , at the end of the aforementioned Council meeting .
Until an operation takes place , because of the urgency of action , a first step was taken by the Council with the formation of a naval coordination cell .
It is directed by a Spanish senior officer and consists of four maritime experts whose role is to facilitate the exchange of information between merchant navies and any naval vessels in the area , on a regular or occasional basis .
The Cell , located in Brussels , will be responsible for supporting surveillance and protection actions conducted by the Member States off the coast of Somalia .
This initiative should be in three sections : the accompanying of certain vulnerable vessels in transit through the Gulf of Aden , the protection of World Food Programme humanitarian convoys destined for Somalia , and the surveillance of fishing areas off the southern coast of Somalia .
Member States with naval units operating off the Somali coast are invited to inform the Cell of this , in particular to improve the chances of protecting the most vulnerable merchant vessels .
In parallel , Madam President , the European Union will continue preparations for a possible naval operation under the European Security and Defence Policy .
An information-gathering mission , consisting of European experts from the Military Staff of the European Union and the Secretariat-General of the Council , is currently in the region , refining a strategic plan .
It is due to deliver its conclusions on 29 September .
You will see , ladies and gentlemen , that the European Union is not only showing its determination to act , but is also affirming its position as a prime mover on the international scene in the fight against piracy .
We must give ourselves the resources to act quickly and in a coordinated manner , for the benefit , of course , of commercial interests , but also in the interest of freedom of circulation , which is a global principle , and finally for the benefit of our humanitarian objectives .

Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission firmly condemns the criminal acts regularly committed in some regions of the world against the interests of the EU Member States , both sea piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters subject to the jurisdiction of a state .
Acts of this kind affect not only maritime transport , but also fishing on the high seas and maritime tourism .
Besides , these acts make living conditions yet more dangerous for sailors who already have to do their work under difficult conditions .
Therefore , because we must not only condemn such acts , but must also take action , we must realise that there is a risk of regressing by hundreds of years to a situation of an organised presence of criminal networks and pirates operating in four main areas : the South China Sea , the Straits of Malacca and Singapore , the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa .
The majority of crimes are committed in these areas , and the intensity and seriousness of the offences are constantly changing .
Furthermore , there is still a concern about developments and even about the expansion of piracy to other areas of the world , demonstrating , in fact , that these are not merely occasional incidents , but we are convinced that there is an organised network of criminals who wish to carry out scientific attacks on cargo ships , tourist vessels and passenger vessels .
Given that the European Community is a member of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 , the European Commission has always undertaken to promote freedom of navigation in all its aspects and the development of appropriate instruments to prevent illegal acts against ships .
In this context , the Commission has systematically backed the attempts by the Member States and the international community as a whole to draw up legislative instruments of high quality within the framework of the United Nations and its specialised body in the sector of maritime transport , which is the International Maritime Organization .
After the work last June in the UN Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea , which dealt in particular with the issue of the legal treatment of pirates when caught , efforts still continue with the current review of the IMO 's three legal instruments on the prevention of piracy and armed robbery against ships .
The review is expected to be completed in December 2008 .
Availing itself of its legislation on the safety of ships and port facilities , which incorporated into Community law the ISPS code , which is an IMO instrument , the European Community favours the promotion of these maritime safety standards by its international partners , and in particular by the Euro-Mediterranean partners through the Safemed II programme .
In the same way , a high-level seminar on the issue is being prepared as part of the ASEAN Regional Forum under the co-presidency of the European Union and Indonesia .
Cooperation with countries outside Europe is thus becoming particularly important .
In a similar conceptual sphere , the Commission is studying the possibility of using the stability instrument to support existing regional initiatives or ones that are being drawn up , backed by the International Maritime Organization , both in the area of the Straits of Malacca and in the Horn of Africa area , to promote the safety of maritime navigation in those areas that are of strategic significance for European interests and supplies .
I should also emphasise the continuing support for development granted by the European Community to countries neighbouring these at-risk areas , to improve their standard of living , which is an essential precondition for compliance with the rules of law .
It is thus also vital in seeking to remove the workforce from criminal organisations , which can focus on the conditions of extreme poverty experienced by certain groups of people .
With regard to the repression of acts of piracy on the seas and of armed robbery against ships , the Commission is delighted at the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1816 on the repression of acts of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia , as well , of course , at the important step taken by the European Council , which adopted a detailed action plan at its meeting of 15 September 2008 .
Mr Bussereau has stressed what these initiatives are , and what commitments are being made by the European Union and the Member States , and we share and endorse these commitments .
There is another question that is raised regarding this constant growth in piracy : do acts of piracy serve to fund international terrorism ?
This is a question that we must ask ourselves , and that we must seek to answer , even if today there is no proof that terrorism is funded through the payment of ransoms ; there is nothing that would allow us to establish a priori that this is not a possibility .
Thus , we are doubtful about rejecting the hypothesis , particularly in the light of the obvious links that exist between certain countries that provide refuge for pirates and the existence of concealed bases for terrorist groups .
The Commission will , however , launch an investigation into this subject , in order to improve its understanding of the financial flows linked to the phenomenon of piracy on the seas .
We must never lower our guard in the fight against terrorism and therefore every suspicion , even if we cannot make a priori judgments , must be carefully assessed and we must take all appropriate steps to prevent terrorism from benefiting from the assistance and organisational and economic support of criminal organisations .
This is why we will continue to work in harmony with all the Member States , with the Council and also with countries outside Europe that are particularly involved in combating piracy .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commission Vice-President , I completely agree with the Vice-President 's statements .
We have to differentiate between the straits where there are responsible countries with whom we can cooperate on cracking down on piracy , and the maritime operations where there is no responsible country , for example in Somalia , where we have to do something ourselves .
President-in-Office , I thought what you said was , in all honesty , rather too little .
Setting up and deploying a crisis unit is always a good thing to do , but it does nothing to help .
The crisis unit is here in Brussels or somewhere else .
What we need is a concerted maritime operation locally , with the ships from the EU Member States that are already there .
We have to appeal to the Member States who do not yet have any ships there to take part in a joint marine operation .
We cannot allow a situation where two pirate mother ships sail happily along on these waters attacking our fishing and merchant vessels and we are for ever having to run round after them and watch to see how we can bring this under control .
I am waiting to hear what my general has to say , who will be here in a short while , but we need a clear strategic and tactical assessment of the situation here , and we need enough manpower capable of controlling piracy , as appeals simply do nothing to help .
We have to hunt down the pirates , we have to catch them , otherwise it will not work .
Ninety per cent of Europe 's imports , on which we depend , arrive via maritime routes .
We have a high level of responsibility for seafarers , for fishermen fishing off foreign coasts , in accordance with jointly agreed treaties , and we have to protect these fishermen and seafarers , and also tourists .
Unfortunately , in areas where there is no governmental authority , this only works if we develop our own European activities on the basis of UN resolutions .
In this respect , President-in-Office , it is good to set up a crisis unit , but we are expecting to see a well-defined operations base and well-defined operations during the next stage .
Ladies and gentlemen , we urgently need to tackle this problem .

My figures , which I do have , are even worse than those that Mr Bussereau has just given us : there are reportedly currently 13 vessels and 300 sailors under the power of pirates .
And what is clear is that , if this phenomenon is not stopped , it will continue in crescendo as it has done so far , and of course it is not going to stop or improve .
The tenacity of the French and Spanish Governments , among others , and also the tenacity of this Parliament have borne fruit .
In a short time we have secured a UN resolution on this phenomenon , which extends the right to prosecution , and also a cell has been created to coordinate operations at European level .
However , you should be aware that it is essential that first of all we work to achieve an extension of the UN mandate , because it is only valid for three months and , if it is not extended , our brand-new coordination cell will have to close in early December .
With regard to the second part of the Ministers ' decision , the strategic military option , we need this operation to come to fruition and a large number of Member States to show as soon as possible that they are prepared to participate in it , and I support what Mr Jarzembowski said .
It would be the first European military naval operation of the European security and defence policy , ladies and gentlemen , and an important sign of visibility for Europe .
The circumstances demand it .
Piracy in the Indian Ocean is currently an extremely profitable business , which is growing day by day .
Someone said to me today that the profession of pirate was , however incredible it might seem , growing in status in some of the countries bordering the Indian Ocean .
We need to stop this spiral , we need to protect vulnerable vessels , whether they are merchant or pleasure vessels , and the numerous fishing boats that fish in the area .
We also need to provide protection and escorts for the World Food Programme vessels , because on 27 September Canada will be finishing its mandate and we still do not have a country to take over .
Madam President , would the increase in acts of sea piracy not be a chance for the European Union to use the means to defend its values and interests , if necessary and wherever necessary ?
In any case , do not tell our fisherman , who had to take refuge in the port of Mahé in the Seychelles last week , or the crews of our merchant and cruise ships who are being threatened further and further by Somalia 's territorial waters , that it is none of Europe 's business !
That would be to forget what European citizens expect of Europe : primarily safety , and particularly safety at sea .
That is why , Commissioner , the Commission 's initiatives to implement a European policy of the sea and oceans were so widely welcomed .
That is why I suspect , President-in-Office , that there is a large majority in this Parliament that will approve the measures you propose at the end of the consultation , which I understand is still going on .
Today , people are saying it is not that easy , that it might be better to consult our allies throughout the world first and to think about legality as regards international law .
What was done for the recent release of the hostages on the Ponant and the Carré d 'as shows that we have the means for effective action , provided that the will is there .
If only this will , President-in-Office , could be the subject of a broad consensus in the Council !
( ES ) The coast of Somalia is obviously one of the most dangerous coastlines in the world , as the figures show , in particular the fact that , last year alone , at least 25 vessels were victims of all sorts of acts of piracy .
The case of the Playa de Bakio is perhaps one of the best known , at least in Spain , but it is obviously not the only one .
Today it is also obvious that the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia does not have the resources or the means to establish peace and security in the country and therefore is much less capable of guaranteeing safety in its waters or in areas close to them , therefore international support is needed to do this , in line with what was laid down by the United Nations in June , as the previous speakers said .
Personally I am also concerned by something else , which I would like to mention : the reports that we sometimes receive of foreign boats , some of which are perhaps European , that are taking advantage of this situation of lack of control in order to fish unlawfully in one of the richest fishing grounds in the area , or even to use it as a dumping ground for hazardous substances , which the Federal Government is also not in a position to control .
Therefore I think that it is a priority - and I stress this - to guarantee the safety of the vessels that are legitimately operating in the area in line with international legislation , but it is also a priority , or even more so , that we commit ourselves to resolving the conflict that is devastating that country , so that ultimately responsibility for safeguarding the security of the area can be taken over by independent , legitimate , recognised Somali institutions .
( ES ) I am not going to repeat the facts that have been set out here .
I want to describe them : they are scandalous , they cause social alarm among our citizens , who are undoubtedly perceiving a degree of defencelessness .
Not to mention the feelings of our fishermen , who are experiencing an understandable fear about their jobs and even their physical safety , given that the pirates are not making empty threats , and workers are not required to risk their lives for their jobs .
In addition , shipowners suffer serious economic damage that their insurance does not always cover , because the circumstances are extraordinary and tend not to be covered by insurance policies .
What can we do about the pirates ?
Of course , anything apart from the amateur spirit that prevailed in the Council of Foreign Ministers on 15 September .
Against piracy we need conclusive action on two levels : in the area of diplomacy , supporting African countries , which suffer from the presence of genuine mafias on their territory , who use extortion and kidnapping in order to blackmail fishermen and merchants from one part of the world ; in the area of legitimate use of force , using it as a dissuasive tool , which is perhaps the only language that pirates understand .
Having said this , where should we act and at what level ?
At national , European or international level ?
I think , ladies and gentlemen , that we need to act initially at national level , as France has done in an exemplary manner , with the protection of international law and in an effective way , which was exemplary .
I regret that the Spanish / French proposals were not adopted by the Council , as what was ultimately agreed was insufficient .
I think that we need to give a vote of confidence to the French Presidency so that it proposes European action that is capable of defending our interests , and I hope that , when the time comes , the offer that NATO is making of global and international coverage can operate in this context .
However , let us act as we always do , let us move forward , let us take decisions and then wait for others to help us .
Let us not continue to be defenceless , with citizens feeling that we are not capable of defending ourselves .
( FR ) Madam President , I would first like to thank the Council and the Commission for agreeing to Parliament 's request for a debate on this issue : a very topical issue that is of concern to us .
We have talked about it in particular in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , where we were visited by Mr De Rossa , who gave us an idea of the extent of the problem .
I would like to say that we should congratulate ourselves on the rapidity of the reaction by the Member States concerned - I am talking about France and Spain - and on what has already been done in the UN and the Council .
I think that is quite a quick response .
I think we need to avoid several things .
Firstly , demands by civil vessels for weapons .
I can see this happening and I think we need to watch out because we know this would only make the situation more dangerous .
Secondly , we need to make sure we do not neglect the situation and let it drift into terrorism .
I mean that we should prevent political groups from getting involved because it would then assume completely different proportions .
Thirdly , we need to avoid a situation where Member States are acting separately .
In this regard , I was just thinking about the Stability Pact .
Obviously we demand that certain Member States do not have a deficit , but these are the same Member States who are always asked to provide protection because they have the means to do so .
I therefore believe we need to show a bit more solidarity there at EU level , and that those who do not have the means to be protected are protected by those who have the military means .
In this case , let us draw any conclusions we might like to draw at any level .
I would also like to say that , although it is a matter of great urgency that we provide a deterrent , through the measures taken by the French Government , for example , and on the Ponant and the Carré d 'as , we know very well that crime is part of human nature but its legitimacy feeds on people 's despair .
It is therefore very important to take diplomatic action towards these countries and find ways of helping them from the point of view of both security and development .
Then they will not have to endlessly look on with an empty stomach as plates of plenty go by .
( ES ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , European citizens cannot understand why , in the age of technology , telecommunications , satellites , etc . , we are experiencing incidents of piracy that appear to be transporting us back four or five centuries in our history .
I cannot accept what others have been saying in terms of being satisfied with the response .
For several years I have been saying here in the European Parliament that the situation in the Indian Ocean , the situation off the coast of Somalia for European fishermen and for vessels that operate and work there is unsustainable , and there has not been a great deal of response .
I do indeed welcome the fact that finally the Council has taken a first step , which I think is an insufficient one , by creating this cell in Brussels that is going to be responsible for accompanying fishermen , protecting humanitarian aid , which is so necessary in Somalia , and also securing agreements on fishing grounds .
I think that with what has been created and agreed so far , it is not going to be possible to achieve all of these ambitious objectives .
The sea is very big , as is the coastline of the Indian Ocean , and we need the contribution and cooperation of all European countries , because the question is not whether the fishermen or vessels are French , Basque , Spanish , or Dutch ; the question is that they are European and that we all need to contribute to this together .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the protection of seafarers is a heartfelt concern for all of us , but I am nevertheless taking the liberty of asking how we can best guarantee this .
I take issue expressly with the commendation of the French Presidency , as politically and technically it has bungled the job , from start to finish .
I should like to explain why .
We have been conducting this debate as part of the Green Paper on maritime policy .
We have pointed out that piracy is a problem and that we need a long-term strategy to be able to combat this phenomenon .
I am also taking the liberty of pointing out that the phenomenon has existed since the sixth century B.C. Then Mr Sarkozy comes along , knocks it all on the head and talks about naval deployments .

German Defence Minister Franz Josef Jung is already having the guns polished on his naval ships , and there is an ESDP mission that has not even been discussed in the relevant committees yet - the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence - but only in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
What kind of game is this ?
It is not the business at all !
I have the impression that we are trying to react in an ad hoc frantic manner in order to legitimise something that will have very , very long-term international ramifications .
If we deploy naval forces to protect seafarers , we have to talk about the consequences .
What do we want ?
Gunboat policy ?
Do we want a shot across the bows ?
Do we want to sink ships ?
If this is indeed connected with international terrorism , where is the long-term strategy there ?
I say this only as a warning .
We shall be analysing this keenly , and in the second week in October we shall hopefully reach a rather more businesslike conclusion more helpful to people in the region .

( ES ) I have just attended a meeting of the Long Distance Fleet Regional Advisory Council , and I could see the enormous concern for the fate of 51 vessels and around 1 500 crew of the Community tuna fleet that fishes in the Indian Ocean .
For years the fleet has been reporting incidents of piracy in the area adjoining Somalia , but not even the capture of the Spanish tuna boat Playa de Bakio in April caused some governments to react in time , including my own , unfortunately , until , in recent days , the fleet had to withdraw to the port of Victoria , and from that point , the measures taken have been highly inadequate .
We need to understand that fishermen live in an especially dangerous situation as , while all the vessels passing through the area are cause for concern , the merchant vessels tend to have established routes , which provides greater opportunity to monitor them as they pass through .
Those 51 fishing boats , however , are scattered , following the migrations of tuna , over an area of more than 3 200 square miles , which is five days ' sailing , and they are therefore much more vulnerable , so a naval operation is essential and urgent .
In addition to what has been said about the Strait of Malacca , in addition to Somalia , we are now receiving reports from the fishing fleet about piracy in the Mozambique Channel and in areas of India and the Caribbean .
We cannot , therefore , remain inactive , and we need to react , in addition to the reactions that may come from our governments and the Council .
All the Community institutions are involved in creating a coordinated strategy to combat international piracy .
I have therefore proposed to my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , an amendment to the budget in order to allocate one million euros to studying a viability plan for implementing this strategy , and I ask Parliament to give it the green light , so that all Community citizens , wherever they are , receive the message that the European Union is supporting them and , above all , protecting them .
( FR ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few months we have seen an increase in acts of piracy , particularly off the coast of Somalia .
These attacks use much more sophisticated means and are therefore a reflection of a powerful mafia .
I share the concern of all my fellow Members for European fishermen , who are extremely vulnerable .
However , the European Union has established the means to respond to these attacks .
The meeting of European Foreign Affairs Ministers on 15 September produced results that I felt were quite significant .
On the one hand , the 27 Member States approved the creation of a Coordination Cell and on the other , the ministers adopted a strategic military option , opening the way for a possible EU naval operation .
The use of private protection agencies has sometimes been mentioned .
This does not seem like the right solution to me .
The only long-term solution , as Mr Savary said , is both diplomatic and political .
Piracy prospers thanks to the weakness of governments .
It is by helping the countries concerned to stop the illegal activities , by helping them to achieve political stability and escape from poverty , that we will end this scourge .
That is how the Malacca Strait got rid of pirates a few years ago .
Obviously the European Union cannot act alone , as Mr Sarkozy said .
The international community must be mobilised , otherwise it will be impossible to guarantee the protection of shipping , particularly because sea piracy is rife not only off the coast of Somalia .
The European Union has taken the initiative of a concerted response .
It is now up to the entire international community to assume its share of the responsibility .
( ES ) President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that we are having this debate .
Since 2005 Parliament has been warning both the Commission and the Council of the dangers involved in navigating the waters around Somalia , even the international waters .
Following various hijackings of boats and armed robberies , the European Union has just created a ' coordination cell ' .
It is very welcome ; at least it is finally being recognised that there is a problem .
However , I fear that even with this cell , the problem will continue to exist .
Until we have real cooperation and a genuine Common Foreign and Security Policy , the Member Sates whose interests are affected will continue to be forced to protect themselves and defend their legitimate national interests .
France has clearly understood this , and I congratulate it on its decisiveness , courage and efficiency .
Spain has also reacted by planning to send a reconnaissance plane , in other words , an unarmed plane to dissuade armed pirates .
It is a shame that this plane will not be enough to adequately defend and protect our fishermen if there is an armed boarding of our fleet .
We need to ask for and secure more cooperation between the Member States that are affected , we need to take advantage of the French Presidency of the Council and allocate more resources so that legal fishing in international waters is not , as it is there , a high risk activity , due to acts of piracy that are inconceivable in international society in the 21st century .
Mr President , I address my remarks particularly to the presidency of the Council .
I am all in favour of robust international action to deal with piracy on the high seas .
I congratulate the French Government on the action by French commandos earlier this month .
You may recall that in the days when Britain truly had an ethical foreign policy the Royal Navy swept the oceans clear of pirates .
It blew them out of the water and we got rid of the slave trade as well .
Now we seem helpless .
Our navies have been run down and we are frightened to act lest we fall foul of some aspect of human rights legislation , or become embroiled in lengthy judicial procedures .
The EU response is to try and invent another military operation by setting up a committee , a so-called EU coordination cell , which says it will coordinate military operations in the seas off the Horn of Africa .
But , there is already a military operation in those waters .
It is Combined Task Force 150 , involving the US Fifth Fleet and warships from other NATO navies , led by a Dane at the moment .
I have a question to the Council presidency .
Why is the EU getting involved ?
This is a job for NATO and , more to the point , what are European allies in NATO going to do to ensure that more warships are provided for this task ?
They have rules of engagement that make them effective , and there is international law in place at UN level to deal with captured pirates without inflicting them on our own countries .
( DE ) Mr President , we have here the Commissioner for Transport and the French President-in-Office of the Council with responsibility for transport .
Yet we are talking here about very tangible military deployment .
Information was given very late to the relevant committee , the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , even though press reports on this EU mission to combat piracy have been in circulation since back in August .
This is unacceptable .
We need to have basic information in good time and then we can take a proper decision .
According to information from the BBC , France wanted a power of attorney of general , worldwide scope , not just for Somalia , but was fortunately unable to win through on this .
For the first time we are talking about a curtailing of maritime sovereignty here , and we are also talking about a palpable breach of international law .
We ought to be specifying this very clearly .
We are talking about direct support for the so-called government in Somalia , which is supported by Ethiopia and the United States .
There is direct cooperation with Operation Enduring Freedom , which is unacceptable , and funding is to be channelled through Athena .
We do not have any information of any kind on this either .
We ought to be informed directly .
What this is about is the protection by military forces of access to raw materials , which cannot be done like this .
What we need is a way of dealing with this other than by military means .
( EL ) Mr President , in this very important discussion let me focus on two points that I think are significant .
One of them concerns the legal aspect .
I think it is time for an update of the Convention on the Law of the Sea , so that we can improve the legal basis for implementing various methods of combating the problem .
The second point is the operational side of things .
The maritime aspect of the issue is important , but not sufficiently so .
An operational plan is needed ; sea and air forces must be used in order to allow effective action .
Lastly , there is a series of interrelated matters .
Commissioner Tajani said that the link between piracy and terrorism is being investigated , and I must add a further dimension : the interconnection between piracy and organised crime should be investigated .
( EL ) Mr President , I have listened carefully to all the speakers .
Everything they have said is correct , but here we are faced with an issue that requires immediate action .
We cannot wait for the new maritime code or turn a blind eye on this situation .
Let me point out that ΝΑΤΟ is stepping in and playing the part of an international policeman and busybody .
Could it not at least intervene here , with our backing , to form a unit from all Member States , with sea and air forces ?
Now if we Europeans , who have no common defence policy , wait until we can create such a unit , I think we shall be too late .
Since NATΟ plays the policeman where it is inconvenient for us , let us call on it to do so to suit our needs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like thank you for this debate of a very high standard .
I sincerely believe that piracy is a form of terrorism and it is taking on uncontrolled proportions .
The truth is that if nothing is done , the freedom of circulation for shipping in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of Somalia may well disappear entirely , with the massive consequences that would of course ensue .
I am delighted that the European Union is the first to have taken responsibility for this .
I would add that , as you know , there are other areas of the world where piracy also poses a problem , particularly in the Malacca Strait and around Singapore .
This is an equally important and difficult question for Europe .
We should be able to make a decision on whether to continue planning a naval operation under the European Security and Defence Policy in early October .
The role of NATO was mentioned in several speeches .
Dealing with piracy is not within NATO 's remit .
It does have a mandate for terrorism .
They may look similar , but they are not the same thing .
Until October , the Coordination Cell will continue to play its supporting role towards the Member States to try to improve the security conditions in the area .
Mr Savary mentioned poverty in Somalia and I would stress that we have to get cargo vessels for the World Food Programme through there .
Somalia and its population really need them .
In parallel , we will need to take action to set up a joint legal framework for the whole of the international community so that these acts of piracy can be brought to justice more effectively .
There are pirates who have been arrested and brought to European prisons .
Obviously we now need to look at the judicial aspect and the legal framework for all of this .
I would like to say that , unlike one Member who spoke earlier , I am pleased about the concrete action that has been taken by a number of Member States .
This concrete action sends a very strong signal that could save lives , because there could be not only ransom demands but also killings .
Some fishing vessels were fired on a few days ago .
The situation is therefore dangerous , so a military response is appropriate .
Finally , I will appropriate the lovely phrase that your fellow Member Mr Morillon used : it is about protecting our interests and values .
Protecting our values is a strong and proper action for Europe !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that this debate has been very useful , because it has certainly demonstrated the wishes of Parliament , the Commission and the Council to take action together to tackle a phenomenon that is becoming ever more worrying , namely piracy , and to give a response to European citizens on this issue .

I endorse the analysis that has emerged from the debate : it is not enough merely to take military action , which is a fundamental point , but it must also be taken swiftly , and I do not believe that we should dwell over-long on issues of competence , whether it ought to be the European Union or NATO - we must not waste time .
I believe that we must step up coordination , but we have a duty to intervene , to prevent pirate organisations from strengthening their positions .
At the same time , it is important to take action to prevent and eradicate the possible causes of the growth of the phenomenon and of the recruitment of pirates .
Someone said during course of the debate that it is becoming very profitable to carry out piracy , and in areas where poverty is at very high levels it is clear that it is easy for pirate organisations to recruit people , especially the young , who are prepared to do anything and prepared to enlist in these paramilitary organisations .
That is why , at the same time as taking measures directed at control and repression , which must be taken by the EU countries , and I am pleased about what has already been done , we must act - and here the Commission has a significant role to play - to help certain developing countries to grow in economic terms , to prevent poverty from becoming a tool that facilitates piracy .
Of course , we must then also work to understand - and here again the Commission can play a very important role - what lies behind piracy , what the links are with fundamentalism and with terrorism ; what the points of strength are , what the reasons are .
The Commission can give significant help here to the other European institutions .
We can certainly not stand by , we can certainly not wait , and certainly , too , with the strong action by Parliament pushing the Council and the Commission to act , we must guarantee safety for sea workers , and we must guarantee safety for goods coming from outside the European Union to supply the European Union .
We must guarantee the issue not only - it is right to deal with it not only in the seas closest to the European Union - where there are also fishermen operating and Mrs Fraga told us , with concern , about events that are taking place even closer to us .
We must also look at what is happening in other parts of the world because piracy also affects ships flying the flags of EU countries in very remote seas .
That is why we must not waste any more time , but it seems to me that the wish of the European Union has been clearly shown today , and particularly that of the Council , with the support of the Commission , to intervene and to continue to take firm action to prevent and , I also believe , through strategic projects to prevent any increase in terrorist action .
That is why the Council will receive support from the Commission on all initiatives to combat terrorism and also to prevent it ; we want to prevent and to combat terrorism , let us say , that is linked to piracy .
Thus , with the vigilant eye of Parliament , I believe that this cooperation can lead us to a positive result .
On defence , I also endorse the view of Mr Bussereau on the words of our friend General Morillon : it is a matter of defending not just the interests but also the values of the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will not take place until the October session .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.50 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m. )

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0462 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Council .
Subject : Importance given to road transport policy
Parliament has expressed its position at first reading on the ' road transport package ' , consisting of proposals for the modification of three regulations on , respectively : access to the occupation of road transport operator ; access to the market in the carriage of goods by road ; and access to the market in the carriage of passengers by coach and bus ( recast - .
These regulations concern and affect the activity of more than 800 000 transport operators in Europe , as well as some 4.5 m jobs .
It is vital that there should be a clear legislative framework making it possible to promote business and development strategies
Given that the new version of the regulation on access to the occupation of road transport operator will come into force on 1 June 2009 , and that by 1 January 2012 the Member States should have interconnected their national electronic registers as defined by that regulation , can the Council state what degree of priority is being given to the ' road transport package ' for the next five months , and what timetable is proposed to enable the new modified regulations to be adopted by 1 June 2009 ?
Mr President , first I want to express my sympathy following the shooting of 10 people at a Finnish school in Kauhajoki .
My sincere condolences go to the families of the victims and to Finnish MEPs either here in this Chamber or detained by their work .
To answer Mrs Ţicău 's question , I just wanted to say that in its session on 13 June 2008 the Council reached a political agreement on the three proposals in the road transport package .
The purpose of these new texts is to harmonise national regulations , which can differ and are therefore a source of legal uncertainty for road transport operators .
The principal amendments that have been made are basically as follows : there is a more precise definition of the concept of ' cabotage ' , a standardised presentation of the Community licence , certified copies and driver certificates , strengthening of the provisions forcing a Member State to take measures when a transport operator commits an infringement in another Member State and , finally , better interconnection of national registers of infringements so that there can be better monitoring of road transport operators across Europe .
The European Parliament adopted the reports on this package at First Reading during the session on 20 May .
Work should now be focused on securing a compromise between the Council and Parliament .
Taking account of translation times , the work on preparing the texts of the respective Common Positions could not start until the end of August but the Council is hoping to be able to adopt the Common Positions on the three proposals in the next few weeks and present them to the European Parliament as soon as possible .
( FR ) I just wanted to say that we have still not received the Common Position from the Council and I wanted to highlight the fact that the date of entry into force of the Regulation , as far as access to the occupation of road transport operator is concerned , is 1 June 2009 .
There are 4.5 million employees and also nearly 800 000 businesses involved here .
This is therefore a very important matter and we are hoping that the Council 's political agreement will give us the time necessary for its Second Reading .
Mrs Ţicău , I am well aware of the urgency you mention .
I can assure you the Council will do its utmost to ensure that the Common Position is defined and sent to Parliament as soon as possible , in view of the urgency you mentioned , which is quite legitimate .
Subject : European immigration pact
Can the Council explain the likely consequences of the recently adopted European immigration pact for the future of the Union 's immigration policy ?

Mr Ortega , the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum aims to express at the highest political level the common principles that should guide migration policy at national and Community level , and the strategic orientations to be pursued to give them substance .
The proposed text was positively received by the Council and the Commission .
The final version should be approved by the European Council in October .
As you know , the aim of the Pact is to lay the foundations of a strengthened common policy , based on two principles at the heart of the European project : on the one hand , responsibility , and on the other , solidarity .
It is based on three dimensions of the overall approach to immigration .
The first is better organisation of legal immigration ; in particular , this involves taking more account of the needs and reception capacities of the Member States , but also encouraging integration .
The next is a more effective fight against illegal immigration , particularly by ensuring that illegal migrants return under conditions of dignity ; we also want to protect the EU better by improving the effectiveness of controls at external borders , particularly within the framework of the Schengen enlargement .
Lastly , there is the promotion of a close partnership between the countries of origin , transit and destination of immigrants , for the benefit of our partners ' development ; this is the concept of co-development .
Finally , as the Vice-President of the Commission said again today , we hope the Pact will enable us to mark out a common asylum policy and a Europe of asylum .
We know that national traditions differ , but we still want to make progress in this area .
As you know , the French Presidency has consulted the European Parliament informally throughout the preparation of this Pact .
There have been many discussions within the Parliament framework .
Parliament 's political support for this initiative is essential .
We have no doubt that the Pact will deliver to European citizens the concrete results they have the right to expect and will show that Europe is taking concrete action to deal with the problems they may be experiencing .
( ES ) I am satisfied with the way in which the Presidency of the Council has answered my question , and I think that the Immigration Pact is an important step .
In what we could call the second part of my question , I am talking , above all , about the influence that this pact could have on the development of the European Union 's policy on immigration .
In other words , can we expect to make progress ?
As the President-in-Office of the Council is aware , at the moment we have , on the one hand , a feeling of alarm in the European Union and , on the other hand , the need for immigration and the need to have adequate regulation , which means that often the information is highly deficient .
Can we expect that this will be followed by legislation and specific provisions that will resolve this problem ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Yes , I do believe , as Mr Ortega has quite rightly pointed out , that there is a need for immigration in Europe , and we are not denying that .
That is why , as I pointed out , we need to lay down conditions for reception and integration as well as conditions for adapting migratory flows to Europe 's economic and social situations .
We need to look at immigration needs within this framework .
We often have a tendency to reduce these needs to skilled immigration .
However , this is not appropriate , because in Europe we also need unskilled immigration , and the discussions in the Council are on exactly that - how to better manage these immigration needs and how to find the best solutions in terms of employment , qualification and reception in schools and universities .
That is where we are at , and we will have a better picture after the European Council on 15 October , when the orientations will be defined .
It is on these bases that the legislative measures Mr Ortega referred to , which are indeed necessary , will be translated .
Subject : Anti-corruption tools
What anti-corruption tools does the Council have in place to ensure that EU aid is being delivered directly and effectively to those most in need in developing countries ?

Mr Ryan , the question you raise is important because it concerns the effectiveness of development aid .
It is important to maintain a significant volume of development aid , and I will come back to that , but you are quite right to point out in your question that this aid must be effective .
For aid to be effective , and to be able to combat fraud and the improper allocation of development aid funds , we particularly need better coordination and complementarity between donors .
That is why we are working on joint multiannual programming based on strategies to combat poverty , which give us a better picture of how funds are targeted and according to what objectives , and which also enable us to control this allocation better .
This is why we have set up common implementation mechanisms , including joint analyses .
In particular , there are some large-scale joint missions , financed by both donors and beneficiaries , so that co-financing mechanisms are in place .
These issues were on the agenda of the Third High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness held in Accra last week .
We debated this here at the last session at the beginning of this month .
At the Forum in Accra in early September , a plan of action was adopted .
It largely meets our expectations as regards the European Union .
The principal commitments made by the donors are as follows : better planning , three to five years in advance , of the aid countries hope to provide ; the use of administrations and organisations in partner countries ; switching from political conditions imposed by third countries to conditions based on targets set by the developing countries themselves .
As regards monitoring the supply of aid , the Council , like the European Parliament , gets the chance to evaluate how the EU 's external aid has been used each year .
This evaluation is performed through the Annual Report on the European Community 's Development Policy and the Implementation of External Assistance , which the Commission generally presents towards the end of June - which must have been done in June , if I am to believe the information I have here .
I would add that the development cooperation instrument provides tools to protect the Community 's financial interests , particularly as regards fraud and irregularities , as Mr Ryan hopes .
There are therefore evaluation mechanisms , control mechanisms , mechanisms that aim to ensure better coordination between donors and beneficiaries ; but at the end of the day , the real objective is to ensure that these policies are appropriated by the beneficiary countries , to continue to stress good governance and ensure there is a greater sense of responsibility , particularly on the part of the beneficiaries of this aid as regards the allocation of our support .
That is what I wanted to say .
Mr President , by sheer coincidence , Transparency International , the anti-corruption watchdog , released its annual corruption perception index today .
It estimates that levels of corruption are adding about USD 50 billion to the cost of achieving the Millennium Development Goals , which is an absolutely staggering amount of money .
It is approximately half of the annual global aid outlay .
Even if that figure is exaggerated - even if it is half what they say - it is still a staggering amount of money .
President-in-Office of the Council , do you not think that more needs to be done to try to tackle this ?
Whatever we need , one thing we do not need is for the general public in Europe to feel that the money they give to aid programmes is in some way being mislaid or abused .
I think it is very important that a figure as staggering as this needs to be addressed in a more coherent way .
I would like to reiterate what I said earlier .
Mr Ryan is right .
It is true that one of the problems for public opinion in Europe is , on the one hand , that the volume of development aid remains high .
In this respect , as you know , the European Union is the biggest donor of development aid .
On the other hand , it is essential that the mechanisms of good governance and effective control are in place .
There must also be better information for the public about aid and the appropriation of aid by beneficiary countries and , to be honest , monitoring of governance - a certain conditionality , if you like - must be at the heart of development policy .
You are all right , corruption is a scourge .
I do not know whether Transparency International 's figures are accurate , as you yourself acknowledged , but in any case the point you made was correct .
Consequently , there cannot be an increase in development aid except through a reinforcement of control mechanisms , anti-fraud mechanisms , anti-corruption mechanisms , and each time this should be one of the objectives of the agreements .
This is also what the Council concluded on 27 May in terms of its development policy objectives .
There must be better control mechanisms and conditionality to protect financial interests , but more importantly , as you pointed out , Mr Ryan , to combat corruption .
Subject : Rising food prices
Among the Council priorities for the French Presidency is sustainable development in the agriculture and fisheries sectors .
In the current economic climate , when Europe and the wider world are affected by rising food prices , what can and will the Council do to ensure that the urgent short-term needs of food supply are met without compromising the sustainability of future development in agriculture and fisheries ?

Mr President , Mr Ó Neachtain , the Council is fully aware of the need to look for adequate and effective solutions to the problem of rising food prices .
This is a complex issue , which the Commission thankfully analysed in detail in its Communication of 23 May 2008 .
It was on this basis that the European Council of 19 and 20 June adopted its decisions .
In the agriculture sector , the EU has already acted : we have sold intervention stocks , reduced export refunds , abolished the need for set-aside in 2008 , increased milk quotas and suspended import duty on cereals .
This has enabled us to improve supply and has helped stabilise the agricultural markets .
However , this is not enough .
We need to continue the reform of the common agricultural policy ; we must make it more market-oriented while encouraging sustainable agriculture throughout the EU and assuring adequate supply .
Agriculture ministers are discussing this - in fact they may even still be discussing it today - at the informal meeting in Annecy and will report back to the ' Agriculture ' Council on 17 and 18 November .
In this context , the French Presidency is determined to strengthen the crisis management instruments in an increasingly uncertain international context and to maintain all market regulation instruments to prevent the volatility that you quite rightly mention .
The question of food prices is not just linked to agriculture ; other mechanisms are at work .
I am thinking for example of the fisheries policy , which has to cope with the consequences of the increase in diesel prices .
On 15 July the Council adopted a series of emergency measures to encourage the restructuring of the fleets that have been hit hardest by the crisis .
There is also regulation of the retail sector : the Commission is due to submit a report to the European Council next December .
There are also policies concerning biofuels , which must take economic and environmental constraints into account and ensure that there is a cap on the prices of these new fuels .
As you can see , these diverse issues , not to mention those that we have already raised - in other words , development policies and procurement policies with regard to food imports - cover a wide range of policies and are high on the Council 's agenda .
The European Council will examine this in October and December , and of course I will be delighted to take on the task of informing you of the results .
( GA ) Mr President , thank you for your response .
I would like to inquire of the President-in-Office of the Council if he believes that it is more important than ever that Europe 's agricultural policy , that is Europe 's policy on food supply , continues after 2013 due to the current crises in the global policy on food supply so that food suppliers in Europe have some sense of certainty ?

What I wanted to say is that , as Mr Ó Neachtain knows , we want to make sure that the Health Check ends with a reflection on the future of the common agricultural policy .
This was the aim - the main aim , in fact - of the discussions taking place today and yesterday between agriculture ministers in Annecy .
Mr Ó Neachtain knows that he can count on the determination of the French Presidency in this respect .
Subject : White Paper on Sport
Can the Council outline what elements of the EU White Paper on Sport it will seek to implement and promote during the French Presidency of the EU ?
This is a subject that interests me a great deal , so I will try to keep it brief .
I will try not to confine myself to the legal aspects , although such aspects do exist .
The EU has no specific competence in sport .
I would like to point out to Mr Aylward that , for its part , the Lisbon Treaty offers a legal basis for real sports policies .
We are aware of this and for that reason , as well as for many others , we are waiting for the Treaty to be implemented .
We would like to ensure that Europe is aware of the various dimensions of sport and the influence that it has on people of all ages , especially young people , but above all its social and educational aspects .
As current holders of the EU Presidency , we attach a great deal of importance to cooperation between Member States on this subject .
Before there can be new legal bases under the Lisbon Treaty , I think we need to recognise the specificity of sport in our society .
At an informal meeting of ministers in charge of European affairs , which I convened in Brest on 12 July , we addressed this issue in the context of the European Union .
We raised the question of the conditions of recognition of this specificity within a legal framework which should be clear with regard to Community law and the need to improve the governance of sport at European level .
We have had discussions , particularly with UEFA President Michel Platini , which were based on the White Paper on Sport , the Pierre de Coubertin Action Plan , which was unveiled by the Commission last July .
These discussions will continue between sports ministers in Biarritz on 27 and 28 November .
There will also be a European forum on sport .
The Presidency will invite ministers to look at a number of subjects that seem to me to be extremely important for the cohesion of our society and for the educational value of sport , particularly health and sport , anti-doping , and also the fact that we need to maintain sport at grass-roots level , ensuring that clubs are given feedback about the players they train and the issues of a dual career , of dual training .
As you can see , we are extremely committed to highlighting the role of sport in the European Union and giving it its rightful place in Europe .
We have set ourselves three goals : to recognise the specificity of the role of sport in society ; to take account of the place occupied by physical activities and sport in economic development ; and finally to guarantee , in an increasingly complex society , good governance of sport , of all sports .
President-in-Office , I welcome the fact that you referred to the different dimensions of sport .
Nowadays , we hear about professional sport all the time but I am particularly concerned about volunteerism in sport and the ' Sport for all ' concept .
I would like an assurance from you that the EU will support voluntary groups and volunteerism , and in particular the ' Sport for all ' concept .
It is vitally important at a time when all the emphasis in the media and elsewhere is on professional sport .
Mr President , Mr Aylward is absolutely right .
We would like to ensure that there is a better balance between amateur and professional sport , we would like there to be supervision , in some cases , of professional sport and we would effectively like to support and encourage the thousands of voluntary associations that are involved in sport across Europe .
It is here that we effectively need to ensure that the European Union provides incentives .
It is crucial that we know at this stage which associations are involved in backing sport within the European Union .
We need to have a detailed study on voluntary work in the EU , and particularly voluntary work in sport , and if Mr Aylward would like to take part in the study we propose , then he will obviously be most welcome .
In any case , this is an important dimension that we would like to take into account .
In this respect , I would like to point out that we are also going to meet in Paris on 5 October with all the European athletes who took part in the Olympic Games .
There are , in fact , still a number of amateur athletes who compete in the Olympics .
Subject : Objectives of European Conference on Alzheimer 's
I welcome the French Presidency programme highlighting the promotion of better care for sufferers of Alzheimer 's disease and their families .
Fostering the exchange and sharing of national experience and cooperation on best practice between Member States on health is what the EU is all about .
Increased exchanging of information and best practices between Member States on all health matters will hugely benefit our medical professions and more importantly our citizens .
I am aware that a large European conference will be held in October on the subject of Alzheimer 's disease . Can you outline the set objectives of this conference and what the French Presidency would like to achieve ?
This is an extremely serious issue .
The French Presidency of the Council attaches the utmost importance to Alzheimer 's disease and to other neurodegenerative diseases .
This is an issue that affects every family in Europe at some point .
We must tackle the issue head-on , unless we want to be overtaken by the ageing European population .

As announced on 1 July by President Barroso and President Sarkozy , together we must prepare a European plan to tackle Alzheimer 's disease based on three pillars : research , patient care and quality of life , and ethics and legal aspects , particularly with regard to those involved in treating this disease .
It is in this context that the French Presidency will hold a ministerial conference in Paris on 30 and 31 October entitled ' Europe against Alzheimer 's Disease ' .
This conference will focus on the disease , but will also tackle other related diseases such as Pick disease , Binswanger 's disease and Lewy body disease .
We will cover all of these diseases so that we can look at how to reconcile the care given to patients with social support , how to tailor professions and skills according to patients ' needs , how to expand our knowledge - in other words , everything to do with research and medical expertise - and how to ensure better coordination of research programmes in various European countries , as well as how to find out about the latest scientific results concerning this disease and the development of new drugs .
There is no question that the European dimension can and must provide a significant impetus for the various campaigns to tackle these diseases .
The results of the ministerial conference will help provide a basis for the conclusions of the European Council next December , although we are fully aware that this is a work in progress .
This will be a long-term project and it is vital that subsequent presidencies , starting with the Czech and Swedish Presidencies , continue the good work .
Knowing how sensitive the European Parliament is , I know that we can count on your support , as well as on the commitment of the European Commission , to provide the continuity that is needed .
Let me compliment the French presidency on holding this conference ' Europe Against Alzheimer 's ' and the proactive role that it has adopted .
I notice , however , that you have not mentioned the issue of dementia specifically and , as you know , Alzheimer 's associations are clamouring for increased awareness and education on the condition .
Can you tell me , Minister , if the conference will address the issue promoting awareness of the condition in order to decrease the stigma associated with it ?
( SK ) In the European Union and in my country , Slovakia , Alzheimer 's disease and the care of people suffering from this are still being given insufficient attention .
Experts estimate that , in the next 40 years , Alzheimer 's disease may affect up to four times more people than today , but early and accurate diagnosis may help to slow the development of the disease .
Will the French Presidency not prepare a special information campaign or give new encouragement to the Commission to prepare programmes to cofinance the activity of citizens ' associations aimed at helping people with memory disorders and Alzheimer 's disease ?

Mr Aylward is right : the conference must study all aspects of prevention and education , as Mrs Pleštinská and Mr Aylward both point out .
We must fully take into account the different aspects of dementia , as well as aspects linked to Lewy body syndrome , as I think I underlined in my speech .
This is a natural process , since Alzheimer 's disease is a neurodegenerative condition ; in other words a condition in which neurons deteriorate and die .
The disappearance of these neurons , which are used to plan sequences of actions , are debilitating .
Although we associate Alzheimer 's disease with loss of memory , other parts of the brain are also affected .
Clearly this can also be accompanied by types of dementia , which is something we must take preventive action against .
From this point of view , I can assure Mr Aylward that the conference will fully address these issues .
In terms of the question from Mrs Pleštinská , I believe that some marginalisation does exist .
You mentioned the rise in Alzheimer 's in your country .
Unfortunately , this is not an isolated case in Europe .
Here , too , we need to focus on the issue of earlier diagnosis .
We need to share information ; we need better coordination between specialists in these issues at European level .
However , early diagnosis is particularly important to prevent patients from being marginalised and gradually falling victim to the disease without others noticing .
Subject : Agricultural policy and the French Presidency
The Presidency of the Council states in its work programme that it ' will review the legislative proposals on the assessment of the Common Agricultural Policy , with the aim of adopting new provisions by the end of 2008 .
To do this , it will work closely with the European Parliament ... the Presidency will [ also ] propose to its partners that they take a broader view of the issues and the objectives that European agriculture and agricultural policy will have to meet in the future ' .
Given this , can the Presidency of the Council update Parliament on the informal meeting of agriculture ministers scheduled to take place in Annecy on 21-23 September 2008 ?
In particular can the Presidency report to Parliament on the progress made with regard to the CAP ' Health Check ' and the animal health strategy ?
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Doyle for allowing me the opportunity to inform Parliament of the recent developments concerning the common agricultural policy .
The Council is working intensively and constructively on the Health Check - as I have already said - with a view to achieving a political consensus as soon as the European Parliament has given its opinion , which it is expected to do by November 2008 .
We are keen to work closely with Parliament based on the report that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is due to submit on 7 October .
The Council is , in turn , due to discuss this at the end of the month , on 27 and 28 October .
As I mentioned , the Council is continuing to examine the Commission 's legislative proposals on matters relating to the modulation of aid , market management mechanisms , milk quota management and conditionality .
These were discussed by ministers of agriculture in Annecy yesterday and today .
Ministers have raised issues concerning both the CAP Health Check and the future of the CAP , distinguishing between internal and external aspects .
As far as internal aspects are concerned , it is important that a higher proportion of CAP appropriations are allocated to the most vulnerable people , especially in view of the price increases we have seen .
External aspects must include the introduction of an emergency EU food programme .
As for the concern expressed by Mrs Doyle on the subject of the animal welfare strategy , following the unveiling in September 2007 of the Commission Communication on the Community Animal Health Policy and its strategy over the period 2007-2013 , on 17 December 2007 the Council adopted conclusions on the strategy , inviting the Commission to present an action plan .
This action plan was adopted by the Commission on 10 September and it is on the basis of this document that the French Presidency is determined to continue working .
We would particularly like to strengthen Community procedures for epizootic control , both in the Community and regarding imports , and to review legislation on biosafety and compensation .
( GA ) Mr President , when we speak of agriculture we speak of food .
It is my understanding that the Commission recommended that the European Union have a policy on food labelling where foods of European origin would be clearly indicated on our supermarket shelves - I make this remark especially in reference to meat .
It has been said , however , that the Council will not accept this policy .
I would like to inquire of the President-in-Office of the Council why that is ?
Listen , I share the concerns of Mr Higgins , so I am going to see what the Council is prepared to accept .
What seems very clear , Mr Higgins , is that , as holders of the Presidency , we share your concerns regarding guaranteeing food safety for citizens and ensuring the traceability of foodstuffs .
It is therefore crucial that we satisfy the demand for food quality and diversity .
Consumers are going to be even more critical when it comes to food safety .
We will ensure that we improve consumer information on the public health issues linked with a balanced diet and the origin and quality of products .
You should know that this is one of the Presidency 's concerns , and that during the various summit meetings we will try to ensure that concrete expression is given to this objective , which is important to us all , Mr Higgins .
Questions Nos 8 and 9 were not deemed admissible .
Subject : Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty
Does the rejection by the Irish electorate of the Lisbon Reform Treaty have implications for EU enlargement and will the Council spell out precisely what these implications are ?

Mr President , Mr Higgins , as you know , the European Council has acknowledged the results of the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon .
It has also acknowledged that the ratification process is ongoing and has issued an explicit reminder that the aim of the Lisbon Treaty is to help the enlarged Union act more efficiently and more democratically .
Heads of State or Government will address this issue at the October Council .
We must all reflect on the consequences of the current institutional situation for all policies , including enlargement , and on the institutions themselves .
The Treaty of Nice , in political terms , was designed for a Europe of 27 members .
However , what I want to be clear about is that during its Presidency , France has acted impartially in continuing the negotiations under way with Croatia and Turkey , in view of the progress made by the candidate countries in satisfying their obligations .
With regard to Croatia , 21 of the 35 chapters are still open , while 3 have been provisionally closed .
Two intergovernmental conferences are planned under the French Presidency .
We have already opened the chapter on the free movement of goods .
In terms of Turkey , we had a troika last week during the meeting of EU foreign ministers .
At the present time 8 of the 35 chapters are open , 1 chapter has been provisionally closed , and if the conditions are met , we hope to be able to open 2 or 3 more chapters with Turkey by the end of the year .
Minister , is it not clear that , by 31 December , all 26 Member States except Ireland will have adopted the Lisbon Treaty , and that there is no question of renegotiation ?
You cannot go back to the text .
But , apart from Ireland and Lisbon , you take France and the Netherlands in relation to the Constitution : we have a major problem in that there is a huge disconnect between the ordinary citizen and the European project .
Would the Minister consider that an idea would be for us to have a Europe Day - not just a Schuman Day , where we just have Brussels and Belgium closed - a Europe Day , a public holiday , where all the citizens of Europe , in all the 27 Member States , would collectively celebrate our common European citizenship and identity ?
I understand that the Council has been supplied with the results of a survey carried out by the Irish Government .
Can I just say that I think that this sort of window dressing is what got us where we are .
They did not survey the 47 % who voted ' yes ' .
The reason that the referendum was not carried in Ireland was a failure of leadership , and secondly because - leaving aside the original vote on the Treaty of Rome - we went to the people six times in referendum : in the Single European Act , Amsterdam , Maastricht , twice on the Nice Treaty , and then on Lisbon .
And then we hand the people an entire Treaty and say : what do you think of that ?
Was it not a recipe for disaster , when there was no leadership ?
The question is : will there be leadership now ?
I would like to ask the President-in-Office if he would indicate what the implications will be if Ireland does not ratify either now , or if it continues to vote ' no ' in the future .
Give us an indication of where Europe is going .
Mr Higgins and Mr Mitchell have raised important questions .
I will leave Mr Mitchell to answer for his comments .
Personally I cannot comment on his remarks , and he will understand this , in view of my responsibilities before this Assembly .
There are numerous causes .
I believe that the report that was produced after the Irish voted ' no ' to the referendum highlights a number of issues : it raises questions of leadership , thematic questions , and highlights the lack of understanding of what the Lisbon Treaty actually is .
The French Presidency will do its utmost to find a solution to this major institutional problem .
We need the Lisbon Treaty and , in agreement with our Irish friends , we will look at all possible options from now until the end of the French Presidency .
To answer Mr Higgins , I think he is right .
There is no doubt that the referendums have shown that there is a disconnect between the European project and public opinion .
This is why we need to look at what the fundamental issues are , as well as examine the communication issues .
This morning the Commission , representatives from your Assembly - Vice-President Vidal-Quadras and the committee chairman Mr Leinen - and I tried to define an interinstitutional architecture , a political declaration aimed at improving communication between the three institutions .
For the Council - and I speak objectively here - this has required effort and has not been particularly easy .
As for your suggestion , I can only speak personally , but I must say that the idea of a ' Europe Day ' celebrated across Europe seems to me effectively to be a symbol of more shared citizenship , of a Europe that is better understood .
However , this is an idea that you and I and the most ardent Europe supporters must promote .
Personally , though , I think it is a good idea .
( FR ) Thank you for clarifying these matters .
I would also like you to clarify a more specific point .
We have talked at length about Ireland , but four other Member States have still not ratified the Treaty , as you know : Poland , the Czech Republic , Sweden - we do not even know what stage Sweden is at with the ratification process - and Germany .
In terms of the latter , I would like to remind you that everything hangs on a ruling by the Karlsruhe Constitutional Court .
The president of the court has said that she does not intend to hurry and will not decide until early next year .
Consequently , I would be grateful if you could also explain the next steps to us .
I thought that this Treaty , which was signed in December last year , had to come into force in a few months ' time .
Where exactly are we with this ?
I have always agreed with the strict assessments of Mr Coûteaux .
We have intellectual differences , which is not surprising , but I recognise that his assessments are thorough .
What I wanted to make very clear is that we need to treat Germany as a separate case .
We will see what happens , but I am not overly concerned , with all due respect for the Constitutional Court of Karlsruhe .
I do not have any further information on this subject .
With regard to Poland , we are in contact with the Polish authorities .
There is also cohabitation in Poland , although I believe that the Polish Government is committed to the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
As for Sweden , there is nothing to suggest that the process will be blocked .
I believe that ratification will take place in November .
With regard to the Czech Republic , as you know , we need to wait for the court 's decision .
Senate elections are currently taking place and an important conference of the majority party will take place in early December .
This seems to me to be the most likely scenario .
I do not share the deduction made by Mr Coûteaux ; I do not share his pessimism .
There is no doubt that this will take time and that we need to give it time , but political will must be allowed to speak and the French Presidency , for its part , has decided to show voluntarism in this respect .
Subject : Iran and the development of a nuclear capacity
Will the Council comment on its position towards Iran and the potential nuclear threat it represents since it decided to abandon the containment and surveillance measures of the 1997 Additional Protocol of the International Atomic Energy Agency limiting the intrusive powers of the inspectors and putting a halt to snap inspections ?

Mr President , to answer Mr Mitchell on this serious issue , the EU still has serious concerns over Iran 's nuclear programme and the country 's lack of interest in responding fully to the concerns raised by the possible military dimension of this programme .
In December 2007 the European Council declared that it would be unacceptable for Iran to have a nuclear military capability .
In this respect , the Council has on numerous occasions condemned the fact that Iran has not fulfilled its international obligations , which are laid down in Resolutions 1696 , 1737 , 1747 and 1803 of the United Nations Security Council , specifically the obligation to suspend all activity linked to uranium enrichment , which is crucial if we are to have the necessary framework to begin negotiations and move towards a long-term solution .
The EU has always supported Iran 's right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy , and if Iran wants to rebuild the confidence of the international community in the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme , it must suspend sensitive activities involving the nuclear fuel cycle .
The proposals made by Mr Solana in June 2006 , repeated in June 2008 on behalf of the six most closely involved countries , still apply and must be used to break the current deadlock .
The EU strongly regrets the fact that Iran suspended the provisional application of the Additional Protocol in February 2006 .
As a result of this - as underlined by the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) - the IAEA knows less about certain aspects of the Iranian nuclear programme .
In addition , as we were recently reminded once again by the Director General of the IAEA in his report of 15 September , Iran is still refusing to answer specific questions that the IAEA has put to it about activities linked to the design and production of nuclear weapons .
As the IAEA Director General said - and I cannot draw a different conclusion - this situation is a source of grave concern for the EU and the international community .
I thank the Minister for his reply .
I would like to ask the Minister - since this is clearly of grave concern to the international community and to the European Union - the following question .
Sanctions , to date , have not worked .
We do not want to get to the stage where military intervention is necessary , so can the Minister tell this House what other sanctions or what other plans the Council has to be proactive to try to bring the Iranian administration to its senses ?
Are there alternative sanctions ?
Do you have a list of alternative sanctions , and what are the future steps to be taken ?
At times it is very hard to see in this game of cat and mouse just who is the cat and who is the mouse .
We have not reached the point of military action .
I am saying this again here very clearly .
The six countries have confirmed their support for the dual approach , which must combine dialogue and sanctions in order to reach a negotiated solution that satisfies the concerns of the international community .
As far as sanctions go , these vary in nature .
They must be targeted and must include the economic and financial sector .
Subject : European agreement on migration and asylum arrangements
The formulation of a European agreement on migration and asylum arrangements proposed by the French Presidency seeks to achieve an active political commitment on the part of the EU and the Member States concerning common principles for the formulation of migration policies in a spirit of solidarity and responsibility .
In this connection , what binding agreements with countries situated on the EU 's borders and in particular applicant countries ( Turkey , Croatia , FYROM ) concerning immigrants from third countries does the Council intend to propose with a view to making Europe an area of security , justice and freedom ?
What I wanted to say is that the most effective weapon that we have in the fight against illegal immigration is the readmission agreements with third countries that share borders with the EU .
The Community has signed agreements with 11 third countries . This is the case with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , where the agreement came into force on 1 January 2008 .
All of these agreements contain provisions relating to third-country nationals in transit through the territory .
With regard to Turkey , formal negotiations began in 2005 .
For Croatia , there is no mandate for negotiating a readmission agreement and the Council wanted there to be swift progress in the negotiations for this country .
The agreement that will be discussed and , we hope , ratified by the European Council on 15 October will cast the political spotlight on the importance of readmission agreements in the fight against illegal immigration .
( FR ) I would just like to thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
Mrs Panayotopoulos offers her apologies because she had to leave owing to a prior engagement .
She asked me to thank you for your answer , President-in-Office .
Subject : Reform of French public-sector television
French President Nicolas Sarkozy has undertaken to implement a major reform of public-sector television in France .
The reform , which would bring to an end all commercial advertising , is facing major resistance from workers in the sector and , in a broader context , from public opinion , with fears that public-service television would soon cease to exist as it would not be able to compete with private channels if it no longer received income from advertisements .
From here it is but a short step to believing , as many people do , that France has decided to kill off public-sector television to the benefit of the private sector , which stands to gain much from the procedure .
Is this an isolated case , or is the initiative likely to spread to all Member States ?
I would also like to know the Council 's position on this issue and whether this kind of reform conforms to European legislation ?
Mr President , it is a pleasure .
Thank you for this final question , which is a joy to receive .
I will of course answer as representative of the Council Presidency and it will come as no surprise to Mr Hutchinson - we know each other well - when I say that funding for state television comes under the remit of the Member States , that the Protocol annexed to the Treaty on European Union on state broadcasting in Member States is unequivocal and that therefore it is up to each Member State to decide how state television companies are funded .
This is what I wanted to say to Mr Hutchinson .
( FR ) Minister , thank you for your answer .
This is what I thought you would say .
I would simply like to say that I am one of those non-French French-speakers - and there are many of us out there - who are devoted viewers and listeners of French state television and radio stations , and that we are concerned about the future of state television and radio stations following the decisions taken by the French Government and announced by its President , who , by chance , also happens to be the current President of the European Council .
I would also like to say that Mrs Reding , Commissioner for Information Society and Media , to whom I put the same question in a recent interview , admitted that she had not been convinced by the French President 's proposed reforms unveiled in January .
She also lamented the President 's decision to tax Internet service providers to finance state television .
I would like to know where you stand on this .
First of all , in my own country , as far as I know , different political parties , regardless of their sympathies , asked that there be an end to the ratings tyranny and the way in which this threatens quality and multicultural programming .
This much I do know .
Secondly , you have singled out the reform of existing advertising resources and public funding .
Funding should continue to meet the needs of the public service and we should have sufficient funding to cover these needs .
This is a fact and is not disputed .
Thirdly , as usual , France has no intention of imposing any particular model and , as I said , this remains the preserve of each Member State .
Having said that , everyone here is keen to see that a high-quality public audiovisual service is maintained .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) - Migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Carlos Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( decision ) ( 12059 / 1 / 2008 - C6-0188 / 2008 - , and
the report by Carlos Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( regulation ) ( 11925 / 2 / 2008 - C6-0189 / 2008 - .
( PT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Vice-President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are examining two instruments : a regulation and a decision on migration from SISone4ALL to SIS II , including a comprehensive test that will assess whether the level of performance of SIS II is equivalent to that of the current system .
These proposals are the result of a change in the migration strategy .
Four points : firstly , the initial plan was to have a migration of 15 Member States in a process lasting around 8 hours .
In the meantime , the number of Member States increased to 25 , which made the process much more complex and difficult .
Secondly , an interim technical architecture will have to be created that will allow SIS1 + and SIS II to operate in parallel for a limited transitional period .
This is a wise solution that we should agree to and it will enable us to have a fallback in the event of something going wrong .
Thirdly , a technical tool - a converter - will be made available during this interim period that will connect the SIS I central system to the SIS II central system , enabling both to process the same information and ensuring that all Member States stay on the same level .
Lastly , the mandate given to the Commission in 2001 expires at the end of this year .
We raised four concerns .
Firstly , the need for the European Commission to continue to have a mandate to develop SIS II until it is operational .
We are opposed to the idea , which was considered , of the Commission 's mandate finishing when work on the C-SIS central system is concluded .
Secondly , for there to be a clear definition of the European Commission 's competences and of those of the Member States .
Thirdly , that all the conditions laid down in No 2 establishing the legal basis for SIS should be fulfilled before the migration of the data takes place .
Lastly , that this migration should be carried out in a single , one-shot phase , processed by all Member States .
The proposals we received on 3 September , on the same day that they were approved in Coreper , make major changes to the initial proposals .
Normally Parliament should be consulted again when the texts presented involve substantial changes .
However , once again , we are up against a tight schedule ; the Commission 's mandate expires at the end of 2008 and it is essential that the Council approve these proposals at the end of October .
Once again Parliament is showing it is living up to its responsibilities and it is not our fault that the process is delayed .
As a matter of fact , the changes that have been made do answer most of the concerns outlined in my draft reports , especially in terms of clarifying the Commission 's responsibilities and those of the Member States and that the Commission will continue to have a mandate to develop SIS II until it is operational .
In conclusion , I should like to congratulate the French Presidency on the excellent work it has put into achieving a good agreement between the Commission and the Member States , which had looked as if it was going to be difficult .
The European Parliament wants to contribute to avoiding further delays and to having SIS II operational by the new date set : 30 September 2009 .
We are , however , concerned , as various experts have said informally that it is more than likely that this date will once again not be respected .
There are two essential points that the European Parliament considers as key and that all the political groups support .
Firstly , that the European Parliament should be updated on a six-monthly basis on the development of the project and , secondly , that the mandate given to the new Commission should not be an open-ended mandate and that a rule be included whereby the European Parliament has to be consulted again if there is a delay of more than one year .
We sincerely hope that this time the project will be concluded in a timely fashion and that SIS II can start operating on the scheduled date .
We will now hear from the Council .
Mr Jouyet , on behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to thank you for being here all day .
I believe that your attentiveness before this Assembly is a reflection of your commitment to Europe .
Mr President , thank you for your kind words .
Obviously I return the compliment in terms of commitment to Europe , and to the Vice-President of the Commission , Jacques Barrot .
Mr Coelho , ladies and gentlemen , redesigning the Schengen system is necessary to develop the new functions that crime prevention and border control will demand in future .
The ' SISone4ALL ' system , Minister , developed on the initiative of the Portuguese Presidency , is a happy compromise that allowed the Member States that joined in 2004 to be included and , more importantly , led to the removal of controls at internal land borders , in December , and then at air borders , in March .
We all felt emotional seeing the last iron curtain come down , seeing Slovak and Austrian ministers symbolically cut down the wooden barrier at the Berg-Petržalka crossing point to the east of Vienna .
I think that this is a proud moment for any staunch European supporter , knowing that we have an area of free movement of 3.6 million km2 .
This is the largest area in the world , although - as you know - the necessary corollary of this great freedom is an electronic system that allows us to identify suspected criminals and to follow the trail of false papers and stolen passports , while applying stringent data protection rules to guarantee individual freedoms .
I would like to emphasise this point .
However , as you quite rightly said , the current system does not allow the use of modern technology , even if this complies with the fundamental principles of data protection and especially the principle of proportionality .
How can the police be efficient with a central database that does not currently allow them to look at digital photographs of wanted criminals , to identify them with any certainty ?
This is why the aim of the Schengen II or SIS II information system must be maintained ; as you clearly explained , this is the real issue in our debate .
Mr President , on behalf of the Council , I would like to thank the Vice-President , Mr Barrot , who , under a new mandate , has agreed to continue overseeing the development of the new SIS central database , in addition to the connection with national databases .
I would like to thank him for being personally involved in this project .
The draft texts that you will be asked to vote on tomorrow set out a clearer division of responsibilities between the Member States and the Commission during each phase , whether in terms of project development , final tests , the interim phase , with the converter , or the final migration of one system to another , in the interests of establishing an overall balance between the obligations of Member States and the responsibilities of the European Commission .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Coelho , who has worked swiftly , effectively and imaginatively on this important project , together with his colleagues from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I would also ask him to pass on my thanks to the committee chairman , Mr Deprez .
Mr Coelho has encouraged support for the texts needed for today 's plenary , and these texts incorporate the proposals that you made , Mr Coelho .
Parliament 's support today allows us to embark on a new phase in the transition to SIS II , in time for the expiry of the Commission 's current mandate - an ad hoc mandate , I should point out - which is due to expire on 31 December .
I would just like to reassure the Vice-President on this point .
Of course , the launch of the new system represents an enormous technological challenge , and one that was no doubt underestimated at first .
In fact , the transfer of 22 million records involving more than 24 parties whose national databases are in different formats is , as you can imagine , no mean feat .
However , the efforts that have been made in this project are , I think , up to the task .
In view of these technical and financial efforts , the European Parliament deserves to be kept fully informed of the progress and of the difficulties that exist in the transition to the new system .
A deadline should be set - as you said , Mr Coelho - to test the new system and check that it will be fully operational - as we all hope - in September next year , as agreed during the Justice and Home Affairs Council Meeting on 6 June .
We realise that we have set ourselves a tight deadline .
The technical experts realise this .
We can only meet this deadline if everyone is wholeheartedly committed to the SIS II project and shoulders their responsibilities .
With this report , the European Parliament is sending out a positive signal this evening by asking perfectly legitimate questions .
This is why the Council proposes to unconditionally approve the amendments tabled , which , I should point out , have received the support of all political groups within the European Parliament . Thank you so much for all your hard work .


Mr President , I too would like to thank the Presidency and Mr Jouyet for agreeing just now with Mr Coelho 's report , since I truly believe that progress needs to be made in this crucial area now , without delay .
I would also like to thank Mr Coelho for his report and for his personal commitment to the success of SIS II .
If SIS II ever sees the light of day , then we will owe much to you , Mr Coehlo .
Your report again highlights the level of interest and ongoing support within the European Parliament for plans to develop the second generation Schengen Information System .
Evidently , SIS II will be a key tool in the Common Space of Freedom , Security and Justice and , to that end , it is clearly essential that this system should be operational as soon as possible .
I am pleased , therefore , that an agreement has been reached on legal instruments relating to the migration of SIS I to SIS II .
This agreement is acceptable because it respects the following three key principles :
a clear delimitation of the tasks and responsibilities of those involved ( Member States , Commission , Council ) ;
effective and unambiguous decision-making processes ;
the setting of compulsory milestones .
The adoption of this legal framework by October will help ensure that the work necessary for SIS II continues in 2009 .
It is true , as Mr Jouyet pointed out - you pointed this out , President-in-Office - that 30 September 2009 , a date now recognised in the proposed legal instruments on migration , is an ambitious deadline .
Even this summer we actually had to suspend some tests with Member States following an informal expert consultation .
The contractor now has a period of 20 days in which to correct the existing problems .
However , there is no doubt that we need to keep a close eye on all of the potential problems that might arise and prevent us from keeping to the timetable for SIS II .
We are currently in discussion with Member States on the best way of finishing the work on SIS II .
We also need to find the right balance between the political priority attached to this system and , at the same time , the guarantee of excellence of the service rendered to the national authorities that will use it .
In any event , the proposed adaptation mechanisms give us some flexibility and oblige us to adopt the necessary transparency with regard to the development plan .
Therefore , Mr Coehlo , we are in full agreement with your amendments ; that goes without saying .

On the one hand , setting an expiry date for legislative acts on migration for the end of June 2010 will give us sufficient room for manoeuvre in the event of problems with finalising the development of SIS II or with migration .
This date will also ensure that SIS II is fully operational by mid-2010 .
On the other hand , the twice-yearly presentation by the Commission of reports relating to the development and migration of SIS I to SIS II will ensure that work on SIS II is transparent for the European Parliament .
For my part , Mr President , I would like to emphasise - like Mr Jouyet , speaking on behalf of the Presidency - that for Schengen to truly be a complete success - which it already is - we need SIS II .
This is a real technological achievement , illustrating what Europe can do when it decides to use new technology . It is also absolutely essential .
This is why I am extremely grateful to Parliament , which , almost without opposition , has accepted all of these aspects and has approved Mr Coehlo 's report .

on behalf of PPE-DE . - ( RO ) I endorse the rapporteur 's proposal of setting the deadline for this new legislative package for 30 June 2010 ; this is important in order to prevent any possible delays in the implementation of the second generation of the Schengen Information System , SIS II .
The removal of border controls on land and at sea , which started on 21 December 2007 , as well as in the air ( March 2008 ) is a relevant step for nine of the ten Member States .
The Council decided that border control in the three outstanding states , Cyprus , Romania and Bulgaria , would cease when the operability of the Schengen System has been guaranteed following an evaluation .
However , the working of the Schengen System in the three states depends on the working of SIS II in the current Schengen countries .
As is known , SIS II was initially scheduled to start operating in May 2007 , then it was delayed for December 2008 , and now it has been postponed again to September 2009 .
This rescheduling may trigger delays in the three Member States .
We should not forget that all of these three Member States are border states of the European Union and that they have both land and maritime borders .
The first two measures in the Schengen acquis are the removal of border control , its movement to external borders , and common procedures for the control of persons crossing external borders .
These measures in the acquis are undermined by the fact that countries such as Romania , Bulgaria and Cyprus depend on the delayed implementation of SIS II in countries which are part of the Schengen Area .
Therefore , I call on the Commission and the French Presidency to solve the problem of managing SIS II and to negotiate with the contractor , so as to avoid the imposition of a new timeline for the implementation of SIS II .
Mr President , I wanted to say that Mrs Roure is the shadow rapporteur for this report .
She could not be here today and so I am speaking on her behalf and on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
I share the comments made by the rapporteur , whom I thank for his work .
This situation is in fact totally unacceptable .
The launch of SIS II is considerably behind schedule .
We have already had to extend the Commission 's mandate once until the end of December 2008 to carry out the migration .
The Commission has again fallen way behind schedule and is now asking for an unlimited extension of its mandate to carry out the migration .
This seems unacceptable to me , as any future consultation of the European Parliament on this issue would then be impossible .
However , we do not want the migration of SIS to SIS II to be rushed , since this would impact on the quality and security of the data and of the system as a whole .
Consequently , every precaution must be taken to ensure that data is protected and that the system is secure .
This is why we could agree to moving the calendar back and extending the Commission 's mandate to carry out the migration properly .
However , there is no way that this process can continue without democratic scrutiny by the European Parliament .
This is why the PSE Group supports the rapporteur , in order to safeguard the powers of the European Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would also like to extend my recognition to the rapporteur of his very good work .
The Schengen Information System is the largest common European database which operates as a joint information system for the Member States .
This information can be used by the police and the judiciary when cooperating on criminal matters , as well as for checking individuals at external frontiers or on national territories , and also for issuing visas and residence permits .
The decision to create the second generation of the SIS - SIS II - took account of the need to introduce biometric data and new types of alerts , for instance because of the European arrest warrant .
SIS II is also needed to bring on board the new Member States , as we have heard .
The new system was originally scheduled to begin operating in March 2007 .
We know there have been many delays , and a new timetable was announced providing for it to become operational by the end of this year .
And , thanks to the transitional solution presented by the Portuguese Government and also mentioned here by Minister Jouyet , the so-called ' SIS One 4 All ' , it is now fully operational and it has allowed nine of the new Member Sates to be connected to the SIS .
Nevertheless , as underlined by Commissioner Barrot , in this enlarged Schengen area , the reinforcement of security requirements has become even more urgent and can only be fully achieved by a full transition to the next generation of a system .
A must for this transition is that SIS II meets all the legally-defined technical and functional requirements , as well as other requirements such as robustness , response capacity and performance .
Parliament is now asked to give its opinion on the two current proposals aiming to establish the legal framework governing the transition .
As the ALDE shadow rapporteur , I fully support the line taken by the rapporteur , notably that the Commission shall submit by the end of June 2009 , and then by the end of every six-month period , a progress report to the Council and to Parliament concerning the development of SIS II and also concerning the migration from the Schengen Information System to the SIS I + to the second generation SIS II .
It has been extremely disappointing to face the fact that SIS II is not yet operational .
With this new mandate and the rigorous testing that will take place , I hope that SIS II is finally on track to a successful launch by September 2009 .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like first of all to thank Mr Coelho for his customary productive work on the reports concerning transition to SIS II .
The reports cover mainly technical things , but I would like to look at SIS II from a broader perspective .
Firstly , I would like to acknowledge the fact that the Portuguese presidency provided an opportunity for the 10 new Member States to join the old version of SIS .
Otherwise , the new Member States , including my own , would have had to wait at least until September 2009 - in other words , almost two more years .
On the other hand , ' late ' does not necessarily mean ' bad ' .
SIS II will operate under two pillars .
Nevertheless , we still do not have a legally binding framework decision on data protection within the third pillar .
As SIS II introduces the processing of biometric data , the issue of data protection remains largely unresolved .
I would like to stress that my political group is extremely cautious where biometrics is concerned .
Maybe we really have to wait for a solid legal background for data protection before we start using SIS II .
Another field where the operation of SIS might be useful is the entry bans introduced by the Member States for third-country nationals .
According to the Schengen Convention , national law is applicable when a person seeks the deletion of an alert concerning him or her .
In this respect , the regulation on SIS II provides for better procedural guarantees at European level .
To sum up , in some fields SIS II gives us a better Europe .
Nevertheless , we will have to continue working on various significant flaws .
If we have to wait in order to get more guarantees , perhaps we should be prepared to wait .
As various organisations that follow the process of communitarisation of justice and home affairs , areas at the very core of States ' sovereignty , have emphasised , with the ' migration ' of the Schengen Information System to its second version , the characteristics of this information system and database have been extended with the inclusion of new types of alerts , such as the European arrest warrant , the addition of new data categories , such as biometric data , and access being given to new entities .
New characteristics and functionalities have also been developed that interlink alerts and connect the system to the visa information system .
It is also worth mentioning the worrying possibility that records may be kept , where necessary , for a long period of time , yet I wonder who will decide when this is necessary .
Clarification is also needed on the all too vague area of the possible exchange of data with third countries .
It is our belief that this extension compared to the previous system brings with it risks as regards safeguarding citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees by adding new elements to a database which will be more accessible and which will mean a greater degree of information sharing .
Basically , much more than responding to the enlargement to new countries , there is an attempt to adapt SIS to the dangerous preoccupation with security that is part of the increasing communitarisation of home affairs in the European Union , which we reject .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the subject we are now debating is of much greater importance than others that are regularly debated in this Chamber .
We are discussing something as fundamental as the mobility of people within the so-called Schengen area .
There is no doubt that this system eases travel for many individuals , but the downside of the system , it has to be said , overshadows its positive aspects .
I am referring to the fact that Schengen also results in the mobility of huge numbers of people being restricted because of social systems . Schengen is a further step towards the creation of a superstate , Fortress Europe .
The creation of a society of control with immense powers . I do not wish to contribute to that .
There is indeed no doubt that cross-border crime is one of the greatest problems we are faced with today .
Hence there is a need for cross-border solutions .
However , I do not believe that Schengen , or the EU for that matter , is the right forum for the purpose .
There is already Interpol , an excellent and efficient international police body in which sovereign states throughout the world participate .
Instead of building up parallel systems , more should be done to strengthen Interpol .
We know that criminality is not limited to our continent , but consists of worldwide networks .
These were a few points of a general nature ; now for the more specific ones .
One aspect , which in my opinion is treated all too lightly when it comes to the Schengen information systems , is the question of confidentiality .
The personal data which will be processed and stored are of a highly sensitive nature .
One of the most important tasks for the State is to provide its citizens with full safeguards against unauthorised access to personal data .
Hence I see this as a national matter , since it is my firm opinion that the EU is in no position to provide the safeguards required .
Besides , I consider it unnecessary and costly to establish new structures .
After all , it is taxpayers ' money which has to finance the system .
I have long been of the opinion that the development of the EU , or European integration as some like to call it , can be compared to the growth of tyranny by small steps .
Frighteningly enough , the steps are no longer particularly small .
Instead we are witnessing large , determined and rapid strides towards the creation of an EU State .
No true Europhile should accept that .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , we are once again discussing the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) which is the main tool for the application of the Schengen principles .
It is undoubtedly the backbone of a ' borderless ' Europe and the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice and therefore it is essential that SIS II should begin to operate .
At the present time , the SISone4ALL system is fully operational as a transitional technical solution , allowing the nine new Member States to be connected to the SIS and of course , through accession to the Schengen area , to become full members of the Union .
The date of 21 December 2007 was a great day in the history of my country , Slovakia , and of the entire EU .
It marked the real fall of the iron curtain .
This is why I should like to thank Carlos Coelho for producing this report and for the tremendous efforts he has made .
I am convinced that , but for him , the Schengen area would not have nine new members today .
I believe that the new generation SIS will also manage to operate equally quickly and without any problems .
Thank you very much to all of the speakers for an excellent debate and for the wide support for the principle of the new mandate , as well as the position of the rapporteur , expressed by various speakers .
Mr Marinescu , I have praised the excellent work of the Portuguese Presidency , which has allowed new Member States to join the system .
I have made a note that Romania wants to join the system as soon as possible under the supervision of the Commission , subject to any technical adjustments that might be necessary in this regard .

Concerning the observations made by Mrs Lefrançois and Mr Lax , the Council can only apologise for the delay , but we all recognise the efforts made by the Commission , the personal pledge from Vice-President Barrot to get things back on track and the strict measures imposed on the contractor .
The Council will also remain vigilant alongside the Commission and all the Member States , who will remain strongly committed to completing the project , as planned , by ensuring that it is both technically feasible and effective , as well as guaranteeing citizens ' freedoms , of course .
In answer to Mrs Ždanoka and Mr Guerreiro , I understand - and Mrs Lefrançois underlined this - that several of you would like a further discussion on incorporating new functions into the system , but it is vital that we complete SIS II before we allow these .
Therefore , I believe that it would be natural for there to be a political debate on what these new functions should be .
However , as several of you have pointed out , this should not hinder the launch of the new system .
In fact , it would be unacceptable to abandon these functions for the sole reason that an obsolete system - in this case SIS I - could not accommodate them .
First of all , before we have this debate , it is essential that we have the system and that the technological development is completed .
In terms of the other speeches , which were mainly concerned with data protection , I would like to point out - as the President did , and we took part in this morning 's debate on personal data protection with Commissioner Barrot - that we effectively want to continue the work undertaken at European level , and that we believe that the guarantees you requested , in terms of protecting this data and sharing information with third countries , must be in place .
Without returning to the general debate that we had this morning , I would just like to say that , in terms of the protection of this data , it was agreed that we would follow the recommendations of the European Data Protection Supervisor so that these concerns are taken into account .
Mr President , I too would like to thank all of the speakers and the rapporteur once again .
To follow up on what Mr Jouyet said , I would also like to remind everyone that we are very mindful of compliance with data protection rules .
As you said , President-in-Office , the services are in regular contact with those of the European Data Protection Supervisor to ensure that these rules are properly integrated into the development and management of SIS II .
A visit to Strasbourg by the European Data Protection Supervisor is planned in the first half of 2009 , before the migration takes place , to ensure that data protection is secure .
The converter , which is in the process of being developed , will also enable secure data transfer from SIS I to SIS II .
Mrs Lefrançois quite rightly said that this migration should not be rushed , and she is right .
We need to be very careful .
In any case , the legal instruments contain specific provisions aimed at ensuring compliance with the principles of data protection .
That is all I can say about data protection , bearing in mind that we need to pay close attention to ensuring that this system is consistent with what we are trying to achieve elsewhere in Europe in terms of data protection .


Now , going back to the matter of the delay : I completely understand Mr Marinescu , Mr Lax and Mrs Lefrançois , who clearly expressed their concern following the series of delays that we have had .
As for SIS II preparations at central level , we are keeping a close watch on progress , we have introduced measures that will help us monitor things closely and the Commission 's services will specifically see to it that there are enough resources to follow up on the work of contractors .
Evidently , if necessary we can resort to the penalties provided for in the contracts , as my predecessor did by imposing a fine of more than EUR 1 million on one of the contractors .
However , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rather than resort to penalties , I would prefer to see contractors working efficiently and keeping to our timetable .
Nevertheless , the implementation of SIS II does not just concern the central SIS II .
Clearly we also need a considerable effort from the Member States .
I am glad that the French Presidency is here today , because I know how committed it is to this .
To assist the Member States in their preparations at national level , the Friends of SIS II , established by the Slovenian Presidency and recognised by the French Presidency , is extremely useful .
This high-level group , in which the Commission is actively involved , has the task of monitoring the implementation of SIS II in the Member States .
It is only through solid cooperation that we will succeed in overcoming the problem .
I would just like to say that we are not trying to turn Europe into a fortress with SIS III ; we are simply trying to make sure that the removal of internal borders does not mean a greater risk of uncertainty , violence and terrorism for the European Union and for European citizens .
Therefore , I cannot allow it to be said that by creating SIS II we are closing the doors to Europe .
It is not a question of that .
It is simply a case of ensuring that , having removed our internal borders , we can offer European citizens a space - yes , I will say it - a space of security and freedom .
That is all , Mr President .
In any case , I would like to thank the European Parliament and Mr Coehlo personally for investing so much in the construction of SIS II , which again is key to the success of Schengen .
Mr President , I am taking the risk of making my final comments in French in response to the courteous remarks made by Mr Jouyet and Vice-President Barrot .
Therefore , I am now going to thank you in your own language .
It has not been easy to reach a consensus within the Council , but you have succeeded .
For us , two things are truly important : a clear division of competences between the Commission and the Member States , and the issue of the Commission 's mandate .
The Commission 's mandate cannot end until SIS II is working properly .
I would also like to thank the Council , the Commission and all political groups in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for their work on drafting the amendments that we will vote on tomorrow .
For us , the transparency clause is crucial : citizens have the right to be kept informed about Schengen and SIS II .
As for the question of the Commission 's mandate , an unlimited mandate is unacceptable .
However , we have managed to address that problem .
To finish , Mr President , I would like to explain why we like SIS II to those who have spoken rather negatively about the system .
We like SIS II because we like freedom of movement in Europe .
However , for there to be freedom of movement in Europe , we have to be sure that our external borders are secure .
The security of our external borders is a condition of the freedom of European citizens , and that is why we urgently need SIS II .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 - International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Caroline Lucas , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the International Tropical Timber Agreement , 2006 ( 11964 / 2007 - C6-0326 / 2007 - , and
the oral question - B6-0458 / 2008 ) to the Commission on the International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 , by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade .
rapporteur . - Mr President , let me start by thanking all of my colleagues in the Committee on International Trade and in the Committee on Legal Affairs for their excellent cooperation on my report on the International Tropical Timber Agreement ( ITTA ) 2006 .
The wide political consensus we found is very reassuring , given the extreme importance of the issue of forests , timber and trade .
You may note that almost a year has elapsed between the referral of this agreement to Parliament and this debate this evening .
That definitely does not represent any underestimate on the part of the Committee on International Trade as to the importance of this issue ; rather it stems from our view that the agreement requires parliamentary assent rather than simple consultation , not least because we have some strong and specific views on the agreement which we believe should be taken into account .
The chairman of the Trade Committee , Mr Markov , will explain further the detailed procedural efforts we made to get a greater role for Parliament on this file and he will also , I am sure , outline the very disappointing response we had from the Council in terms of delay and ultimate refusal .
I said that Parliament has some strong and specific views on the agreement .
Without doubt it does represent an improvement on the older ITTA agreement of 20 years ago which , although it was billed as an agreement promoting both trade and sustainability , is in reality very much about trade and not very much about sustainability .
Maybe that explains why one of the key signatories to the agreement , Indonesia , has irrevocably lost about three quarters of its forests and why half of all logging in regions like the Amazon , the Congo Basin , South-East Asia , is still done illegally .
So , while the new agreement is an improvement on the former one , and we therefore offer support to the Community 's ratification of it , this should be understood as very much a reluctant endorsement of an unsatisfactory agreement .
ITTA 2006 falls well short of what is required to address the problem of the loss of tropical forests .
For example , it still defines as its objective the promotion of the expansion of international trade , before moving on to speak in just a few words about sustainability .
Again , if you look at the voting structure of the organisation behind the agreement , it gives more votes to producer countries that export more timber , and awards more votes to import-heavy consumer countries .
In other words , for all the rhetoric about sustainability , the system is still designed to give greatest influence to those who trade the most .
So our report calls on the Commission to begin already to prepare for the next round of ITTA negotiations to secure a greatly improved successor agreement .
Parliament 's assent to any future agreement will depend on a radical change in the underlying objectives of the agreement towards the protection and sustainable management of tropical forests , with trade in tropical timber taking place only to the extent that it is consistent with that objective .
That means that the Commission should propose appropriate financing mechanisms for countries that are willing to limit their timber exports , as well as proposing a major reorganisation of the ITTA voting system .
But we also have another demand to make of the Commission , and that is to do with the long-awaited legislative proposal on further measures to combat illegal logging .
We absolutely have to see this without delay .
It was under preparation at the start of the year , it was supposed to have been voted on by the Commission in May and has been repeatedly delayed due , we understand , to industry pressure .
This is despite numerous expressions of wide political support from Parliament for the proposal .
The last information we have is that the proposal is to be voted by the college of Commissioners on 15 October - I would be grateful for any confirmation of that - and I would call very strongly on our Commissioners to take their responsibilities very seriously , because this issue of deforestation is a massively important one ; it is one that concerns the whole Parliament .
I look forward to a very strong and optimistic response from the Commission today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that today we have the opportunity of discussing the International Tropical Timber Agreement .
Protection and sustainable management of tropical forests is becoming increasingly important in view of the need to fight climate change , maintain biodiversity and protect the rights of indigenous populations .
Accordingly , there is broad support in the Committee on International Trade for the concept of an international agreement .
Nevertheless , as our rapporteur Mrs Lucas has already said - and I should like to thank her very warmly at this point for her wonderful report - there is some doubt as to whether this agreement will indeed be sufficient to tackle the problem of deforestation seriously .
Thirteen million hectares of tropical forest are disappearing every year owing to logging , and approximately 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions can be attributed to this .
The reason that virtually a whole year has elapsed between the referral of the text to Parliament and today 's discussion on the agreement in plenary is by no means that the Committee on International Trade wanted to delay this debate or failed to attach sufficient importance to the problem .
Instead , the reason was that , in our opinion , or rather the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs in particular , this agreement requires Parliament 's assent and not just that of a consultation procedure .
At this point I should like to thank in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , and the Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , for their clear and rapid legal advice regarding the legal basis .
In the light of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , President Pöttering wrote to the Secretary-General of the Council in January and explained that , in our view , this agreement establishes a specific institutional framework and therefore requires Parliament 's assent under Article 300 ( 3 ) ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
Regrettably , the Council did not reply to this letter until 23 May 2008 .
The reply - four whole paragraphs - did not contain any kind of legal argument or any other grounds for rejecting Parliament 's request .
It was in this context that the Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Mrs Lucas , the present oral question and the corresponding resolution we are debating here .
I should therefore like to highlight not only the significance of the agreement itself and of the fight against climate change , but also the issue of Parliament 's rights and prerogatives .
The current Treaties grant scarcely any major competences to Parliament in the area of international trade agreements , with the exception of those agreements falling under Article 300 ( 3 ) ( 2 ) .
The establishment of a specific institutional framework such as this is the most frequent basis for application of this Treaty provision , and it also provides the justification for applying the assent procedure when concluding Economic Partnership Agreements between the EU and the ACP countries and possible agreements with Korea or India and South-East Asia - which , in turn , is of particular importance in the fight against deforestation .
Why is the application of the assent procedure so important to us ?
What we are concerned with is conducting parliamentary discussion and carrying out scrutiny on behalf of the citizens of Europe and thereby conferring greater legitimacy and public recognition on agreements .
Indeed , it is thus also in the interest of the Council and the Commission to include Parliament as co-legislator in this .
In the light of the public interest in the preservation of biodiversity and in fighting climate change , I hope that the Commission will now at least comply with our request to present annual reports on the implementation of the International Tropical Timber Agreement and on its interaction with bilateral agreements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me first of all to thank Mrs Lucas for her report , which draws attention to the overwhelming need to face up to the problem of the destruction of tropical forests .
Despite its imperfections , the agreement signed in 2006 is an important step in this direction and its entry into force can only further the cause that you quite rightly defend in your report .
This agreement has a much greater environmental and social bias than its 1994 predecessor .
It is clear that the International Tropical Timber Organisation ( ITTO ) cannot put an end to over-exploitation and illegal logging on its own , since the main reasons for these often come from outside the forestry sector .
For example , these might be the permanent or temporary replacement of forests by farmland , the relatively low profitability of forest maintenance compared with other land use and , quite simply , poverty .
In this difficult context , this organisation has become one of the major players taking practical measures aimed at improving the sustainable management of tropical forests .
It therefore deserves the attention and support of the Community .
In terms of the legal basis for this agreement , the Commission has conducted an analysis of the issue and has arrived at the conclusion , supported by the Council and Member States , that it should maintain its original proposal .
The priority today is to finalise the procedure for the entry into force of the new International Tropical Timber Agreement in 2009 .
Rather than repeat the legal arguments underpinning this decision , I think that it would be more useful to address the other issues raised in your report and to answer the related oral question from Mr Markov .
I would just like to say that there is no formal link between the International Tropical Timber Agreement and other agreements such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ( FLEGT ) bilateral agreements .
In fact , these agreements are very different in terms of their signatories , content , scope and organisation .
The interaction between these different agreements is based on the extent to which the developments achieved as part of this process fuel the debates and initiatives that are taking place elsewhere , as well as the ability of the various processes to generate synergy .
Within the framework of all of these agreements , the European Union is pursuing its main objective of capitalising on the enormous contribution that trade can make to sustainable development : for example by ensuring support for multilateral agreements and national legislation on the environment .
The Commission is of course ready to report to the Council and Parliament on the activities of the ITTO , but I would still like to draw your attention to the fact that this organisation publishes its own annual reports .
Therefore , we can consult these , and the Commission is prepared , if necessary , to provide additional information .
As for the Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade ( FLEGT ) , the Council regulation already stipulates that the Commission must present an annual report on the functioning of the licence system .
This is all the information I can give you .
Since Commissioner Michel is away and could not be with us this evening , despite members of his staff being here , I am personally authorised to forward any comments and observations resulting from this interesting debate to him , at a time when we are pondering the development of a number of countries , particularly African countries .
Therefore , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the House and to Mrs Lucas and Mr Markov for all their hard work .
I will now listen carefully to the comments from the various speakers .

Mr President , the Chairman of the Committee on International Trade , Mr Markov , referred to the legal aspects of the matter we are discussing when standing in for Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou and speaking on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
As you know , at the sitting on 19 December 2007 , the committee in question gave its opinion on the legal basis of the motion for a Council resolution .
This resolution was taken on behalf of the European Community with regard to the conclusion of the 2006 International Tropical Timber Agreement , tabled by the Commission .
The proposed legal basis comprises Articles 133 and 175 in conjunction with the first subparagraph of Article 300 ( 2 ) , and the first subparagraph of Article 300 ( 3 ) of the EC Treaty .

The European Parliament Committee on Legal Affairs decided to propose a change to the legal basis , so that a reference would be made to the second subparagraph of Article 300 ( 3 ) .
This requires the assent of the European Parliament rather than simple consultation .
The Commission responded differently and is continuing with the legal basis that it proposed .
The Committee on Legal Affairs justifies the decision to change to the legal basis .
This is a case of an international agreement creating a special institutional framework through the organisation of procedures for cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , timber is a valuable building material ; it is healthy , practical , perhaps a bit lacking in fire resistance , but increasingly sought-after .
In brief , it is a sought-after and attractive commodity , and often a country 's main export product .
Tropical wood - that is , wood that is restricted to a narrow geographic band - is even more attractive and is the subject of trade that is often illegal and destructive to forests and to the entire ecosystem .
We are , then , faced with a dilemma : on the one hand we need timber , we have a need for building materials , while on the other hand we need to protect the tropical forests .
If exploitation is no longer under good and rational control , this will end not only in environmental disaster , but also in demographic disaster .
Without forests there will be no other vegetation , no animals and no people there .
International agreements are needed , but an awareness of rational timber management probably takes priority here .
If such rationality does not prevail , we will destroy an important element of the irreplaceable natural world .
We will be destroyers instead of wise managers .
To sum up , then , I support the extension of the agreement ( bearing in mind the possibility of continuing to improve it ) , which , albeit only partially , regulates free and just - or ' fair ' - trade in such timber and may at the same time be a model for the exploitation of timber from other regions - from Siberia , Commissioner , about which we hear so little these days , from the Amazon , about which we hear a little more , and from other vulnerable regions of the world .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , let me say at the very start of this debate that the Socialist Group congratulates Caroline Lucas on her report , truly supports it and will vote for all the amendments that she proposes in her report .
I welcome the fact that the revised International Tropical Timber Agreement places a greater emphasis on sustainable management - for example by tackling illegal logging - and on the restoration and conservation of degraded forests .
As others have said , the preservation of tropical forests is vital in maintaining biodiversity and in our fight against climate change because , as we now know very well , tropical forests play a central role in removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere .
Currently the felling of these forests is responsible for 20 % of global carbon emissions .
I share Caroline Lucas 's objective in trying to ensure that the revised agreement does in reality give priority to social and environmental issues rather than solely focusing on increasing trade in tropical timber .
Of course , developing countries must have the resources to protect , restore and sustainably manage the forests .
The agreement makes a provision for funding based on thematic programmes , in addition to project funding .
I hope that the thematic programmes can focus on issues such as governance and poverty reduction , and that Member States can contribute generously to these programmes .
I share the disappointment that both Caroline and Helmuth Markov have expressed regarding the fact that Parliament has not been granted the assent procedure on this agreement , and I share the view that we should have been given that procedure .
I hope that we can count on the Commission to submit to Parliament an annual report analysing - and ' analysing ' is the key word - the implementation of the agreement .
I understand what the Commission has told us tonight , that the International Tropical Timber Organisation publishes its own annual report , but we want to hear the Commission 's response to that document .
On the subject of bilateral agreements , earlier this month the EU signed an agreement with Ghana to prevent the import of illegal timber into EU markets .
This agreement will in theory ensure that the basic rules of forest conservation , such as sound monitoring by government of timber felling , are respected - and at present , we have to note , the Ghanaian forests are being felled at an annual rate of almost 2 % .
If this bilateral agreement works , it can bring benefits to both parties .
In Ghana , where illegal logging has reduced the rainforest by up to 25 % of its original size in under 50 years , the agreement will help to secure the future of its timber industry - its fourth most profitable industry .
In the European Union , where consumers are becoming increasingly environmentally conscious , we can ensure that the timber we import from Ghana is fully certified as clean .
Although this deal may take a few years yet to become fully operational , I think it is a promising start , and I support the Commission 's plans to reach similar agreements with other African countries , such as Gabon , Cameroon and Liberia .
Finally , I want to reiterate a point made by Caroline : this agreement is a modest start ; it is better than nothing , but it does not go far enough , and we need further proposals from the Commission and from the international community .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the conclusions of her report , which I fully endorse .
After more than 20 years of tropical timber agreements , their impact on the sustainable management of tropical forests seems limited .
The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation estimates that between 2000 and 2005 alone , tropical deforestation rates increased by 8.5 % when compared to the 1990 levels .
It is a pity that parliamentarians and civil society are not more involved in the design of such agreements , in order to balance trade interests and push for a more sustainable management of tropical forests .
But , however effective it may be , an agreement has to be part of a more general approach , where every region acknowledges its responsibility and takes firm action to stop forest devastation .
In Europe we might think that we have effective mechanisms to protect biodiversity and the consumer , but reality proves us wrong .
Large volumes of illegal timber and timber products arrive in EU ports every day .
Once the illegal timber has penetrated the market of one Member State it can easily be sold in any of the other 26 Member States without any further control of its legality .
In this way , European consumers buying , in good faith , furniture or construction materials from supposedly legal sources , instead become unwitting accomplices to forest crimes .
As a main importer and consumer of wood and having committed itself to halving deforestation as part of its plans to fight climate change , the EU has a responsibility in combating illegal logging and trade in illegally harvested timber products .
If we really want to get serious about tackling deforestation and illegal logging , we should first sharpen up our act back home by enforcing European legislation that prevents the marketing of illegal timber and timber products in the EU .
Regrettably , a legislative proposal in this sense has constantly been delayed , despite the EU resolution in July 2006 and the announcement made by the Commission work programme in October 2007 .
On the occasion of this debate , I would like to invite the Commission to clarify the reasons that led to the postponement of the publication of the forest package .
Furthermore , I urge the Commission to present , without further delay , legislation which requires that only legally harvested timber and timber products are placed on the EU market .
I am afraid too much time has been wasted already .
At this point I call on the Commission to speed up the procedure to put forward this important piece of legislation , so as to allow a first reading before the end of this parliamentary term .
We need to ensure that we are sending the right messages and that we are sending them on time .
Mr President , Commissioner , the conclusion of an International Tropical Timber Agreement is certainly a very significant step towards protecting tropical forests and making trade in certain species of timber more civilised .
Procedural matters , however , should not blind us to our fundamental objectives .
It may be important to establish a legal basis , it may be important whether this is a consultation or an assent procedure , but will this enable us to protect the tropical forests and to go further ?
Every day thousands of hectares of forests , and not just tropical forests , die irretrievably .
The land that remains turns into swamp or desert .
Deforestation cannot be averted by new planting , at least not in the short term .
The poor countries of Africa , America and Asia do not have the means to control excessive exploitation of the forests , to prevent it or to carry out rational management .
This is also true of the Siberian forests .
We do not protect trees and we have no respect for timber .
The poorer the country , the more this is true .
During the Cultural Revolution in China many square kilometres of forest were cut down .
Timber is utilised as a primary source of energy .
This is why the International Tropical Timber Organization has such an important part to play .
Let us remember that technical progress and modern machines for felling and skidding trees are accelerating this process , and cheaper timber originating from illegal felling is attractive to traders .
Every closed loophole in trade , every obstacle , certificates of origin and control will be another success .
I hope that this agreement fulfils its role as soon as possible .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Lucas for an excellent report .
We have established , and there is agreement all round , that the trade in tropical timber in the EU is a disgrace .
As has also been said repeatedly this evening , we are tired of seeing only solemn declarations and no action .
I hope that the Commission hears how many people are calling for it to take action to try to change things , so that the future will be a little brighter .
Illegal timber is pouring into the EU , and this in itself is completely absurd .
If it was any other product we would call it handling of stolen goods .
Voluntary labelling schemes are a rather odd step .
Unlawful acts should be prohibited , including in the EU ; they should be curtailed not by means of labelling but by actual prohibition .
I believe it will come as a surprise to most people that it is at all legal to buy illegal timber in the EU .
Naturally , labelling is better than nothing .
The extent of the control of large logging firms - some of the worst of which come from my own country , Denmark - over EU legislation , or lack of such legislation , is also grotesque .
Therefore , I support the rapporteur 's call for the Commissioner to now set about revising the international agreement , and we must also set to work at EU level .
We badly need to introduce efficiency .
Even if bad governance and corruption in timber-producing countries plays a significant role , we cannot ignore demand , as has also been said many times , because that is the most important factor .
The EU must assume its responsibility as one of the world 's largest timber importers .
We need effective legislation that ensures that all timber products sold within the Community - including processed products - are both legal and sustainable .
We can get started straight away with public procurement .
Anything else would be inconceivable .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the destruction of tropical forests continues unabated .
Thirteen million hectares per year or one football pitch per second - that is the area of forest which is disappearing from the world each year .
This is happening despite the fact that the first timber agreement came into being as long as 20 years ago .
In 2006 , the International Tropical Timber Agreement was signed .
Although the agreement is general in its scope and leaves something to be desired , at least it provides a tool for us to tackle the problem .
Mrs Lucas has drawn attention to this , and her much-needed amendments will give us a better means of protecting tropical forests .
I would like to put a question directly to the Commission .
Mrs Lucas said in her introduction that the entire European Parliament is waiting for legislation from the Commission to combat illegal logging .
When shall we get this legislation on illegal logging ?
Is it true that the Commission already voted on this matter in May this year ?
Why then have we not got to see anything ?
You did not touch on this in your speech , but we in Parliament want to know about it .
What has happened to the legislative proposal ?
Please give us an explanation .
Otherwise I thank Mrs Lucas for highlighting the whole problem of trade in timber .
Is it really reasonable that so much forest has to be cut down and the produce exported ?
My own country , Sweden , is the EU 's most densely forested country .
At the same time we import one sixth of all the timber we consume .
Why ?
Obviously because it is very cheap to buy timber on the world market .
Mrs Lucas wants to do something about this and asks the EU to support countries which adopt strategies to protect their tropical forests .
Quite right , a very good proposal .
Another measure which Mrs Lucas touched upon is to attach conditions to trade agreements and ensure that both European businesses and producers in the south have a responsibility to live up to , and that international conventions and agreements are observed .
The idea is that international trade should be put to use - as a tool to promote sustainability and development throughout the world .
Another dimension of deforestation which is too little debated is the meat industry .
A large part of the meat and animal feed consumed in the world comes from land that was previously covered by forest .
Meat production is one of the main causes of forest destruction in Amazonas .
The Chairman of the United Nations Panel on Climate Change , Rajendra Pachauri , recently called for a reduction in meat consumption .
He is quite right in doing so .
Here then is another question for the Commission : when will there be a strategy for reduced meat consumption ?
As I mentioned earlier , Mrs Lucas is also right in most of what she says in her report .
The European United Left Group therefore supports this excellent report .
( PL ) Mr President , the existing international agreements relating to tropical dendroflora are very clearly inadequate .
The genetic resources of tropical forests are shrinking at an alarming rate through their excessive exploitation by man .
There are two reasons for this .
The most interesting species of tropical timber still have a market in wealthy countries .
They are ever more efficiently sought out and felled .
Meanwhile , the potential for farming them under managed forestry conditions is limited by the lack of nursery methods enabling them to be farmed . Seeds are usually non-dormant .
In other words , they are not suited to storage and transportation .
They sprout as soon as they have fallen from the tree .
Special studies on these dying species are therefore needed in seed production , plant breeding and nursery management .
People trading in such timber should be taxed to support such studies .
A second reason is the excessive exploitation of tree cover , including bushes , by local people , who use them for firewood and to prepare food .
This devastation cannot be halted without organising supplies of some other fuel for these people .
( EL ) Mr President , the conclusion of the 2006 International Tropical Timber Agreement is an extremely positive development .
Furthermore , it reflects the consensus of 180 producer and consumer state governments and international organisations .
There is no doubt , then , about the importance of the objectives set out in the agreement .
We need only think of the harmful effects of illegal felling and deforestation , especially their contribution towards the greenhouse effect .
It is therefore essential to back the national policies of the producer countries for the sustainable use and exploitation of tropical forests , and to strengthen their ability to implement forest legislation and effectively combat illegal felling .
The matter of adequate funding to achieve the aims of the new agreement is of course crucial .
We in the EU are called on to ensure that only lawfully felled tropical timber is imported and distributed on the European market .
We must promote actions to inform and raise awareness among consumers .
Let us , however , consider whether voluntary programmes are enough , or whether legally binding rules and specifications need to be enacted in respect of lawful trade in tropical timber .
This objective must be pursued not only at international level , but also at the level of bilateral agreements covered by the FLEGT programme and the trade agreements under negotiation ; in other words , free-trade agreements .
The EU-Ghana Agreement is an example that points the way to bilateral cooperation .
( PT ) Mr President , this specific case is a clear instance in which concern about liberalising international trade should take second place to more important objectives , in this case of an environmental and social nature .
The preservation of tropical forests is essential for maintaining the planet 's ecological balance and we can state , without exaggeration , that , as such , tropical forests really are the heritage of mankind and that we all bear a responsibility for the conservation of tropical forests .
The more developed and wealthiest countries in particular have responsibilities that they cannot shirk .
These forests are located in countries that are in most cases poor countries , countries facing enormous difficulties , and whatever rhetoric we come up with here will be absolutely useless if we are not able to promote development actions directed at those countries .
It is crucial that we help those countries and it is of the utmost necessity that the world 's main consumers and most developed areas , as is clearly the case with the European Union , commit themselves to ensuring on the one hand that there are thorough control mechanisms for how these forests are used , but at the same time it is vital that those countries commit themselves to guaranteeing support for producer countries .
Those countries depend on tropical forests and their economies are to a great extent linked to forests .
Rapid deforestation will end up having dramatic consequences from all points of view - for us on a more global level , from an environmental point of view , but for them at a more tangible level , from an economic and social perspective and will even put their very survival on the line - and , therefore , everything that can de done has to start there .
We have to lend support and we must have measures that encourage development and the transformation of the production structure in those countries , so that they may have a relationship with their forests , with their resources , that is better tailored to their interests and more in line with the global interests of humanity .
This is a responsibility of the European Union .
This agreement is heading in the right direction : it is still not enough but the report clearly points out these shortcomings , yet offers us some hope for the future .

( FR ) Mr President , tropical timber tonight , the financial crisis this week , major pandemics , migration , the food crisis ... it all leads us to the same conclusion : the major political issues of today are global and require a global political response .
Of course , in principle no one is contesting the permanent sovereignty of Indonesia over its tropical forests and its right to plant palm trees to produce palm oil , just as Brazil has the right to replace its forest with cattle , just like Gabon .
However , it appears that the exercise of territorial sovereignty has negative consequences outside the sovereign territory .
Deforestation , poverty , the threatened extinction of fauna and flora and cheap timber all cause damage on a global scale .
Therefore , it is not a question of saying , ' people who harm others must make amends for the problems they cause . '
It is a question of addressing these issues at a legal level .
How do we tackle this problem ?
Where do we start ?
In Europe , by labelling timber , certifying it as a sort of ' fair-trade ' timber , in the same way as we do with fair-trade coffee , with bilateral trade agreements ?
No doubt this is an essential first step , but the solution must be global .
We need much more than a multilateral agreement on timber because people in the Communities , because Africans , Latinos and Asians , are also entitled to be rewarded for the various functions that they perform .
This is why , Mr President , we need to look at these problems politically , at a global level , and find concepts and models to enable life on our planet to continue .
Thank you for your transnational plea , Mr Martinez .

( NL ) Mr President , I too should like to thank Mrs Lucas and also Mr Zaleski sincerely for their efforts in bringing about this resolution .
After all , regrettably , trade in illegally or unsustainably harvested timber is still taking place on a large scale in Europe .
The European Commission 's 2003 FLEGT Action Plan , specifically intended to prevent trading in illegally harvested timber in Europe , has had only a very limited effect .
For this reason , it is regrettable that the European Commission has yet to present the new proposals .
After all , misconduct on the part of importers still seems to pay , as action is hardly ever taken against the illegal trade and there are no sanctions .
Responsibly minded timber importers therefore pay a high price , both literally and figuratively , for compliance with environmental and safety standards , since trade in the much cheaper illegal timber is still taking place on a large scale .
The timber industry itself has already undertaken some sound initiatives , such as certification .
We must underpin these with binding legislation , in accordance with the WTO framework .
For this reason , I also advocate the recognition of existing certification systems that have been set up partly by the sector itself and partly by NGOs .
What Mrs Lucas wants , namely the creation of a new European body too , would entail a great deal of red tape and is in our view unnecessary .
Of course , measures must be taken locally in the regions to combat illegal logging , but we also expect the European Commission to present a proposal for the introduction of sanctions , which should also have a preventive effect on timber importers .
After all , if we do not impose sanctions on businesses engaging in illegal trade , the danger is that this illegal behaviour will continue to pay , and that is what we must eliminate .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate rapporteur Lucas and all her colleagues for their work on this report .
I believe that the International Agreement on Tropical Timber will contribute to the sustainable management of world forests , even if 80 % of them have already been destroyed or damaged .
We all know that forests are a haven for the preservation of biodiversity and that they play a crucial role in the fight against climate change .
Low-priced timber and furniture imports done by virtue of voluntary agreements cause imbalances in the world market as well as the loss of employment both in the exporting and in the importing countries .
Therefore , I would like to stress once again the need for legislative measures to protect tropical forests and other forests as well , and to prevent illegal timber .
I welcome the revised agreement , and I rely on the Commission to forward an annual report on the evolution of this agreement .
( HU ) We can only stop climate change if we also stop deforestation .
Our European endeavours to protect the environment will remain ineffective if we tolerate the destruction of the environment in other parts of the world .
The liberalisation of international trade and globalisation stimulate destruction of the environment that spans the continents .
The WTO 's rules must be supplemented by stringent provisions on protecting the environment , otherwise further liberalisation will lead to even more destruction of the environment .
Now it is not enough to ban illegal trade in wood : the importing of products and furniture manufactured from illegally lumbered wood must also be banned .
Do people really think that importing cheap Chinese furniture has nothing to do with deforestation ?
This report is a step in the right direction , but even more radical measures are needed because the state of our planet demands it of us .
Until more stringent rules come into being , we must call on the big international furniture dealers like IKEA to use transparent restraint , and not to deal in furniture manufactured from illegal wood .
Finally , deforestation stimulates not only trade in wood and furniture but also increases in agricultural prices and in demand for biofuels .
If we allow trade in biofuels produced through deforestation , then we have to be aware that , every single time we fill our cars with such fuels , we have also contributed to the felling of a few square metres of rainforest .
( CS ) Mr President , the state of the tropical rain forests has been alarming for some years now and it is impossible to turn a blind eye to the unscrupulous plundering of this key component of our planet 's biosphere .
It is sad that legislation to combat illegal logging of tropical timber has come up against serious obstacles in Europe , while every year 13 million hectares of ancient forest are said to be lost , which of course contributes greatly to the increase in CO2 emissions .
I fully support the call for environmental protection requirements to be included in the European Union 's common trade policy .
I am very pleased that Mrs Lucas 's report also places emphasis on the dissemination of information on the catastrophic consequences of deforestation .
This type of agreement should be ratified by Parliament and it is important that we discuss the Commission 's report on the implementation of this international agreement and the state of deforestation every year here on the floor of the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , we are too late to avert or stop climate change , but it is our responsibility at least to put a brake on it .
This agreement , although not enough , is a step in the right direction .

( PL ) Despite its addiction to environmental protection slogans , the united Europe appears to be ignoring the growing problem of the disappearance of primary forests , the main reason for which is rapacious forest management to meet the demands of the tropical timber trade .
Almost 80 % of the total area of such forests has so far fallen victim to deforestation .
The EU must increase the financial assistance it gives to producer states in order to prevent illegal felling and to promote sustainable forest management .
Another positively good idea is to introduce timber certification for the European market .
According to official statistics , timber imports into the EU constitute a small percentage of total production , but let us not forget , meanwhile , the enormous amounts of timber imported into Europe in processed form .
The battle to maintain what is left of our primary forests is de facto a battle for the future for succeeding generations .
Mr President , thank you to those members who have spoken .
First of all , I would just like to remind everyone that the 2006 agreement aims to promote the expansion of international trade in tropical timber from forests that are sustainably managed and exploited legally and to encourage sustainable management of timber-producing tropical forests .
I would also like to say that this is the only multilateral international instrument that places forests , particularly tropical forests , in a legally approved framework .
This agreement also affects other forests indirectly , although this is less evident and more marginal .
What is interesting is that the agreement establishes a framework of cooperation combining all forestry initiatives .
Naturally the Commission intends to be an active participant in this agreement , with the Community contributing towards the administrative budget , and we would also like to finance large-scale measures through thematic programmes .
However , this should not replace the bilateral agreements under the FLEGT programme - indeed quite the reverse .
You were right to underline this .
In these bilateral agreements , which will increasingly adopt a more global approach , we are introducing the concept of respect for tropical timber .
It is true that the agreement that we have discussed tonight is a modest start - to quote someone here - but this should be the starting point for a much more effective strategy than in the past .
In principle , the texts on illegal logging and the implementing regulation for FLEGT are planned for October .
I believe that with these , the Commission may be able to satisfy the expectations that you have expressed here .
Therefore , I would again like to thank Mrs Lucas , and of course I would like to thank the author of the question , Mr Markov .
I will be sure to pass on all Parliament 's comments and sensibilities to this problem , which , in fact , is a major issue , as each of you has pointed out .
This is a crucial human legacy for the future .
I loved the expression ' the cradle of biodiversity ' .
It is clear that our forests are cradles of diversity .
The protection of our forests is a truly major initiative that concerns the future of the entire planet .
I would like therefore to thank the European Parliament for being truly committed to this and I hope that , with the Commission , we can gradually meet everyone 's expectations , having witnessed today how important and acute these are .
I would again like to thank all members , and particularly your rapporteur .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank my colleagues for their comments and support , but I do want to have a few words with Commissioner Barrot in particular .
I hope you have heard the impatience and the frustration that has been expressed right across this House tonight about the endless delays to this long-awaited legislative proposal on measures to combat illegal logging .
Please take back to your colleagues the fact that this Parliament believes that it is utterly unacceptable that that legislative proposal is constantly delayed .
I am very sorry that you have not been able to answer a question that has been put to you at least three times by people here tonight about when we might expect that proposal .
I think it plays very badly with the public as well .
I think it looks very bad that the EU is unable to get its own house in order .
We like to talk about the political leadership that we like to think that we have in the world .
If that political leadership means anything , then it should mean that we stop the sale and the import of illegal timber into the EU , and we want to see much more urgent action to achieve that .
While I have the floor , I would just like to raise one other issue .
Many colleagues have mentioned the link between deforestation and climate change , and I would like to add a final point about the climate package that colleagues will be voting on in the coming weeks .
You will know that deforestation is a key issue when it comes to the emissions trading system , and I want to urge colleagues not to be persuaded by arguments in favour of including so-called ' sink credits ' in the emissions trading system .
We held a lunchtime debate about this today in which we underlined why putting deforestation into the emissions trading system is a bad idea for a host of reasons , not least that it would swamp the whole emissions trading system .
There are big problems around the verification , monitoring , reporting and liability regimes .
We certainly do need to tackle deforestation as part of the climate package , but we are arguing that that should be done by using the auctioning revenues to properly invest in those countries that have that issue .
Commissioner , please make autumn the moment when the EU really starts to get credible on forestry .
Please assure us that you will bring forward that proposal as soon as possible .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Perhaps Mrs Lucas did not hear me .
I thought that I had given a clear answer .
I announced a text for October .
Is it the interpretation ?
Was I not clear enough ?
I would like to clarify this .
I am used to listening to Parliament .
At the risk of repeating myself and incurring the wrath of the House , I did mention October just a few minutes ago .
Right .
October , that 's next week , so a meeting next week then . Thank you .
To conclude the debate , I have received a motion for a resolution on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Nobody can any longer be in doubt that the clearance and destruction of forests has an impact on climate change and biodiversity .
To be precise , deforestation now affects 13 million hectares worldwide and is the third biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions .
Illegal wood production causes erosion , undermines the subsistence of local communities and constitutes a loss of EUR 10-15 billion a year for wood-producing countries .
I naturally welcome the creation of an international agreement on tropical timber , but even with this we are still nowhere near the target .
We will get there if we manage to adopt a more comprehensive approach to forests in temperate zones , at least within the European Union ; an approach that ensures both that wood products are manufactured in an honest way and also the traceability of the entire selling chain .
Only such an agreement could make a real contribution to protecting forests and to the sustainable use of timber .
Of course , I am under no illusions , especially since the statement that several of my colleagues and I wrote during spring and summer this year has been signed by a quarter of all MEPs .
I trust that , sooner or later , the issue of tropical forests might turn attention to us , to Europe .
Maybe , thanks to an agreement on tropical forests , the Commission will come forward with legislation stipulating that only wood and wood products that have been produced legally may be imported into the European Union .
Proceedings before the Court of Justice ( Amendment of Rule 121 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Costas Botopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of Rule 121 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , the draft report we are discussing today concerns the amendment to Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament regarding proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
As the Rule stands , it regulates such proceedings only in cases where the European Parliament brings an action before the Court .
However , the text does not tell us what happens when Parliament decides to state its views through its representative , the President , by submitting observations or intervening in prejudicial proceedings .
These proceedings serve to contest the validity of a legislative act that the European Parliament itself has approved within the framework of the co-decision procedure .
A question has therefore been put by the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , whom I would like to take this opportunity to thank for his help in preparing this report .
He asks whether this procedure of intervention and submission of comments is covered by Rule 121 , and if not , what we should do .
The first answer I give in my report is that one procedure cannot be considered to be included in the other ; that the word ' action ' , used in Rule 121 , cannot be considered to include the qualitatively different case of submission of comments or intervention in Court .
On this basis , the first answer is that we cannot proceed merely on the basis of interpretation .
Can we stick to the Parliamentary practice whereby the decision in such cases lies with the President of Parliament , as our head and representative in court cases ?
Once again , I think the answer is no .
A more reliable course of action is to work out a new procedure in detail .
Why , though , is this really so ?
Because there have in practice been occasions when the President of Parliament has decided not to follow the recommendation of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
This is when it is a matter of defending the validity of a prior decision of Parliament before the Court .
This has happened twice in Parliament 's recent history .
We have grounds for saying that we should work out the procedure from scratch .
What solution is proposed ?
Following a recommendation by the Committee on Legal Affairs , the President , if he agrees , submits his comments .
If he does not agree , he settles the matter after discussion in the Conference of Presidents .
Why the Conference of Presidents ?
Because it is a collective body that can reach decisions with due regard to the pros and cons in each case .
Only in cases where the Conference of Presidents decides that , for exceptional reasons ( revision of the Treaties , for example ) , Parliament should not protect its previous position , only in such cases is the matter referred to Plenary , because Plenary alone is in a position to amend a previous decision it has reached .
Mr President , as rapporteur - of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , that is - I wish to say that tonight we are discussing an issue that concerns the organisational autonomy and sovereignty of the European Parliament .
The Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament form a regulatory nexus based on the long-term validity of individual provisions .
By this , I do not mean provisions that are applicable pending an amendment , but those with regulatory durability and robustness .
I shall not mention the more specific aspects of the dispute settlement procedure described in the text of the amendment - Mr Botopoulos has in any case covered this aspect accurately and thoroughly .
The text of the amendment proposed by the rapporteur is the outcome of conciliation between the PPE-DE Group and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
The paragraph added to the existing text of Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament deals with a potential difference of opinion between the President of Parliament and the Committee on Legal Affairs on a decision concerning submitting comments and interventions by Parliament during proceedings before the Court of Justice .
Until now , there has not been a clear , explicit provision on such cases in the Rules of Procedure , and the amendment we are discussing serves to close this legal loophole and this regulatory gap in the internal workings of Parliament .
( PT ) Mr President , the European Parliament is represented before the Court by its President and , in controversial cases , the President first consults the plenary .
This is what happens with proceedings .
The new report extends this system to other procedural acts where the President represents Parliament and , in controversial situations , consults the plenary .
Yet there is something new in the report in the way it brings in the Conference of Presidents as an intermediary decision-making body between the President and the plenary .
This solution is not problematic in itself , yet it would be good to take this opportunity to stress that the European Parliament must never lose sight of the traditional parliamentary principle of concentrating all final decision-making power in the plenary .
The plenary is sovereign in all things , as it embodies the legitimacy arising from the ethics of representation .
It is true that institutions that govern complex and broad areas , as the European Parliament does , often cannot avoid the temptation to surround their own democratic power with red tape .
This temptation is often impossible to avoid , yet the fact remains that we have to steer clear of wrapping democracy in too much red tape , as the efficacy of good governance must never mean losing the space for politics , still less abdicating space for politics to quasi-administrative forms such as committees and , sometimes , conferences .
This is because , to borrow Mirabeau 's expression , these are not a real ' cross-section of the population ' .
( CS ) The amendment of the Rules of Procedure may appear to be just a technical matter , but in reality it involves strengthening or weakening their democratic legitimacy .
The two precedents , in which the Presidents did not have to follow the recommendations of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs , have revealed a gap in our Rules .
I will support the amended version of Rule 121 , which will ensure that in such cases the President shall submit the matter to the Conference of Presidents and then to plenary .
However , I believe that the President should present and defend his position before the Committee on Legal Affairs rather than before the chairmen of the other committees .
It is a pity that there is no mention in the amendment of the possibility of a group of Members suggesting a third alternative to plenary , or whether plenary only has the choice of accepting or rejecting the alternative submission by the President or the Conference of Presidents .
We are dealing here with a new precedent , which will only be tested in the future .
I do not think that this is about bureaucracy , but about democracy .
( ES ) Normally , when the opposing parliamentary group comes to the aid of the rapporteur , who is from another group , the rapporteur should be concerned .
This is the night of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Four members of the PPE-DE Group speaking in the debate on the Botopoulos report !
What is most surprising , Mr President , is that we are here to applaud the proposal made by Mr Botopoulos , because we think that it is a good proposal , a consensus proposal , a proposal which , I can announce , will have the approval and political support of my Group .
Parliamentary life is an expression of life in general , it is a life that changes , a life that we need to react to .
Therefore , in response to an interpretation of the Rules of Procedure as to whether a specific article included the possibility of Parliament making observations in proceedings , Mr Botopoulos has clarified the issue by making a positive proposal , which is what life requires .
Therefore , Mr President , my congratulations to this young MEP , for whom I predict great success in Parliament , and the support of my group , Mr President , for this reform .

Mr President , may I first of all thank the speakers , and please allow me also to thank my fellow Members who helped me a great deal in this , my first report , which , as Mr Méndez de Vigo said , will hopefully not be the last .
I have some very brief comments on what has been said .
Mr Papastamkos is right to say that the report is the outcome of conciliation , because that is what actually happened .
However , it is the outcome of conciliation between political groups in the best sense of the term .
In other words , it is not the lowest common denominator , but represents the common ground we have been able to agree on and what I think are more reasonable and democratic solutions .
I believe this resolution is democratic precisely because it allows proceedings to develop in the most appropriate way .
Mrs Esteves has quite rightly said that we should not make excessive use of plenary sittings .
How true !
For this reason the logic here is that we should go to plenary only when absolutely necessary ; in other words , only when it is necessary to amend a decision already taken by Parliament .
Mrs Roithová also quite rightly pointed out that the role of the Committee on Legal Affairs is important ; it is exercised in accordance with the way the regulation is formulated .
In other words , the Committee on Legal Affairs is heard at the beginning , in the middle and at the end of proceedings .
Let me say here , and I did not do so the first time , that when in exceptional cases the Committee on Legal Affairs does not have time to give an opinion , the President alone may reach a decision .
However , in this case too , it is expressly stated , with an explanation , that the Committee on Legal Affairs should be allowed to submit its decision in whatever way it thinks fit . Thank you all very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Statement by the President
It is with great sadness that we have learned of the dramatic events in Kauhajoki in the west of Finland , where 11 people have lost their lives in a very tragic incident at a school .
A number of people were also seriously injured by the perpetrator , who then turned his gun on himself .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to express my deepest sympathy and solidarity with the families and all the relatives of the victims .
All the victims were innocent young students at a vocational training school , where they were studying for careers in the service sector .
This tragedy occurred less than one year after a similar appalling killing spree at Jokela High School .
As we all know , Finland is regarded as one of the most peaceful and safest countries in Europe , so we can understand that the people of Finland are speechless with shock , and we share their distress .
Unfortunately , we often see similar patterns repeated in these acts of bloodshed .
In this instance , although the perpetrator posted threatening videos on the Internet before the killing spree , it was not possible to avert the tragedy .
As responsible politicians in Europe and in all the Member States , we must do our utmost to ensure that such acts of violence are detected and prevented in time .
Once again , on behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to express our deepest sympathy and solidarity with the victims and their families .
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Priorities of the European Parliament for the legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on priorities of the European Parliament for the legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2009 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this morning we are debating the legislative and work programme of the Commission for the coming year , 2009 , which is an election year .
Next year , a new Parliament will be elected and there will be a new Commission .
No one 's position is certain : not that of the Commissioners and not even that of the Commission President , who is unfortunately unable to be here this morning to present his programme in person .
During any election year , it is always a temptation to do right by all our voters , assuming , that is , that we know what they want , or at least what they should want .
The question , then , is this : how should the European Union present itself to Europe 's citizens in the coming year ?
Like all politicians , our task is to try to respond to citizens ' concerns .
The European Union has an outstanding opportunity to do this .
We have many possible ways of responding to people 's needs and concerns .
Peace has been a fundamental concern throughout human history , and the European Union has safeguarded peace in Europe for many decades .
We are able to find answers to external threats , such as international terrorism or the conduct of large neighbouring countries which occasionally trample the rules of international law under foot .
We can make a contribution to ensuring that Europe has a secure and sustainable energy supply , while doing what we can to protect the climate .
We can safeguard social security and justice in Europe by unleashing the growth potential of our successful European economy , and we can safeguard innovation and the competitiveness of the European economy , with the associated opportunity to create and safeguard jobs .
Europe can become a haven of security in a changing world .
My colleagues will have more to say about the finer points of detail on many of these issues shortly .
What are the prerequisites for successful action in the European Union ?
I would like to mention two in particular : firstly , we need appropriate institutional bases , and that certainly means the Treaty of Lisbon .
This Treaty will create more transparency and more democracy and enhance the EU 's capacity to act , thus enabling it to perform its functions more effectively .
We can only appeal to the citizens of Ireland to reconsider their position on this Treaty .
I share many of the criticisms levelled at the European Union , but we cannot ignore the fact that this Treaty provides sound solutions to many of these points of criticism .
Thus the Treaty of Lisbon is vital .
Secondly , however , we also need the backing of Europe 's citizens , which has declined to an alarming extent .
That became apparent from the referenda in France , the Netherlands and , not least , in Ireland .
It is not about whether we need more or less Europe , as I recently had the opportunity to say to the Commission President .
The real issue is where we need Europe , and where we do not .
That needs to be decided .
If I may cite an example - and I admit that this is my very favourite example - soil protection is not something that we need to deal with at European level .
Soil protection makes work , but it does not create jobs .
That is why Europe will be successful and will generate support if it acts where Community action is undoubtedly required , and where action at European level can achieve more than action at national level .
The Commission would therefore be well-advised , in my view , to attach greater importance to the issue of subsidiarity in its action during the coming year .
That will boost Europe 's acceptance and we will probably all be re-elected by more of Europe 's citizens than was the case at the last election .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , the European Commission has done outstanding work in the last few years in many areas , notably environmental and climate policy , and here in this House , we are in the process of translating this into legislation .
As regards the development of the common market , however , we see major shortcomings , especially where the social dimension is concerned .
The current financial crisis is sufficient reason to discuss this issue , and that is what we have done in the context of the Rasmussen report .
It is not only my group and I , and indeed many others , who are deeply disappointed by what Commissioner McCreevy has said - or has not said - here .
That is the major problem .
If we read the lead articles in any conservative newspaper today , whether it be the Financial Times or the Frankfurter Allgemeine , the headlines could have been written by socialist groups in this House , but not by the Commission President and certainly not by Mr McCreevy .
The Financial Times , for example , has had the following headlines :
' Modern history 's greatest regulatory failure ' or ' After the crash : why global capitalism needs global rules ' .
While Damien Hurst 's The Golden Calf broke art auction records , the financial institutions have suffered record losses , prompting the following comment from the Financial Times :
' How we were all blinded by the golden calf ' .
( DE ) Unfortunately , this applies to the Commission , or at least to those members of the Commission who should be responsible for these issues .
Frank Schirrmacher , the editor-in-chief of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and hardly a left-winger , writes : ' Neoliberal ideology created a rational and fortuitous connection between the individual and globalisation which was rooted solely in the economy ' , and laments ' the self-destruction of the social welfare discourse ' .
It would be nice to have detected at least an element of this in the words of the Commission President or Commissioner McCreevy .
After all , I am not demanding a large amount of left-wing criticism or self-criticism , but what we are demanding , time and again , as Martin Schulz recently made very clear , is the strengthening of the social dimension and scrutiny of all Commission projects in terms of their social impacts .
Unfortunately , this is still not happening .
There is no response from the Commission here .
What we are also demanding is a stronger common economic policy in Europe , which could also help to cushion or avert the type of crisis now spilling over from the US .
Here , too , the Commission has been notable for its omissions .
Another area where the Commission has failed - and I am sorry to address these comments to you as I know you can do very little about it - is its failure to tackle the growing inequality in Europe of its own accord , or to urge the national governments to act .
We will be debating this issue this afternoon in relation to energy poverty , another topic which we have repeatedly raised and where we have received no response from the Commission , which has yet to produce any real initiatives here .
It is unacceptable for the Commission - with its commitment to inclusion and social justice as a matter of principle - to stand by and watch while social inequality in Europe steadily increases during this particular phase of economic and social life .
That is unacceptable , and we should not be accepting it .
Europe 's citizens expect the Commission to take their needs and concerns seriously , to present appropriate proposals and to act as a moral authority , notably in the context of the financial crisis .
It should not be left to the French President , Mr Sarkozy , in his capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , to take a clear position here ; this clear position should come from the Commission , the Commission President and the relevant Commissioner as well .
Madam Vice-President , you are very eloquent in your endeavours to inform citizens about the Commission 's work , and we pay tribute to and fully support your efforts .
However , it is not just about form ; it is also about substance .
The Commissioners must provide you with appropriate content .
When it comes to the financial crisis , regulation and the social dimension , the social market economy is supplying you with too little content .
That is why you will often find it difficult to present a credible case to citizens .
We say ' yes ' to the ecological restructuring of our economy and society ; we are completely on your side here and will translate this into action .
However , my urgent message to you is this : we need to take a step back - or a step forward , if you like - towards policies based on social responsibility , and that means the Commission as well , for what we are getting here is too little , too late .
I would ask you to ensure that this situation is remedied in the next few months .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , next year - 2009 - is indeed a very important year for the European Union , for it is the year in which the European elections are due to take place , and more generally , the major question as to the European Union 's future course must be answered .
The elections will take place : that we do know , but what we do not yet know is the exact basis on which we will be working together thereafter .
That is a question to which our citizens are quite rightly expecting an answer .
From the European institutions ' perspective , how do we envisage the future of Europe ?
The Commission 's legislative and work programme of course offers an opportunity to provide a comprehensive answer to this question .
That is why we , as the Parliament , have agreed to set out our own requirements of the Commission 's work programme first , before it is presented to us and we then react to it .
The European Union faces these major challenges of direct relevance to its future .
What will that future bring ?
At the same time , so much is happening in the world which directly affects citizens in their daily lives , such as rising energy prices and the financial crisis .
Here , we need clear words from Europe to explain how the European Union intends to respond .
For that , we need conviction and leadership .
That is why it is important for the European Commission to set out very clearly how it intends to respond to these crises and , in its work programme , to define exactly where the political priorities must lie .
In this context , it is important , from our perspective , for the Commission to keep the European Union 's competitiveness in mind .
In an increasingly globalised market , it is important for us to define this as one of our continued political priorities .
Other aspects which are equally important , however , are strengthening and protecting civil rights , expanding research , and finding a solution to climate change .
These are other issues which have been very important topics in the House for many years .
These areas should be defined by the Commission , and above all , it should also ensure that Europe is able to take credit for any successes achieved .
It is often the case that if something is achieved which is entirely in line with citizens ' interests and wellbeing , the Member States take the credit .
I would like the Commission to pay more heed to this in future .
In that respect , I am very pleased to see you , Madam Vice-President , here today .
There are one or two of our fellow Members of the House who have to accept that Mr Barroso , the Commission President , had something else in his diary for today .
I am pleased that you are here , Madam Vice-President , because you are responsible for driving forward communication in the European Union and this might present an opportunity for today 's topic - namely the Commission 's work programme - to be fully debated in the national parliaments as well , so that we have this type of interplay from the outset .
In the German Bundestag , this now takes place in most of the committees , but it is something which should undoubtedly form part of the plenary agenda in the national parliaments throughout Europe as a whole .
Europe 's hour has come : that much should be obvious .
We are facing global challenges , and Europe has no option but to develop a joint response .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , members of the Commission , the debate about the work programme is , as always , the moment of truth .
It is here that we see what the statements made in public on so many different occasions are really worth .
If we look at the programme in more detail , it becomes apparent , unfortunately , that these announcements are not being acted on , notably as regards the financial perspective or the Commission 's forward planning .
We have before us a climate protection programme which suggests that the Bali conference never happened , as if Europe had never positioned itself as a key pioneer to avert the dangers of climate change at global level .
The car industry has applied the brakes , and the Commission is sitting back and watching .
The Member States are being given their heads and allowed to undercut each other in introducing ever-lower environmental standards for their own industries and making ever-greater concessions to their own car manufacturers .
Unfortunately , we see the same thing happening across the board in the industrial sector .
As ever , the focus is on nuclear energy : an industry which squanders capacity , finances and energy .
Even though Europe has an innovative renewables sector , the European level has nothing but small change to spare for this sector after it has given its commitment and allocated its financial resources and planning elsewhere .
That is completely unacceptable .
If we are to remain market leaders here , we must send out a clear and unequivocal message , and that means setting the priority where it is needed .
We have the same problem , unfortunately , when it comes to employment relations .
I would underline just one issue here : the Working Time Directive which has now been agreed , and where considerable concessions have clearly been made .
It is a slap in the face for all our young people who want to build a future for themselves .
This is not how we should be treating our workers .
Finally , we have the debate about the financial markets .
I can only endorse what the previous speaker , Mr Swoboda , said .
The last remaining champions of self-regulation of the financial markets are here in this House .
Even in the US , regulations are being considered , but on this side of the Atlantic we seem to be pretending that this will all happen of its own accord .
We should be signalling our willingness to create a sound framework so that the financial markets can no longer evolve in the same direction as before , where nonsensical financial products took precedence over sound economic policy .
From my perspective , this whole programme is a huge disappointment .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , at this very worrying juncture when the people of Europe and the world are facing fundamental challenges , it is unacceptable that the European Commission has not presented any proposals that make a break with the policies that have made the social situation worse , pushed up unemployment and precarious and poorly paid work , brought about the financial , food and energy crisis - which is affecting in particular the economically weaker countries and the more vulnerable sections of society - and increased the militarisation of international relations , with all the dangers that this represents for world peace .
Despite being aware that there is clear opposition and resistance by workers , consumers and public-service users to privatisation and liberalisation , to unfair health and social security reforms , and to the ever-increasing distribution of income to economic and financial groups , thus worsening social inequalities , the European Commission is insisting on maintaining and continuing with the same instruments and policies that led to this situation , in particular the Stability Pact and its irrational criteria , the liberal Lisbon Strategy and the false independence of the European Central Bank .
It is insisting on proposals for unacceptable Directives such as the Working Time Directive .
At such a time , the priority must be to halt the process of ratifying the draft Lisbon Treaty and to respect democracy and the result of the Irish referendum , which was a sovereign decision by its people , following on from identical results in France and the Netherlands .
It is time for the leaders of the European Union to learn the lessons from these votes and from the opposition and resistance of workers and citizens to neoliberal , militaristic and anti-democratic policies .
At this moment in time , the priority must be to make specific proposals such as those in our Group 's motion for a resolution , including revocation of the Stability Pact and an end to privatisation and liberalisation , with a monetary policy and a reorientation of the European Central Bank giving priority to employment with rights , to the eradication of poverty and to social justice , including through a progress and social development pact .
We need to give hope to our citizens , create jobs with rights for young people and ensure equality for women and equal rights for women .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the whole climate change programme has given the EU yet another excuse to flex its muscles and show the world how important it is , claiming that this is an issue that nation states cannot deal with alone .
The 20 20 20 slogan is a typical example of a catchy phrase to work with : 20 % of energy in the EU from renewable sources ; a 20 % reduction in carbon emissions - all by the year 2020 .
But you are missing the most important point : is any of this necessary ?
We were told recently by the IPCC that 2 500 scientists were all in agreement that CO2 was responsible for global warming and that we humans were the culprits .
Al Gore 's infamous film confirmed that view .
Since then , however , over 30 500 scientists and climatologists have signed the Oregon Petition and the Manhattan Declaration which directly challenges the IPCC conclusions with some very compelling evidence .
So whilst we are urged to believe the IPCC 's 2 500 scientists , we are being told to completely ignore the 30 500 scientists who are painting a different picture .
The EU is persuading nations across the world to spend billions of taxpayers ' money , at the very time when the world is facing dire financial problems , on something that might not only be totally unnecessary , but could well prove to be counter-productive if the latest evidence of global cooling proves to be correct .
We must have a full and open debate to prove exactly who is right .
What do supporters of the IPCC 's position have to fear ?
You will no doubt be pleased to hear that this will be my very last speech in this Parliament since I retire after this session .
( SK ) The European Parliament 's motion for a resolution on the Commission 's work programme for 2009 can be agreed in principle like the document expanding on this programme .
I would personally like to point to the complexity with which Parliament 's resolution emphasises the importance of ensuring stability on the financial markets and reassuring consumers during the current financial crisis .
There is no doubt that there is a need to develop regulatory measures so as to improve investor transparency and to improve the standards for valuation , supervision of business caution and the work of the rating agencies .
The Commission must develop a detailed plan to bring about an improvement in the legal regulations for financial services and review the directives on the activities of credit institutions and capital adequacy .
This will make it possible to achieve an improvement in the financial regulatory framework and increase the confidence of market participants .
Paragraph 27 of the resolution rightly includes a call for the Commission to consider what kind of transitional arrangements should be put in place in the field of justice and home affairs pending the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
If , however , the situation actually arises whereby the Lisbon Treaty does not enter into force before the 2009 elections , this request to the Commission will have to have a far broader scope .
Otherwise , our dear European Commission will be caught with its pants down .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , allow me to pose a question to the House .
What are Parliament 's legislative work and the Commission 's proposals all about ?
The answer is that they are about creating authority amongst Europeans , amongst people who are citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
I firmly believe that Parliament and the European Commission should concentrate on legislative work relating to job creation and the promotion of economic growth .
It is only by demonstrating that the European Union and its structures are close to the people that we can develop the authority of the Union 's institutions .
The latter have been somewhat weakened in recent years .
In my view , our main priority at present is not ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
We should be focusing instead on making it abundantly clear to the citizens of the Union that we want to create more employment and that we are concerned about existing jobs .
There is also the issue of cybercrime , an entirely new problem affecting many people .
I am calling for a suitable hierarchy to be established when it comes to the priorities ; I cannot make one out at present .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first thank Parliament for taking up my suggestion to make the interinstitutional dialogue on the Commission 's work programme a more political exercise with the involvement of the political groups , the plenary and the committees .
I think this has been given a good start with your speeches so far .
This year 's work programme will be the last one of this Commission , and it has been prepared under very special and specific circumstances : the follow-up to the war in Georgia , the situation in our neighbourhood , the uncertainties surrounding the Lisbon Treaty after the Irish ' no ' , the escalation of fuel and commodity prices , the increase in food prices , inflation threatening purchasing power and , last but not least - and you have all mentioned it - the financial crisis affecting banks and other credit institutions .
I will not need to remind you that what we do in the first half of next year will also set the scene for the European elections .
This is why , in our presentation of the annual policy strategy last year , we underlined our intention to stick to our ambition of delivering a Europe of results and bringing concrete benefits to citizens .
The main policy priorities which the Barroso Commission envisaged for next year are still structured around five pillars , but the circumstances are different and we are facing new and urgent questions .
The first pillar is promoting sustainable growth and jobs .
More than ever we need to address today 's concerns : what we can do to boost growth , jobs and social stability in a period of growing inflation ; what we can do to improve financial stability , building on and reinforcing the instruments available to the Union - and available to the Commission as well , which is an important discussion .
As you know , the financial crisis is at the top of our agenda every week too , and we have established a kind of road map , but we have also discussed the preparation of a proposal on capital requirements for banks to tighten existing rules ; we are also preparing a proposal to regulate rating agencies , which , as you know , played a very important role in the financial markets and in this crisis as well .
Of course , we think that well-thought-through proposals also play a very important role in ensuring that we can deal with the effects of the financial crisis .
So we are active , and will continue to be active .
Another concern is what we can do to respond to the rise in oil , food and commodities prices .
Our job is not day-to-day micro-management but , in a single market , we need to look carefully at how we can bring long-term stability into the financial system .
That is the first pillar .
The second major effort will be put into promoting the transition to a low-emission and resource-efficient economy .
The Copenhagen meeting will be a major global rendezvous with a view to reaching a global climate-change agreement for post-2012 / post-Kyoto .
Europe must prepare its ground well and also maintain its role as a pioneer on climate change ; we will also need to pursue work on how to assist with adapting to the impact of climate change so that we can be the leaders in development of smart growth .
The third pillar has to do with a common immigration policy .
We want to make a reality of a common immigration policy , following up on our communication in June , as well as to work on a pact on immigration , and we will need to move from pacts to acts if we are to make this a reality .
The fourth pillar is how to focus our intentions on delivering policies that put our citizens first .
The revised social agenda and the EU health strategy will also guide our action in this area , as well as the question of how we can further strengthen the rights of consumers .
Finally , we will pursue our objective of consolidating the role of Europe as a global partner .
On the external front , the challenges for 2009 are well known : the enlargement process , relations with our neighbourhood , the fate of the Doha negotiations , improving our record on development assistance and establishing full cooperation with the new US Administration .
This debate means that Parliament is involved early , because the programme does not exist yet , so we are taking this as input into our discussion and we will take your suggestions on board .
On the other hand , to be credible and to have a real impact , the demands from Parliament to the Commission must remain focused , and this is particularly true for 2009 .
On different sides of the House you have different views on how we should prioritise over the next year .
I hope most of us can agree that we must work together to forge a positive agenda for 2009 , concentrated on the essentials .
I think we must only consider initiatives that can really make a difference .
In addition to choosing our proposals carefully , we need to communicate them well , so that European citizens can make a fair judgement on what the EU does and can do for them .
So I am grateful for this debate at the very moment when we are preparing the programme .
We intend to adopt it next month and to present it in plenary with the whole college present on 19 November .
I have taken good note of your views , and you can be sure that they will help us to build a work programme with concrete initiatives bringing tangible , concrete change for European citizens .

Mr President , as Mr Nassauer has already said , the PPE-DE Group is very happy with the contents of the annual legislative programme .
I think that , due to the improved process , Parliament has already come on board , which makes it very easy for us to improve the annual legislative programme .
As a representative of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , I would like to concentrate on your first pillar - growth , jobs and European competitiveness .
I think that a key factor is how we respond to the financial crisis .
In the PPE-DE Group we believe that , as we already have quite good legislation in place in Europe , everything we do now should be based on the existing legislation and its improvement .
We do not see the need for a very radical overhaul in Europe .
We think that , firstly , soft-law measures should be considered because that is also the most effective way to respond to global issues .
Financial markets are very global and we cannot act in Europe as though we were in a vacuum .
We also believe that there are many improvements in the present regulatory and supervisory framework , the so-called ' Lamfalussy Framework ' , and we support completely the Commission 's work on that area .
The second issue is climate change .
Climate change will influence growth and jobs in Europe .
We should not take the fundamentalist view about climate change that Europe must act now and must do everything at once without global support .
Thirty per cent of emissions , even if we were to go that far , is not enough to tackle climate change .
We need a global , effective deal and that will probably come from Copenhagen .
Until then we should not punish ourselves .
We should not punish European competitiveness too much , but take a realistic approach to climate change policies in Europe .
Finally , my third point concerns SMEs .
SMEs are the key to European growth .
For example , in the social package we should always take on board their views and how they see the social framework environment in Europe .
The social package should not be a burden to European small and medium-sized companies .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I want to concentrate on the social EU .
When the social agenda came , we said that it was too little too late .
When we now look at the Commission 's work programme and also at the joint resolution , we see that employment and social affairs issues are not particularly highly prioritised .
They are a priority for people , but not for the Commission .
That does not accord with the demands of ordinary people .
In the resolution from the Social Democrats , we raise a number of questions .
One concerns people with atypical jobs , a group which is constantly growing , and the need for those who have atypical jobs to be given proper protection .
People who are vulnerable to and affected by unjustified dismissal .
There must be minimum standards for this in the common labour market .
We must also look again at the Globalisation Adjustment Fund and see whether we can further improve prospects for those affected by unemployment due to restructuring , so that they can get training and find new jobs .
We have a number of proposals in the field of working conditions .
Finally , I would like to raise the question which was discussed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on Monday .
Because of judgments in the EC Court of Justice , people today are terribly afraid that there will be social dumping in the EU , that it will become the policy .
We succeeded in drafting proposals to open out the Posting of Workers Directive in order to guarantee equal treatment and to establish in primary law the principle that fundamental rights , such as the right to strike , are not subordinated to freedom of movement .
I hope that the Commission will now take this up .
It is good to know that you are organising a forum , but you must also present concrete proposals to prevent social dumping and to give workers reasonable pay and reasonable working conditions .
Mr President , when we last had this discussion with Commissioner Barroso about the work programme , I said it was good that the Commission tried to avoid what I called ' end of term-itis ' .
It is , however , very difficult for Parliament up front of the European elections .
Each of the groups will want to stamp its own imprint on the programme that goes forward .
That is only natural , but we also have to try and speak to you in this dialogue with one voice so that some clarity comes forward .
You will find that the group of Liberals and Democrats has joined the joint resolution , but also we pick things from other groups as well , to try and provide what is often our role : balance in the House and some equilibrium .
These are really unnerving times for Europe 's citizens .
Everybody is uncertain about the future with the global financial turmoil , which brings worries about debt , unemployment , health costs , pensions , and it breeds an atmosphere where fairness and equality can fly out of the window when there is a scramble for everybody to save their own position .
Climate change brings its own worries about adapting our lifestyles and about fuel costs in a very different world .
This time of global problems should , of course , be a time when the EU comes into its own because we have a multinational reach , but as Liberals and Democrats we would say , OK , let us use that reach , but it should not reach too far .
It should produce an umbrella , it should produce some control , but it should also give individual choice so that individual citizens can begin to feel in control again in these times of uncertainty .
So , yes to greater oversight of financial markets and players , but also yes to greater consumer choice and greater consumer redress .
We do not want another Equitable Life in Europe .
Yes to greater labour mobility , yes to greater joined-up social security , but yes also to fairness and non-discrimination .
Yes to greater choice in health and to patient mobility .
So , let us give our citizens a choice in how they live their lives .
If you are worried about the future , the one way you can begin to feel more secure about it is if you feel you can do something about it , you feel you have control , and that will be the theme running through the choices made by Liberals and Democrats in this resolution .
Yes to Europe , but yes also to individual choice and empowerment .
( GA ) Mr President , the Commission , the Council and , of course , Parliament 's greatest concern is that Europe 's economy improves without delay .
Europe will have no social cash fund to help those who are disadvantaged , unless the economy improves .
We must face this challenge immediately .
In light of what happened in the financial markets , I do not think that we can continue in the way we have this year .
The current meddling with the rules of the financial markets must stop .
The public is very worried about this and we must reassure them .
We must act very soon .
All of us , in the European Union , must invest more in research and development .
I am delighted that EUR 55 billion will be spent on these areas between 2007 and 2013 .
We must keep up-to-date and competition must be ensured in these areas , in order to create employment and to guarantee that the world we now live in has a strong economic base .
( DE ) Mr President , we are currently facing an explosive mix of social decline , cultural conflicts , increasing democratic deficits , the threat of supply bottlenecks , inflation , imported security risks and a speculation bubble which could burst at any moment .
For far too long , the worrying developments in the labour market and citizens ' concerns have been ignored .
It is high time to set the right priorities .
As regards the food crisis , I believe that renationalisation of agricultural policy is essential to maintain our self-sufficiency capability .
Problems of illegal mass immigration have to be resolved at last , and a sensible family and birth policy must be introduced for Europe 's native population .
Citizens must be protected from EU-subsidised business relocations , and the waste of taxpayers ' money and tax fraud must also be stopped .
We must halt the sell-off of the EU 's family silver , which is being sacrificed to over-zealous privatisation , and we must also finally accept that the Lisbon Treaty project has failed .
If the EU shows itself to be amenable here , we can ride out the current crisis .
Otherwise , we are likely to witness the steady decline of the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , my Group simply wants to highlight that the current budgetary and financial framework for 2007 to 2013 makes it very difficult to respond effectively to the new political priorities .
Both this Parliament and my Group said that it was impossible to adopt new political priorities without ensuring sufficient funding .
We are now seeing that there is no room for the new political initiatives taken by both the Council and the Commission , such as food aid or aid to Georgia , within the current financial framework and we therefore need to find solutions .
However , we must not allow the solutions adopted to harm existing plans and available funds within the Interinstitutional Agreement .
In this respect , we believe that we must be extremely strict .
We must ensure that the necessary resources are fully available .
We must use all aspects of the Interinstitutional Agreement , during its remaining years , to ensure adequate financing of our priorities and we must use something that we have rather forgotten about , namely the current review of the budget , to adequately solve those problems that are going to arise as the developing situation imposes new political emergencies .
We therefore ask the Commission to make an additional effort to move forward , as quickly as possible , with its proposed review of the budget .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , citizens ' scepticism about the European Union can be felt very strongly nowadays , and there is a reason for that .
It is due to the policies which have been pursued over recent years and the way in which they have been conveyed to citizens .
For that reason , it is extremely important for the European Commission and other EU institutions to gear policy-making far more strongly towards the lives of citizens and to convey the impression and demonstrate to them that the European Union is genuinely doing something for its citizens .
To that end , it is also important - for example , in our analyses of what is needed - to focus more strongly on what we should be doing .
For example , a consumer scoreboard is a very important instrument which must be further expanded so that we can take better account of citizens ' concerns and interests in this area .
The second point which is also important in this context is better monitoring of the impacts of EU legislation .
It is not enough simply to assess the economic impacts .
We need clear impact assessments in the social sphere as well , so that we are aware of how the legislation that we are forging is impacting on citizens , and so that we can demonstrate that what we know what we want and what we are doing , and that what we are doing can generate positive outcomes for their lives .
It is also important to grant the same rights to citizens throughout the EU .
I would therefore urge you to work on the further development of class actions and common legal entitlements .
That would send out a very important signal to citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , the Commission seems to be behaving like an inattentive pupil rushing to finish his homework on time .
Yes , the social package exists , but it is not complete and can be seen only as one step towards a full engagement by the Commission with social concerns .
The Commission President has not realised the scale of the warning given by citizens in France , the Netherlands and Ireland , which would , unfortunately , have been issued elsewhere if referendums been held .
These results are a call to order .
If people want more Europe , it is in order to build a better society and not merely to adopt yet more obscure directives .
Legislation on the internal market is certainly necessary , but it is far from being the most important concern .
The 2009 programme , just like its predecessors , incidentally , is going to miss the point .
People do not expect the Commission to restrict itself to adding to or even streamlining legislation .
They expect the Commission to be up to the task assigned to it by the Treaties : to be the driving force behind the Union , its suggestion box .
To that end , it is not enough for its President to sit quietly and nicely behind the Council President .
We expect the Commission to behave like a key player in the examination of the sort of society we need to build .
However , what sort of society does this programme envisage ? The 2009 programme contains no serious flaws , but it is not the programme our fellow citizens need .
Mr President , it will be up to the new College to take up its responsibilities .
I only hope that it will be more attentive to the voice of the European people than the present one .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , the diversity of the messages coming from the plenary to the Commission today cannot be ignored .
I will therefore focus as far as possible on a few key points which I hope my fellow Members will endorse .
In my view , what we are able to agree on - and Madam Vice-President , you mentioned this earlier - is that the European Union must maintain its commitment to the fundamental principle of the social market economy while promoting the interests of the business sector and consumers alike .
At an individual level , that is a difficult balancing act whose outcome may , of course , vary according to one 's political standpoint .
However , I believe - and here , I would like to follow on from what Mr Nassauer said - that during the coming months , the Commission must develop a better sense of what is required in terms of subsidiarity .
If we look at the type of proposals you presented on the procurement of eco-friendly vehicles or what you intend to propose as regards eco-friendly procurement in the work programme , you clearly take the view that our cities ' mayors , as ordinary mortals , are not able to make eco-friendly decisions themselves , and you therefore feel a need to prescribe what they should be doing from your position at Europe 's centre .
In our view , this is the wrong approach .
We want individuals themselves to understand that environmentally friendly procurement is in their own interests .
To that end , we need more subsidiarity in these sectors , more best practice and less dirigisme .
Madam Vice-President , may I also encourage the Commission to adopt a more courageous approach in its negotiations with Member States in future , for example when it comes to the issue of how we should harmonise consumer protection legislation in the European Union in the interests of companies and in the interests of consumers .
Proceeding with this harmonisation will only make sense if we genuinely harmonise the entire sphere of consumer protection law and leave the Member States no further scope to tinker on the margins of this harmonised acquis .
Otherwise , it is a pointless exercise .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 2009 is a year in which we will not only be going to the polls but will also have to provide some answers to specific questions asked of us by our electorates .
One such question will concern the area of freedom , security and justice : why do we mean to create it , how do we mean to create it and when do we mean to create it .
We need to provide an answer in the form of an ambitious programme of legislative policies which , Commissioner , the Commission has not yet put on the table .
We expect strong legislative proposals with respect to immigration policy , especially on entry policies and asylum policies , in order to safeguard this fundamental right throughout the European Union and to avoid drawing a distinction between policies on legal and illegal immigration , which seems to us altogether inappropriate .
We believe that a common policy framework and regulatory environment is necessary : alongside containment measures we need integration measures and legal immigration channels .
We expect strong proposals on judicial cooperation in criminal and police matters , founded on mutual recognition of procedural guarantees .
Mutual recognition is still lacking , and without such proposals the fight against organised crime and terrorism is likely to remain nothing but rhetoric .
Lastly , we expect a bolder approach to the protection and safeguarding of fundamental rights , which remain the primary objective of judicial measures .
The new Fundamental Rights Agency should become the main instrument of this activity once the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
We expect , Commissioner , to find evidence of this intention in the programme to be unveiled to us by the Commission within the next few days .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner said that she herself wanted a Europe that was more visible , that meant something to citizens .
Now , the largest budget item today , accounting for 36 % of the Union 's budget , is concerned with cohesion policy .
If there is one area in which our fellow citizens can see the practical and tangible effects of Europe 's achievements and determination , it is the Cohesion Fund .
As has already been stated , 2009 will be a significant year , as we shall see the formation of a newly elected Parliament and Commission .
This means that it will be a ' blank ' year , a year off in certain areas .
However , in terms of cohesion policy , we cannot afford to take any time off .
We cannot stop the programmes that are under way and , above all , we cannot stop their effectiveness .
Everyone here will surely have in mind the improvements brought to the daily life of people of Portugal , Spain , Ireland and all the countries of Europe thanks to our cohesion policies .
The Commission must therefore be able to present to us a detailed work programme for 2009 as regards cohesion , which is , I repeat , the European Union 's largest budget item and also the most tangible expression for citizens of our achievements , so that 2009 is not a ' blank ' year but a year of progress within the 2007-2013 programming period .
I thank the Commissioner and her colleagues in advance for their proposals on this matter .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , the year 2008-2009 represents a transition period , as we are living through an unprecedented economic crisis .
It is also European election year , meaning , unfortunately , that it is in danger of being wasted .
We must therefore do all we can to maintain the competitiveness of our businesses and persuade our fellow citizens that Europe is the answer .
Unfortunately , the programme is full - too full - and has come too late , and not for a lack of warnings on this subject over the past several years .
On climate change , Mrs Wallström said that we should be pioneers of smart growth .
We all agree , but the efforts must be joint or not at all .
Europe cannot do this alone .
It should not shoot itself in the foot .
The consequences of the decisions we take will weigh heavily , socially and economically .
We cannot talk about a global climate change agreement if China , the United States , Brazil and India are not on board .
An agreement without China 's signature is not an agreement .
As regards health , we have been told that there is pharmaceutical package .
At last !
We have been asking for this package for years .
It has come just as we are about to begin preparing for the elections .
However , it is still a source of great frustration .
How can we justify our slowness to tackle the counterfeiting of medicines when it represents a real health threat and is a serious crime ?
We could have begun long ago to work on the traceability of medicines and the ban on repackaging .
Finally , it is imperative that we strengthen our consumer protection policy , particularly in the light of all the crises and food scandals the world is experiencing .
I therefore urge you , Mrs Wallström , to make sure that 2009 is not a wasted year !
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Europe has in recent times become accustomed to relatively strong economic growth and economic prosperity .
I fear that this period is now coming to an end , at least temporarily .
The main priorities for the Commission , Parliament and also the Council next year should therefore be directed at restoring economic growth and strengthening social cohesion .
There is a need to improve the system for regulating the financial markets in the Union ; it is essential to strive for more effective economic and fiscal coordination , including coordination of the system of direct taxes and clear measures against tax fraud .
There is an urgent need to put forward a complex proposal for an external policy in the field of energy , including active support for the construction of energy infrastructure .
In a period of economic uncertainty , it is also essential for the Commission to reaffirm its commitment to support social rights far more strongly than before and I need not remind you that the main priority next year should also include completion of the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and , of course , its implementation .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Wallström has just talked about reaching the citizens .
Well , cohesion policy with thousands of small-scale regional and municipal schemes is the most visible form of action of the European Community .
With those we shall be actively reaching out to citizens in the future .
I am thinking , for instance , not just of the regional and municipal open days here in Brussels in the next few weeks , but also of many different activities in the Member States .
So far so good .
However , changes are also needed and I shall mention two .
First of all , it is the fervent wish of Parliament to make the European Union Solidarity Fund more flexible .
Citizens want quick action in natural disasters and floods .
We have a view on that and the European Council has already been obstructing that debate for a couple of years .
Let us in any case make sure that it is opened up .
Secondly , the Green Paper on territorial cohesion expected in October must be the basis for cohesion policy after 2013 : not renationalisation , but a long-term European effort , a single integral European policy .
We are seeing concentration in a number of regions in Europe ; that is a consequence of globalisation and it is necessary .
At the same time , however , we must have a view of how balanced development can be made possible in Europe in all areas with their own characteristics in the broad spectrum of agricultural development , R & D , ecology , and so on .
The internal market has brought many benefits and it is nearly completed , but cohesion policy is now entering a new phase .
The Green Paper will provide the basis for that and legislative steps should then follow in the new phase .
( EL ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking Commissioner Wallström .
Her participation has truly enabled us to find common ground on a communications policy and on the schedule of priorities for the European Commission and the European Parliament , within the framework of an interinstitutional agreement , which we have consolidated and shall be presenting .
Commissioner , as you have very rightly said , we all know that the first-pillar issue concerning social policy must be the priority for the communications policy and indeed at the core of an EU that does not simply respect its citizens but wishes to impose its own outlines , structures and order in this international context of the globalisation crisis .
On this point , then , no-one disagrees .
Allow me , however , to point out to you that in your proposal there is a lack of certain individual recommendations focusing on specific markets or handling important issues such as the protection of intellectual property rights .
From now on the Commission needs to arrive at a decisive solution to the problem because in its recent communication it avoids making a specific recommendation and confines itself to ' technocratic ' issues rather than issues of substance .
As regards education and immigration policy , I think these are issues that you should highlight in your text .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I would like to water down , if only slightly , the praise you have received from the House , at least as far as the issue of passenger rights is concerned .
We urge the Commission to submit a comprehensive package of proposals for passenger rights throughout the transport sector .
It is gratifying that we already have passenger rights in the air transport industry , although these require urgent review , given that a number of airlines are not applying the relevant regulation in the way that we would wish .
This year , we have also agreed a package of passenger rights for rail users , to be implemented next year .
However , Madam Commissioner , it was announced that passenger rights for people taking long-distance buses would be introduced , and a debate about passenger rights for ferry services has already started .
We do not see either of these proposed measures included in the work programme .
We need these proposals , as we want to have passenger rights for the entire transport sector , for we agree with the Commission : if we want to put the citizen first , one of the best ways of doing this is to introduce passenger rights that apply right across the transport sector .
The second point which I would briefly like to mention is this : we hope that the Commission will implement the planned traffic management systems as envisaged .
Specifically , this means SESAR for a single European sky and ERTMS as the single European Railway Traffic Management System .
With these systems , Madam Vice-President , we are not only making transport safer and cheaper , we are also helping to protect the environment .
You therefore have our full support for the rapid deployment of these systems .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , there are no new issues in the sphere of budgetary control .
Budgetary control is ongoing , and we would have been gratified to see some progress being made on the issues already on this agenda .
I have five points to make .
Firstly , we would urgently appeal for some support for Romania and Bulgaria in establishing the rule of law , the justice system and financial control .
We do not want to be in the same position in two years ' time , so this issue is very important to us .
The second issue is the statement of assurance for the budget as a whole after the phased control procedure involving the national courts of audit .
In the last half-year remaining to the Commission , it would be nice if we could achieve some major progress here , or at least agree on a common way forward .
As budget controllers , our expectations are quite modest .
The third point is simplification .
We should be giving the lower tiers of administration in the Member States more help in implementing EU law .
It is clear that they are completely overwhelmed by many areas of EU law , which is why the failure rates are so high .
Fourthly , foreign aid : here , I would like to mention Kosovo in particular and the issue of cooperation with the United Nations .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has been to Kosovo , and I would like to announce at this juncture that Kosovo will be something of an issue when it comes to the discharge of the budget .
In my view , we are falling far short of the opportunities available to the European Union and have considerable ground to make up here .
My fifth point is improving cooperation among the Member States in combating fraud .
Here , we have homework for the ladies and gentlemen of the Council in particular .
In November , the House will be voting on the regulation which provides the legal basis for combating fraud , and we will need to consider how we take this forward if we want to achieve better results in this area .
At least , that is something that we have always agreed on until now .
( PL ) Mr President , much has been said in the House concerning the Commission 's strategy .
The main aim of the latter is to bring the Union closer to its citizens .
We reiterate this year after year .
Nothing has been achieved , however , despite the Commissioner 's determined efforts , which I certainly appreciate , and despite the actions for which I am grateful .
The Union is not closer to the citizens .
I still believe that the reason for this state of affairs is to be found in the information policy .
I have studied the point concerning information on Europe .
There is one important reference in the action presented by the Commission , namely the launch of a grass-roots campaign concerning the social dimension of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is a good point .
The remainder , however , concerns information on the European Union 's work and intentions , rather than on its actions .
The citizen expects to be informed about results , not about what the Union is planning or intending to do .
The man in the street wants to know what the Union has achieved and how it has affected him .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commission why Mr Ganley 's campaign in Ireland produced better results than the campaign undertaken by the Irish Government and the European Union regarding the Lisbon Treaty ?
Was there some mysterious power at work or did Mr Ganley 's funds have something to do with the outcome ?
Perhaps the Commission should consider the matter .
( ES ) In 2009 the European Union will have to strengthen not only the internal dimension of the European project , but also its external influence , through an external policy that must be consistent and effective in responding to the challenges currently being posed by the global agenda .
To do this , we will have to adjust our relations with Russia following the crisis in the Caucasus .
We will have to , in some way , adapt the neighbourhood policy , firstly within our own continent , through association and stabilisation agreements and then through the enlargement policy , and also outside our continent , through the Union for the Mediterranean .
I believe it is also important to maintain our presence in the conflicts of Central Asia , Iraq , Iran , Afghanistan and now also Pakistan , to reinforce our presence in the Middle East conflict and to maintain our relations with the emerging powers of China and India .
We must , in particular , develop the Association Agreement with the African , Caribbean and Pacific States .
I believe we must pay very close attention to the result of the US elections and , last but not least , we must also give priority to the conclusion of the association agreements with Mercosur , the Andean Community and Central America .
Finally , Mr President , Madam Vice-President , this is a huge task that I feel would be much easier to tackle if we could use the instruments provided to us , in the area of external policy , by the Lisbon Treaty .
To end , I must say to you , Madam Vice-President , that you already know that you can count on the support of this Parliament .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Contrary to expectations , the financial crisis that started in America a year ago , far from abating , has hit the whole world again and again in ever bigger waves , including the financial markets and thus the economies of Europe .
The Central Bank has to pump enormous sums of money into the financial markets in order to ensure their survival .
However , in order to remedy the economic and social impact of the financial crisis , the Commission must make progress in two areas .
The first is that a common European financial supervisory authority must be established as soon as possible and must be charged with avoiding similar speculative dangers , thus also ensuring that Europe gradually takes over the role of America 's broken financial and capital market .
Secondly , it must make the European financial sector concentrate on funding real economies , which have been neglected up to now , instead of on speculative transactions .
In order to do this , naturally , it would also be necessary for the European Central Bank to treat economic growth and the creation of jobs as priorities , in addition to keeping a tight rein on inflation . Thank you very much .
Mr President , 2009 will be , to put it mildly , a crucial year for achieving the goals of the Lisbon process .
There are four matters that I would like to raise here today .
The first one is the need to make real progress on the process of better regulation , where we all agree that we should reduce administrative burdens by 25 % by 2012 , and I think it would be appropriate for the Commission to demonstrate here in Parliament , year by year , that it is moving ahead in really making better regulation .
The second thing is research and innovation .
The budget review is coming to an end , and it is crucial and of strategic importance that we now ensure that we can move ahead and put Europe in the forefront of research and innovation by contributing the proper financing .
The third thing is mobility of workers .
That is one of the more dynamic aspects of the European Union where we have seen enormously good achievements that are contributing not only to the economy of Europe but also to individuals all over Europe .
It is important not only that we do not make it more difficult - that we defend opportunities - but also that we make it easier also by discussing and reforming education in the framework of the Bologna Process , making mobility a reality to even more people .
Finally , 2009 will be an important year to take action on energy policy , where we currently have a number of legislative items going forward .
There is legislation on the energy markets ( which still has to be completed ) , on renewables , on effort sharing and on emission trading .
Now it is also time to ensure that we can finalise this process and implement it in reality so that we have a good basis , not only for 2010 but for the further future , for being the best knowledge economy in the world .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , 2009 is an election year .
This does not mean , however , that Parliament and the Commission should focus on the election programme to the exclusion of all else .
There is a tendency to promise a great many things in such programmes .
We attach great importance to the joint action to be undertaken up until the middle of 2009 and in the second half of 2009 .
The citizens expect clear and comprehensible information too .
I should like to refer to one of these elements , namely the fundamental change to be proposed by the European Commission in October .
The change involves amending cohesion policy by introducing a spatial feature , namely territorial cohesion .
The Commission has referred to October , yet we cannot find any reference to the matter in the 2009 programme .
We already know , however , that the issue will arouse great interest as well as controversy .
In this connection , I should like to highlight that 2009 is particularly important with regard to the issue of cohesion policy , notably territorial cohesion and integrated action .
I trust additional information will be forthcoming .
( LT ) It is , of course , a pleasure to discuss a programme that should be a continuation of earlier programmes from previous years .
In the first pillar we see the battle against the global financial crisis .
This reminds me of firefighting .
The crisis has been going on for a year now and we have failed to notice it ; no measures have been taken .
I would like to draw your attention to the energy policy .
Three years ago we decided to have common energy policy .
This is a lengthy , complex process that requires hard work .
It is essential that our actions are consistent .
Meanwhile , I am not aware that any actions regarding energy issues have been mentioned .
The legal acts we have adopted will not create energy policy , common energy policy , by themselves , nor will they implement that policy .
There are no connections , the search for alternative energy resources is non-existent , and nothing is being done about the problems of the Arctic , the potential resources in the Arctic .
In fact , there is no long-term energy perspective and the outcome could be similar to the situation with the financial crisis .
We will be taken by surprise when something happens as regards the energy situation , and only then will we take action .
I suggest that we perhaps continue the work we have started .
( RO ) I would like to emphasize two priorities which the European Commission should take into account next year , with regard to social and employment policy .
First of all , the European Commission should encourage the employment of young people .
A recent European study showed that fewer and fewer young people enter the labour market , because they are discouraged by barriers such as the lack of employment in their chosen field of sudy , the lack of experience and the lack of professional skills .
It is imperative that all young people should have access to the best education and that they should obtain qualifications which are demanded on the labour market .
Therefore , I believe that the educational system should be correlated with the labour market , and that the transition from theory to practice should be done smoothly , through various professional training programs or EU internships .
Secondly , the European Union should support , coordinate and perfect the actions taken by the Member States in the field of sports , by promoting competitiveness and the affiliation of children and youth to sports clubs , as well as an unbiased and transparent attitude in competitions .
Sport also needs financial support , and I am in favour of creating a new budget line dedicated to European sports programs .
Mr President , I would like to make a few comments on this , and I welcome the opportunity to do so .
I want to speak on the situation as regards the Solidarity Fund .
I am a supporter of this fund , because I think it has the ability to bring Europe and Brussels closer to the people .
Europe is now 27 Member States , so it does not really matter if it is floods in my region in Northern Ireland or forest fires in Greece , or Spain , or Portugal .
You see some terrible instances where people have almost been wiped out .
So we are not talking about giving them a lot of money , but we are giving them some hope to restart again .
I certainly would like to make an appeal that this Solidarity Fund is kept and supported , and please do not make it too complicated .
Keep it simple , where either a national or a regional government can apply and can go back to their local area and tell the people that this fund is coming from Europe and Europe is giving them some support .
So let us make it simple , keep it simple , but let us not do away with this Solidarity Fund .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , thank you for this debate .
I think it reflects very well the full spectrum of issues that the European Union deals with , from sports - a budget line for sports - to how we label medicines , to what we do in the Caucasus , or how we try to help the situation in the Middle East .
We do all these things at the same time .
It also represents the ultimate challenge from a communication point of view .
We have also heard some very detailed proposals here today .
I want to assure you that the role of the Commission is to make sure that we can balance all of these interests , because the Commission cannot be seen as representing only one interest or only one stakeholder or only one issue .
We have to cover this whole spectrum of political challenges .
Sometimes we can choose the issues , others are chosen for us , and I think that , even if some people say that they had warned of the financial crisis , nobody knew exactly when it would occur or the full consequences of this financial crisis .
So we have to deal with that as well .
We have to be able to respond .
The way we do it , of course , is that we are the guardians of the Treaties , and that also sometimes restricts our capabilities or our capacities to act .
We cannot suddenly make up new competences or enter into areas where we know that it is actually sometimes the Member States that have the competences , or we are at least limited in what we can propose , or we have to work together with the other institutions .
That is what forms the framework for whatever we do .
When we met last time in a small seminar - and this is the message I want to pass on to Parliament as well - we said first of all that we will stay on message .
We will not change our overall objectives of prosperity , solidarity and security .
These will still guide everything we do , and prosperity means defending growth and jobs in Europe .
Nobody should doubt our determination to continue to fight for growth and jobs in Europe .
This has been even further reinforced by recent events and the financial crisis .
It is all the more important that we have a very forceful policy and that we are careful about what we do right now .
I do not think that anybody is ignorant of the fact that this is one of our major priorities , has been from the very beginning , and will continue to be one of our most important priorities .
On the topic of solidarity , this is about energy and climate change and about how we use the solidarity fund , because defence today is also defence against natural disasters or threats that we did not have , say , 10 or 20 years ago .
Now we need proper cooperation and defence against these things too .
I do not like the doom-and-gloom atmosphere on energy and climate change .
You know what , I think we have an enormous opportunity in Europe .
I think we have the know-how , we have the technology , we have the resources , we have the people , we have hope for the future and , even if there is a cost to it all , I think we can do it and it will actually bring something very positive to Europe .
It will bring a better quality of life and I think it offers new opportunities also for creating jobs in Europe .
I think that we have to turn it around and not only see it as a cost , a burden , an effort , but actually as part of the future .
This is a solution for the future , and it is Europe that can take the lead , that can create innovation , jobs , creativity in Europe .
It will bring us a better quality of life , especially by bringing the future into the picture for once and also by bringing the rest of the world into the picture .
We will also continue to deliver .
Concrete results are the most important for this Commission .
We will not be a caretaker Commission .
We will continue to present proposals to this Parliament and to the Council until the end .
I thank you for all your concrete proposals and I would just like to respond to a few of them because I think , for example , the whole issue of consumer protection is a very important one , and we have a very ambitious project .
We will present a proposal to undertake a complete review of the existing legislation on consumer protection , simplifying it and making it more accessible to all .
We hope that Parliament will be able to deal with this major proposal before the elections .
We will also , before the end of the year , present a proposal to extend the possibility of action on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , another important fund .
We want to be able to also use this in the context of globalisation and to meet the effects of globalisation .
Since Jan Andersson also mentioned the whole social issue - and again it is the role of the Commission to make sure that we balance all issues in which the social agenda plays an important part - the forum that the Commission will be organising in November can , I hope , also look at questions about the functioning of the Posting of Workers Directive and help us to decide on the way forward .
We will not shy away from looking at these issues as well .
We know by now how important they are and how they affected even the Irish referendum .
On that topic , Mrs Grabowska , you also know the saying that ' the lie is already halfway to Damascus while truth is putting its boots on ' .
I do not know exactly if this is the English expression , but you know the meaning .
I think that this is part of it .
If you are well-funded , if you can use and mobilise fear as well , this is very often more effective than maybe having to explain a treaty text that is not always that clear or that helps to simplify things .
At the same time in this debate you have , however , given some of the best examples of why we need a new treaty , why that would help us to act and speak with one voice in the world and also be more effective in our decision-making , and why that would help citizens .
We continue to deliver , for example , with the proposal yesterday on the telecoms package which will give lower prices to all those of us who use mobile phones and make sure that roaming charges go down .
Finally also on the budget review , I would like to say that this consultation process on an initial so-called reflection paper can help us from the end of November to propose a new way of constructing the budget .
I think it will be an opportunity to look at the question about what Europe is and how it should act over the coming years .
That is only to comment on a few of the more detailed things that you have raised .
All of this I will take back to the Commission and it will feed into our discussions on the work programme .
I have very much appreciated the full range of issues that have been mentioned here , and we will come back in a few weeks with a new proposal and present it in the full college .
I also want to underline how important it is that we have a framework agreement that we also abide by and follow , and that we can agree on the way the institutions should work in an efficient , effective and democratic way together .
I have received six motions for a resolutionpursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The year 2009 is a crucial year , as the European elections , renewal of the Commission and , hopefully , also the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty will take place .
The main political priority of the first half of 2009 will remain the ratification process of the Lisbon Treaty .
Unity and better functioning mechanisms are crucial to remaining a strong player in the global arena .
More than ever we need better coherence in our energy policy , with a perspective of enhancing energy independence .
Solidarity between Member States and the search for alternative energy resources should become EU priorities .
Reaching the goals set in the Lisbon Treaty has to get a new boost .
Innovation , entrepreneurship and promoting a science-based economy are the key aspects to bear in mind .
The completion of the internal market has to be finalized .
More efficient tools for SMEs have to be provided to further support their role as the main creators of jobs .
A new approach must be established on how to bring EU closer to citizens .
This approach has to be a two-way road .
We as politicians are not only leaders but first of all servants and attentive listeners to our citizens .
in writing . - ( HU ) Of the tasks set out in 2004 , the Commission has failed to deliver on the most important one , namely halting or significantly reducing indifference to and the lack of confidence in the idea of Europe .
Next year 's programme also fails to reflect the perception that this Europe is different from that of the past .
The economic potential of the EU-27 is much greater than that of the EU-15 , and it occupies a more serious position in the global economy .
At the same time , the economic and social problems of the EU-27 are different , and internal tensions and fears are also different and stronger .
The free movement of labour and services has brought fierce conflict to the surface .
This is shown clearly by the French ' no ' votes that derailed the draft Constitution , and the Irish votes are making the fate of the Treaty of Lisbon more difficult , partly because of the tensions surrounding employees of the special mission .
The 2009 work plan also fails to mention what plans the Commission has for monitoring Member States that want to make use of further restrictions after the 5-year restriction , in the interests of the free movement of labour .
In connection with all these things , I regret to say that the ever more frightening presence of racism and xenophobia in Europe is not inciting the Commission to act .
These problems are unavoidable , and come back like a boomerang .
The only question is whether we will deal with them while the tension can still be dealt with , or when neo-fascist groups filled with hatred run riot in Europe 's cities .
I hope that we will choose the former .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union is facing major difficulties due to the unexpected fragility of the international context .
The instability of financial markets , the oscillating price of fuel , terrorism , the spectre of the Cold War , the acute need for energy security , the accumulating effects of climate change are threats which the European Union can overcome only by means of unity and consensus .
The consequences of the crisis in Georgia and of the US financial crisis , as well as the escalation of terrorism should outline clear lines of action in the legislative and working schedule of the Commission .
2009 is a crucial year for institutional stability , due to the Lisbon Treaty , the ratification of which should be the main priority for the next period .
The program should include those aspects on which the future evolution of the Union depends : the common energy policy , the common foreign and security policy , reforming the neighbouring policy and strenghening commitments to countries in the West Balkans , Moldova and Ukraine , which need the European Union and which the European Union needs in turn .
2009 is also the year of European Parliament elections , and the Eurobarometer does not look promising .
The legislative and working schedule of the Commission should show that the main goal of European institutions is to meet the demands and ensure the well-being of European citizens .
Preparation of the EU-India Summit ( Marseille , 29 / 09 / 08 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on preparation of the EU-India Summit in Marseille on 29 September 2008 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome your interest in strengthening our relations with India .
The European Union-India Summit , which , as Mrs Wallström reminded us , will be held on 29 September 2008 in Marseille , in the presence of the Indian Prime Minister , Manmohan Singh , the Commission President , Mr Barroso and the Council President , Nicolas Sarkozy , is one of a dozen summits we are holding with third countries during the French Presidency .
You will notice that the calendar of meetings features plenty of summits with major emerging countries .
In July , a summit was held with South Africa and summits will take place - we hope - with Korea , and with China and Brazil in December .
This series of meetings is a unique opportunity for the European Union to develop a dialogue with the major emerging countries on subjects of mutual interest , and the summit with India ties in perfectly with this approach .
I am aware that Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs recently took part in a fruitful workshop on European Union-India relations , which was attended by a number of experts .
It has fanned a deep desire to enhance dialogue and cooperation between the European Union and India .
The Presidency is driven by the same will as Parliament .
With a population of more than a billion , which should overtake that of China in 2025 , and annual growth of more than 8 % since 2005 , India is set to become an essential partner of the European Union and we consequently want this summit to be an important step in deepening our relations with the country .
Since 2000 , when our first summit was held , we have enlarged the scope of our dialogue and cooperation .
The European Union is now India 's main trade partner .
It is also one the biggest investors in the country and in many key sectors of its economy : energy , transport and telecommunications , in particular , and the summits we have held have contributed decisively towards strengthening our relations .
This was the case in 2004 , when we raised our cooperation to the rank of strategic partnership .
In 2005 , we came up with an action plan to boost this partnership and , in 2006 , a free trade agreement was concluded .
However , we need to do more and ensure that our political dialogue and cooperation with India reflects the country 's true potential .
We hope that the Marseille Summit will serve this purpose .
We also hope to strengthen our cooperation with India in areas that are currently priorities for the Union : climate change and energy .
These discussions with our major emerging partners are far from easy , but we must have them and we must work with our Indian counterparts to achieve certain aims .
Firstly , we wish to adopt at this summit a new action plan that is shorter and more operational and enables us to adapt our partnership to the new concerns of energy security and sustainable development .
We also want to secure future cooperation in the area of research and new technology , for example regarding solar energy and the ITER project .
This action plan should be accompanied by a work programme on energy , clean development and climate change and should envisage cooperation in the areas of energy efficiency , clean coal and renewable energy use .
These measures could , where need be , be supported by the new European Business and Technology Centre .
The new centre should open in New Delhi by the end of the year .
Of course , we shall also discuss at the summit regional concerns that are crucial for international stability , be it in relation to Afghanistan , Pakistan , Burma or Iran .
We also wish to make progress at the summit in our strategic partnership with India through the launch or continuation of specific cooperation ventures .
We hope to be able to sign a very important agreement regarding aviation .
This agreement was initialled by negotiators at the beginning of the year .
We are keen to sign it , because it will enable us to bring national legislation in line with Community law at the same time as improving legal certainty for European operators .
I am referring here only to flights between India and the European Union .
As for the rest , I hope that we are on track as regards Community legislation .
We wish to bring fresh impetus to the negotiations through a trade and investment agreement .
It will naturally be the Commission , which has responsibility in this regard , that will negotiate the agreement .
We would like to assure the Commission , via Mrs Wallström , of our full support , as our relationship with India is worth strengthening .
The signing of a trade and investment agreement would be a major step forward .
While there is great potential for the development of relations with India , it should be remembered that the country is only the European Union 's ninth trade partner behind South Korea , a surprising situation indeed .
The three documents that we intend to adopt at the summit , the revised joint action plan , the work programme on energy and the agreement I mentioned just now , are currently being negotiated with India , along with the joint press release .
I am unable to go into detail today regarding these documents , given that discussions are ongoing with our Indian partners , but I think I can say that we are optimistic about what can be achieved by this summit .
In conclusion , I would like to congratulate Parliament on the highly constructive role it has played in relations between the European Union and India .
The creation in 2007 of an individual Delegation for relations with India has boosted communication with the Lok Sabha , the Indian Parliament , and Parliament 's delegation will certainly be called on to play a leading role , particularly in terms of the drafting of future parliamentary resolutions on sensitive issues affecting relations between India and the European Union .
Finally , I would like to take the opportunity to give a special mention to the chairman of the Delegation for relations with India , Mrs Gill , and to praise the dynamism with which she fulfils her role .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , Mr Jouyet , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague Benita Ferrero-Waldner , and it is a pleasure to speak to you today on the preparation of the summit with India in Marseille on 29 September 2008 .
Europe 's relations with India , I have learned now , have been growing in importance for several years , not only because of growing trade and investment but also because of a shared commitment to , and experience of , multilingual and multicultural democracy .
In this Parliament you have recently demonstrated the political importance of relations with India , both by setting up a new parliamentary delegation and also by inviting President Abdul Kalam to address the House last year , which was the first time an Indian Head of State had done so .
At this summit we hope to turn this growing political commitment into stronger concrete cooperation , and we can already report a good deal of progress since we agreed a Strategic Partnership with India in 2004 and a Joint Action Plan in 2005 .
The first thing to mention is the political dialogue and cooperation that has been strengthened , and there is now a regular calendar of summits and ministerial meetings , an annual security dialogue has been established , and new formats for dialogue in the Asia-Europe Meeting ( ASEM ) and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation meeting , and this has fostered cooperation even on sensitive issues such as counter-terrorism .
The second point to mention is that the contacts between the EU and India are intensifying , particularly in education , where the European Union has provided funding for over 900 scholarships to Indian students under the Erasmus Mundus programme , and this funding will be continued until at least 2013 .
The third point is that economic and technical cooperation has deepened .
Science and technology activities and exchanges have intensified and they have also been lifted to ministerial level ; new dialogues have been created ; an EU-India energy panel has been established ; and the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor - the so-called ITER agreement - to which both India and the EU are party , is now in force .
Trade and investment has also continued to expand .
EU-India bilateral trade has doubled to EUR 55 billion since 2000 , and the EU is now the biggest source of foreign direct investment into India while the EU is also receiving increasing inflows of Indian outward investment .
Development cooperation has continued to increase and we will be using the bulk of our indicative budget of EUR 470 million for India for 2007-2013 especially to support health and education programmes related to the Millennium Development Goals .
So we have achieved a good deal , but there is more to do , and we believe that our relations should be guided by the promotion of peace , human rights and comprehensive security , sustainable development with environmental considerations , social equity and economic prosperity , and the strengthening of cultural and educational exchanges .
One of our main aims at the summit is to agree a revised joint action plan to reflect these objectives .
As global players , both sides have a responsibility to address global challenges , and some specific global issues will be raised .
With regard to world trade , we hope that India and the US can resolve their differences over the WTO Round and enable negotiations to get back on track .
Climate change and energy are also summit priorities for us , and we hope to sign a joint work programme on energy , clean development and climate change focused on renewable and clean energies , together with two climate-change-related European Investment Bank loans .
We will also discuss the global financial crisis and ways in which the world food situation can be addressed .
On bilateral matters , we have some significant joint interests to discuss .
The free-trade agreement negotiations that were launched last year have made good progress and now we are aiming for their early and balanced conclusion .
We hope to sign a horizontal agreement on civil aviation at the summit .
We will also push for progress on the conclusion of a maritime agreement .
Concerning culture and education , our objective is to agree on the launch of a policy dialogue .
Science and technology is also a priority , and the summit should welcome the creation of a European Business and Technology Centre in Delhi and the support provided for this by the European Parliament .
Let me finish by welcoming the recent creation by the Indian Parliament of a group for friendship with the European Parliament .
I am sure that this will enable all of you , through contacts with your Indian partners , to convince them that the EU is the most successful and forward-looking phenomenon in international governance of modern times and that we have much to offer each other .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the EU strategic partnership with democratic , secular India is of critical importance in these dangerous and unpredictable times , as this is a country that shares our values and aspirations .
We face common challenges : the fight against terrorism - and in this context I hereby call for Europol to grant India privileged status in the exchange of intelligence and the fight against terrorism - the need to protect the environment including the issue of climate change , and the importance of managing the benefits of globalisation .
The recent bombings in Delhi have underlined the serious threat India faces from Islamist terrorism .
Mindful of the instability in India 's neighbouring countries , from Pakistan to Sri Lanka , it should be obvious to all of us that we should do our utmost to support India , both as a regional power in South Asia , but also one which plays a major , constructive and global role in multilateral fora such as SAARC , ASEAN and the UN , where it is high time that India be granted a permanent seat on the Security Council .
Our resolution rightly expresses concerns about the recent killings of Christians in the Orissa Province and unrest in Jammu and Kashmir , calling for those responsible to be punished , as human rights and the rule of law are at the forefront of the EU 's strategic partnership with India .
This situation is in stark contrast to the EU 's dealings with the People 's Republic of China , which considers itself immune from our pleas to respect the human rights of its citizens .
I do hope that the forthcoming summit will solidify the flourishing relationship between India and the EU , especially in the field of commerce .
As co-president and founder of the Friends of India and draftsman in the Foreign Affairs Committee for the EU-India Free Trade Agreement , I want to see rapid steps towards establishing a free trade relationship , to our mutual benefit , with large foreign direct investment now flowing from India to the EU for the first time .
But my group , the PPE-DE , also wants to see enhanced political cooperation in the many challenges , such as the current issue of global financial instability , that we both face for the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) The vast majority of this Parliament believe that India is the biggest democracy in the world and that we must increase our cooperation with that country .
We have the same principles and realities as India , from democracy to multilateralism in international relations .
However , there are some points on which we disagree : for example the death penalty , which we wish to see abolished from their judicial system .
We also urge India to sign up to the International Criminal Court .
Many regret that the Indian Government has not yet ratified the International Convention against Torture .
Having said this , and despite this , we welcome India 's cooperation with the UN Human Rights Council and we commend the Indian Human Rights Commission on its work on religious discrimination , the caste system and other issues .
We are mindful of the terrible atrocities recently committed in the state of Orissa by Hindu fanatics .
We condemn these atrocities without any hesitation but , at the same time , recognise that these are exceptions which , although very bloody , are not widespread .
We therefore maintain that India is a model of cultural and religious pluralism .
India plays a major role in its neighbourhood and is concerned , just like us , about the current volatile political situation in Pakistan and , again like most of us , about the increasingly insecure and uncertain situation in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka .
It would certainly be laudable if New Delhi were to combine its efforts with ours in the European Union to help Myanmar to awake from its current nightmare .
Finally , India can be regarded as a promoter of peace and stability in the region .
Unlike other countries , India is now a responsible nuclear power .
However , I personally believe that it would be even more so if it signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Its image in the world would be enhanced as a result , and I must say in passing that this comment is also true for countries such as Pakistan , North Korea and Israel .
Having said all this - and I am about to finish - and with the understanding that shared aims should not exclude reasoned and reasonable criticism , I am convinced that the imminent summit between the EU and India will be a success .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is always a pleasure to speak on matters which will enhance the steady growth of one of the most important international relationships in the globe , that between the European Union and the Republic of India .
We call , in our resolution , for those involved in the summit to explore further ways of upgrading this relationship , and we look forward to concrete results which will be reported back to this Parliament .
It is a critical time for the summit .
We paid tribute in our resolution to the September victims of terrorism in India , including those killed in the assault on the Indian Embassy in Kabul .
But today , surely , we must also pay tribute to those heroes who saved lives in Islamabad , and we must remember that India lies at the heart of a region that is in considerable security difficulties .
It is proper that the wish in our resolution that there should be greater intelligence-sharing should be taken up and honoured , and all efforts to support India in her fight against terrorism with us should be supported - including , we believe , a seat on the United Nations Security Council .
In our resolution we call also for a peaceful future for the former princely State of Jammu and Kashmir , on both sides of the border and now split into two nations .
Peace comes , as we know so well with the European Union , with employment - with jobs - and it is particularly pleasant to learn that India is at present , in Jammu and Kashmir , building the longest railway tunnel in the globe , which will be nearly 11 km long , as part of a 148-km long section of track .
This will be the longest in the world , 95 % complete , which gives 3 900 new jobs of direct employment and , I am sure , many thousands more to come .
And culture : we call , too , for greater links with culture .
This is the year of dialogue , and India has much to teach the European Union on this .
We call for more people-to-people dialogue , and I am sure that is the way forward .
In conclusion , I urge colleagues to support this excellent resolution .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , India is one of our strategic partners where both trade and politics are concerned .
It plays a constructive role in the region . The time has come , however , for the Indian Government to be on the receiving end of strong words regarding the blatant infringement of freedom of belief on its territory .
The All-India Christian Council states that Christians are the targets of varying levels of aggression and intolerance on average every three days in India .
People are dying and churches are being demolished whilst the judicial system has adopted an exceptionally passive stance .
We cannot condone the legislation banning conversion to Christianity in certain parts of India .
We expect determined action in this respect and also in respect of the compensation to which Christian communities are entitled for the damage done to their property .
Mr Jouyet , Commissioner , I am calling for all these issues to be made very clear at the EU-India Summit later this month .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to start by underlining that my group has a strong interest in good partnership-based relations with India , a country which is regarded as the world 's largest democracy .
However - and this also needs to be emphasised - equal partnership means addressing problems honestly .
That is still not happening with India , and nor is it evident in the resolution before us .
That is why we are unfortunately unable to support this compromise .
How can we claim that India provides a model for handling cultural and religious pluralism , as stated in the resolution , when yet again , there have been countless deaths in the violent excesses perpetrated by extremist Hindus against Christians in Orissa and Muslims in Kashmir ?
Those responsible for the pogroms in Gujarat have still not been brought to justice .
Around 200 cases are still caught up in India 's sluggish judicial system .
Is resolute action genuinely being taken to deal with the radical factions ' excesses and the massacres of Christians and Muslims ?
How much equality do the Dalits really enjoy ?
Is there genuine universality of human rights ?
Are children being protected from labour and exploitation at last ?
These are questions which we should be discussing frankly with our Indian partners .
In the last five years , the Indian National Human Rights Commission has recorded more than 14 000 deaths in police and military custody .
I appeal to India to reform the Armed Forces Special Powers Act .
It is this arbitrary justice which is fuelling the rebel movements in many Indian states .
Poverty in India is still a cause for serious concern , and even good-quality programmes are not enough .
Much more needs to be done , given that 40 % of the world 's most undernourished children live in India .
With knowledge and technology transfer , Europe can make a very substantial contribution to genuinely sustainable development in India .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , when India achieved independence in 1947 , its 18 % literacy rate , unstable political environment and level of economic development in no way hinted at the kind of problems with which we would be faced 60 years on .
Indeed , the country 's development problems are far from over .
There are still many millions of illiterate , unemployed and socially marginalised people , but we are now dealing with a nuclear power with gross domestic product growth of about 8 % for several years now .
This is a country which urgently needs to build tens of power plants , modernise the basic rail and road network , and solve the problems of the small cities .
Small cities in India are those with about a million inhabitants , just so we know what we are talking about .
There is still great demographic pressure in some parts of the country , but today the problem of outsourcing is on the table .
Indian firms are taking qualified work from the European Union , programming work , for example in the field of accounting , and this work is often undertaken by workers living in India .
Many countries import qualified specialists .
We have got used to Lakshmi Mittal 's company being the largest steel company in the European Union .
We are aware of other industrial companies beginning to look at our market .
The problems inside the SAARC are still far from being solved and the delicate matter of Kashmir is still on the negotiating table .
There are , however , positive signs here and it seems that there are numerous topics for discussion in the political and economic fields .
I should very much like to plead for support for the large infrastructure programmes in India and other SAARC countries .
One example is the gas pipeline connecting Iran , Pakistan and India .
We have common interests in this and other projects .
Security , energy security and worldwide international cooperation : these are good signs ahead of the summit .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the joint motion for a resolution is ending up in the precarious position of the Christian minority in India .
I want to emphasise to the Council and Commission that this situation will be hopeless , especially in the state of Orissa , if the political and socio-economic causes at the root of the problem are not actually addressed .
According to reports , on 23 August this year the local leader of the radical Hindu organisation VHP , Swami Laxmanananda Saraswati , was murdered by Maoists in Orissa .
However , the Christian minority had to pay the price .
Hindu nationalists hunted down their Christian fellow citizens , armed with clubs , axes and torches , and continued to wreak havoc for weeks on end , even in the refugee camps .
This violence is apparently purely religious , but it does have an obvious political element .
The point is that , not just in Orissa but also in other parts of India , the Hindu nationalist BJP is now winning strong support .
There is no room in its ideology for religious minorities , let alone a Christian minority .
I have just heard that the Council and Commission will be meeting the Indian Prime Minister , Mr Singh , in Marseille on 29 September .
Mr Singh called the shameful events in Orissa a national disgrace .
You must talk to him about this in Marseille .
You must put on the agenda that point , namely the religious intolerance and the persecution of Christians , and discuss it in detail , because it is unacceptable to continue a strategic partnership in that way .
( NL ) Mr President , I too want to take the opportunity to express my concern at the violence against Christians in India in recent weeks .
Dozens of people have been murdered and thousands driven from their homes .
Hundreds of houses have been set on fire and even churches have not been spared .
The European Union must call upon not just the central government of India but also the governments of the states to do everything they can to stop the violence and bring the guilty to justice .
At the summit in Marseille next week , as well as reinforcing the strategic partnership with India as far as our trade relations are concerned , cooperation in the fight against terrorism must also be extended .
The bomb attack in Islamabad last week has once again shown how much the neighbouring country of Pakistan is plagued by the problem of Islamic terrorism .
Certainly in this political transition period in Pakistan it is very important that relations between India and Pakistan should not deteriorate .
The European Union must provide all possible assistance to keep the dialogue going and encourage further dialogue .
India has a fast-growing economy , which is having an impact on the demand for energy .
It must therefore be the policy of the European Union to ensure that India does not become too dependent on countries such as Iran and Russia .

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , I must respectfully point out a difference between my colleagues ' speeches and your introductions , namely that you did not have the courage to speak in those introductions about the massacres of the past few days , nor to strongly condemn the lack of religious freedom in India .
This is a very serious sign .
It leads us to believe that we will present ourselves at the forthcoming summit without having the courage to address the key issue , which affects the real relations and true friendship existing between the European Union and India .
What is at stake , in fact , is not solely the massacre of Christians but the principle of religious freedom , and religious freedom is a freedom unlike any other .
Religious freedom determines the quality of a democracy .
We heard the Indian President tell us in this House how , in a Christian school , he learned not only to love knowledge but also to distinguish between religion and politics .
If this is true , we emphatically demand that the European Union devote the days of the European Union-India Summit to recalling that religious freedom is fundamental to the development of democracy , and to pressing home the point that we have to perform a common task : we must remember in a spirit of friendship that the infringement of human rights puts an end to truly constructive relations between entities which have everything to gain from building their future together .
We must have this courage , Commissioner ; we must have this courage , Minister , because , if we do not assume this responsibility , we will inevitably make ourselves complicit in eroding the quality of democracy .
Mr President , as chair of Parliament 's India delegation , I really welcome this debate .
I would like to stress the central importance of continued and frequent dialogue between India and Europe on many issues that benefit from a shared approach - both at Council and Commission level , but also at parliamentary level - so I welcome the group that has been set up in the Indian Parliament , and I hope they will be coming to the European Parliament in the very near future .
On our resolution , whilst it makes clear the values that Europe and India hold dear on commitment to democracy , pluralism , the rule of law and multilateralism , it is key that we are natural partners .
I do believe our resolution should have focused more on major issues such as terrorism , climate change and the economic strengthening of this partnership , which I hope this summit will go some way towards tackling .
I also would like to give my deepest sympathies to the families and victims of the recent bomb attacks which have taken place in India .
I think , for this reason , we need to acknowledge that both Europe and India have many enemies who want to destroy our shared values .
This summit should be an opportunity to deepen our ties , but I think we have to recognise that progress so far has been slow and the joint action plan needs more resources in order to achieve the ambitions that we have given ourselves .
In conclusion I would just say that in many friendly relationships we can have constructive criticisms , but it is a responsibility of both sides to ensure that this is balanced .
So criticism of India 's difficulties and failings must be balanced by full and frank admission of our own .
We are right to condemn the poor treatment of minorities , but Europe must also be mindful of our own problems with intercommunal violence and our own unsatisfactory record in some areas on race relations .
( PL ) Mr President , India is the world 's largest democracy .
It also has great demographic potential and is enjoying swift economic growth .
India is therefore a key partner for the European Union and the West .
It is important for such relations to be built on sound foundations .
There are many positive features of India 's development .
The recent wave of persecution of Christians in Orissa and other locations is cause for concern , however .
The relevant local authorities have failed to take any action to protect citizens of their country from attacks perpetrated by fanatics .
This is not particularly surprising , as certain states within India have passed legislation banning Hindus from converting to other faiths .
In addition , there are no legal restraints on the activities of extremist Hindu organisations calling for India to be cleansed of Christians .
India prides itself on its democratic system , yet such a system requires the rights of ethnic and religious minorities to be respected .
Does Mahatma Ghandi 's home country really wish to disregard this now ?
If that is indeed the case , the matter must be raised at the forthcoming Summit .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me briefly explain why my group is about to reject the compromise resolution in the vote .
In the negotiations , it proved impossible to formulate a critical position on the nuclear deal between the US and India .
We regard this as a failure by the European Parliament , as we expect this House to have the courage to criticise Europe 's silence during the negotiations in the Nuclear Suppliers Group .
It is sheer cowardice for all the Member States , and especially the German Chair Country of the NSG , to prove incapable of defending the European Security Strategy in a meeting of such importance .
We have a compromise in which one of the priorities is combating proliferation .
However , by remaining silent , we have forfeited - indeed , wrecked - the credibility of disarmament policy .
Nuclear disarmament ?
No chance !
Strengthening the NPT regime ?
No chance !
Credibility in negotiations with Iran ?
No chance !
Instead , we have France 's economic interests , especially in closing a deal on nuclear technology with India .
That is the inherent position , which is why we are rejecting the compromise .
( NL ) Mr President , India , just like Europe , is a subcontinent with many peoples and different languages , which is trying to put the war and oppression of the past behind it .
However , India still has torture and the death penalty and there is still violence against the people of Kashmir , who never had the referendum that was needed after partition in 1947 to establish the state to which they wanted to belong .
In Europe , the strategic partnership with India that was agreed in 2004 should not be a reason to close our eyes to the discrimination against the 170 million untouchables who do not belong to any caste and have no rights .
In 2007 the Indian Prime Minister rightly compared the discrimination against these Dalits to apartheid in South Africa .
Many Dalits have converted to Christianity or Islam .
The extremist opposition party BJP is trying to use the forthcoming elections to mobilise Hindus against the Christians and Muslims and to force the Dalits to resign themselves to always being poor and having no rights .
How can we help the Indian Government to stop this violence and how can we make sure that the EU aid after the floods also reaches the Dalits ?
Mr President , this relationship between the two biggest democracies of the world is a very special one .
India is emerging as an economic and political giant , but it is a shared commitment to the rule of law , multicultural democracy , global stability and the fight against terrorism that unites us .
I hope that the ninth summit will bring us closer to reaching a free-trade agreement and that the still unresolved issues such as services , competition and intellectual property rights can be settled .
I too express my concern about the recent wave of attacks on Christians in Orissa .
It is not the first time this has happened .
The last wave of mob violence occurred last December .
It is very important - and I asked the Council and the Commission to bring this to the attention of their Indian counterparts - that Indian authorities take all possible steps to compensate for the damaged property , provide full protection for people who do not dare to return to their villages , help them to restore their churches and bring the perpetrators to justice .
At the same time , we understand the complexities of this huge country and I would like to express my deep sympathy with the victims of numerous terrorist attacks which have hit India .
We stand together with our Indian friends for common values , for the rule of law and the unconditional respect for human life , values so forcefully embodied by Mahatma Ghandi .
( NL ) Mr President , nearly a year ago there was an uprising in Burma .
The repression is still going on .
It would be to the credit of India if the government were to break with the criminal regime in Burma .
More and more Indians are asking for that , shocked after the terrible reaction of the regime to the effects of the cyclone .
In recent years India has achieved fantastic growth , with more and more highly qualified people and an enormous curiosity for innovation .
India is playing a new role in relation to developing countries , with its own ' everything but arms ' .
India is a new donor .
The dialogue between the European Union and India is also different and sometimes sharper , as you would expect of a dialogue between equal partners .
The enormous economic growth can create better conditions and opportunities for greater social justice in India .
Unfortunately , the problem of the untouchables is still acute .
The European Union also wants India to comply with the ILO conventions on child labour .
There is no easy solution to that .
In India , whole families live off the money that the children earn .
However , child labour is both a cause and an effect of poverty .
With children working , there is too much cheap labour and adult wages remain low .
As such , the gap between rich and poor remains too wide in India .
Working on opportunities for everyone is a matter of survival , it prevents unacceptable social tensions and is an issue of justice for millions of Indians .
That is a joint responsibility , for the EU , for India and for the world .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union must depart from its policy of servility and readiness to make concessions if it is to rise to the challenges of the future .
One example of this policy is the Union 's attitude towards Russia and the argument that such a policy is justified because of Russia 's energy resources .
In today 's fast-changing world the Union is called upon to promote and defend rights and inalienable principles such as an individual 's right to freedom and tolerance , and a nation 's right to self-determination .
The talks and contacts with India , a new world power , will reveal whether the Union is prepared to take on this role and act accordingly .
One of the key issues the European Union should raise is Christians ' right to freedom of religion .
I refer in particular to the rights of members of the Catholic Church , which is currently being persecuted and threatened with extinction in India .
Churches are being burnt and Christians killed in India at present , yet Europe gave the people of India Mother Teresa of Calcutta .
She was a holy person who brought goodness and kindness to where it was most needed .
The European Union should seek inspiration from Mother Teresa on how to pursue its relations with India .
India should look to Mother Teresa for an example of how to develop relations between followers of different faiths .
Mr President , I , as a long-standing rapporteur on this issue within this Parliament , welcome the EU-India Summit , which is due to take place very soon .
I see India in many ways as a natural partner for the European Union .
We must use this summit to make progress , and I welcome the Council and Commission statements that have been made today .
But I have to say , as a rapporteur , that too much time has been taken to get to where we are today .
It is now time that we have delivery .
I hear comments made by so many of my colleagues today pertaining to the issue of human rights and religious freedoms .
I remind them that this House fought very hard to have a human-rights clause included in all of our free-trade agreements .
We , Commissioner , must underline our commitment to that clause .
So , whether it is thousands of disappeared or mass graves in Jammu and Kashmir , or the murder of Christians in Orissa and attacks upon them , our commitments to human rights must remain absolute and committed .
Concerning the FTA : we now need delivery .
A comprehensive bilateral between us and India is not just of importance to us and India but is of global significance .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe is founded on Christianity , and we should always be guided by Christian values .
Freedom of religion is one of the European Union 's fundamental rights .
This should be emphasised in the context of relations between the European Union and other countries .
The attacks on Christians in India , their persecution , and the damage to their churches have given rise to great concern .
The Indian authorities have failed to take action , thus indicating consent to the escalating terrorist attacks .
In the context of the forthcoming EU-India Summit it would be appropriate to make holding the talks conditional on clear commitments by the Indian authorities .
The latter should undertake to immediately implement all possible measures to halt the persecution of Christians and to ensure that those responsible for such actions are punished .
Furthermore , the European Union cannot make any concessions , including trade concessions , to countries where fundamental rights are violated with impunity .
The European Parliament must send out a clear message that it places the defence of these values above short-term economic interests .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the EU-India Summit marks a new stage in the deepening of relations between the European Union and India .
We want to promote economic development in India .
However , we are also monitoring very closely what is happening in the context of human rights and dignity in India 's regions .
Almost all the previous speakers have talked about the persecution of Christians which has recently been taking place .
These are issues which must be discussed at the Summit as well .
The murder of a spiritual leader and member of the World Hindu Council on 23 August this year triggered this new conflict .
This is not the first attack on Christians , which is why some 60 000 Christians in the state of Orissa alone have now fled their homes .
Christians are being subjected to a campaign of persecution , humiliation , abuse and murder .
Homes , churches and monasteries in Christian communities are being ransacked and destroyed .
The Indian Government must guarantee the right to life and liberty of the Christians who live there .
Economic prosperity and stability can only be achieved through freedom for the people .
( DE ) Mr President , India and Europe need more and better contacts with each other at all levels , but particularly between ordinary people : business people , tourists and students , for example .
Let me make a brief comment , which is also of relevance to the Commission 's legislative programme that we were discussing earlier .
In international aviation , we need good security regulations that are genuinely useful and effective and not simply token gestures .
One sensible and genuinely necessary measure would therefore be to abolish the senseless rules that prevent passengers from taking liquids on board at last , and to come up with a more sensible solution .
( PL ) Mr President , as the EU-India Summit approaches , we ought to reflect on the prospects for increasing cooperation with India .
Despite significant progress , our cooperation with India is still significantly less dynamic than our links with China .
The Union is India 's main economic partner , but there is still scope for our companies to improve their position in those sectors of the Indian economy that are undergoing dynamic development .
I am referring to energy , telecommunications and machinery .
At the same time , we must ensure that the prospect of doing business with India does not lead us to overlook the problems facing its population .
The most important of these are widespread poverty , the inadequacies of the health and education systems , the AIDS epidemic and the marked social contrasts .
As we dispatch politicians , financiers , goods and know-how to India , we must not forget the need for humanitarian aid and medicine .
Above all , we must not neglect the cause of religious freedom in India .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank everyone for this debate , which has shown the importance we attach to the development of our partnership with India , because it is a power that contributes to international and regional stability , because it is , as has been said , the largest , most populous and most democratic country in the region and because it is a country that , in spite of the difficulties that have been mentioned , upholds cultural and religious pluralism .
In response to the concerns that have been voiced by Mr Tannock and others , I would say that the fight against terrorism is a key element of the dialogue between the European Union and India .
With regard to the terrorist violence that has struck India , the Union condemns all the attacks of which the country has been victim and , as Mrs Gill stated , our sympathies are with the victims of these attacks , which aim to destroy the multiethnic and multi-confessional nature of Indian society .
Several speakers have , quite rightly , referred to the violence , persecution and attacks targeting the Christian community in general and the Christian community in Orissa in particular .
We have been extremely watchful of these incidents and we will obviously address them at the summit .
However , as Mrs Gill said , we must provide constructive criticism and we must make sure to praise the courageous attitude , which has been referred to by several speakers , of the Indian Prime Minister , who described these events as a national disgrace and was quick to dispatch 3 000 police officers to Orissa .
We remain deeply concerned by the attacks and the violence committed against people of different faiths , in particular the Christian communities .
We reiterate that the fight against terrorism must take place in a context of respect for the rule of law and international law .
On the issue of regional stability , raised by Mr Menéndez del Valle and Mr Berman among others , the European Union has requested that the situation in Burma should be included on the summit agenda .
The Union wishes to convince all Burma 's neighbours that democratic reform and a peaceful transition in the country are in their interests .
We will discuss the matter with India and with other countries .
We wish to see greater stability too and hope that the negotiations can bring results with regard to the situation in Kashmir and India-Pakistan relations .
In terms of the social issues mentioned , including child labour , touched on by Mrs Kallenbach , the Council shares these concerns and not only with regard to India .
We are negotiating with our Indian partners an action plan aimed at strengthening commitments in the area of corporate social responsibility , decent work and efforts to combat child labour .
We have made provisions on fundamental labour rights in line with the International Labour Organisation 's standards a part of our delicate negotiations on the trade and investment agreement .
As I said , I share in part Mrs Gill 's opinion , which seems to me a very balanced one .
We should stand up for the victims of all terrorist attacks and must criticise India when the measures it takes to counter them appear to us insufficient , but we must also support the Indian authorities when they take appropriate action .
As regards the comments made on nuclear cooperation , I would like to remind you that , on 6 September 2008 , an agreement was concluded by the Nuclear Suppliers Group , in which it was agreed to grant a derogation making it possible to establish trade relations with India in the field of civil nuclear power , under the supervision of , with the agreement of and in respect of the conditions set by the International Atomic Energy Agency .
I would also stress that India has pledged to extend its moratorium on nuclear testing and that the civil and military programmes should not be confused .
In conclusion , I reiterate that the European Union is alone in developing a firm dialogue with all the emerging countries and which applies to each partner the same human rights criteria , with a compulsory clause appearing in all new agreements from 1995 that requires respect for international law , whether it is in the form of the International Criminal Court , the United Nations conventions on political rights or the application of social and environmental rights .
This goes for all emerging countries , including our Indian partners .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , let me almost in telegram form answer some of your detailed questions and add a couple of points .
Firstly , a piece of information that I think is important to all of you who are engaged in the issue of India-EU cooperation concerns the recent flooding in Bihar state , where the European Commission is providing assistance to the victims of this catastrophe .
The Commission mobilised EUR 2 million for emergency relief to cover the most urgent needs of food , shelter , water , sanitation and medical support .
This has been provided both to those displaced and those who remained in the affected villages .
I thought it important for you to know that .
There was a question on civil aviation .
In principle , the signature of the horizontal agreement at the summit should be accompanied by the signature of the financing agreement on a new civil aviation cooperation programme covering EUR 12.5 million .
That is the highest amount of European Community funding for aviation for any third country .
I would just like to say a few words on climate change , because it is , of course , in our interests to engage India in the run-up to the post-Kyoto regime .
As you know , we take the view , contrary to India , that climate-change-related measures are not incompatible with economic development .
On the contrary , they can help us and we urge India to also be proactive in the coming Poznań Conference to prepare post-Kyoto and in the negotiations on an agreement in Copenhagen .
We have good reason to expect that a work programme on energy and climate change will be adopted at the summit , and this is an essential component of our cooperation with India .
We are , of course , following very closely the communal violence in the state of Orissa , which we deplore .
We raised the issue of Orissa at the last human rights dialogue in February , asking the authorities to prevent such violence .
We also raised the issue with the India National Human Rights Commission and the National Minorities Commission .
We will also raise it at this summit on the basis of a report which has been requested from the Heads of Mission in Delhi .
Finally , concerning our dialogue on India , I would like to say to Mrs Gill that the Commission is prepared to inform Parliament on the priorities set in the revised Joint Action Plan .
Our External Relations Department holds regular meetings with all the services directly involved in Indian affairs and a representative of the secretariat of the Parliament is always invited to these meetings , but I think it is important to follow this up in a very practical way .
Thank you very much for this debate .
We will of course take back to the Commission all your detailed and well-informed views .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the run-up to the EU-India Summit in Marseille on 29 September , I should like to draw attention to certain dramatic events .
I am referring to the wave of violence against Christians and the serial killings of Christians in August in India , notably in Orissa .
The European Parliament should strongly condemn such incidents .
The issue of police behaviour in the context of the massacre of representatives of religious minorities is also of concern .
I should like to express my deep distress and concern regarding the attacks on Christians in Orissa , and in particular in the Kandhamal district .
I would also like to emphasise the need to provide immediate aid and support for the victims .
in writing . - ( PL ) India is an important partner for the European Union .
In both political and economic terms , India 's achievements are impressive .
There is scope for ongoing improvement of the relations between India and the Union .
Such relations could be mutually beneficial .
There does seem to be , however , a serious impediment to the development of India and of our mutual relations , an impediment that significantly reduces India 's potential .
I believe that this impediment is the caste system currently operating in India .
The Indian authorities must make every effort to cleanse Indian society of the negative , and indeed sometimes tragic , consequences of this system .
In such cases , legislative action and political declarations alone are not enough .
What is important is actually changing social relations and inhuman traditions .
This is not an easy task and one cannot expect immediate results .
We should not be dissuaded by the prospect of a long-term process .
On the contrary , we should support India 's efforts in this important enterprise .
I trust that the forthcoming EU-India Summit will help to weaken the caste system in India and to improve standards of human rights and citizens ' rights in the world 's largest democracy .
1 .
Proceedings before the Court of Justice ( Amendment of Rule 121 ) (
2 .
Migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) (
3 .
Migration to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) (
4 .
Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system (
5 .
Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector (
6 .
The liability of carriers of passengers by sea in the event of an accident (
7 .
Port State control ( recast ) (
8 .
Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Directive recast ) (
9 .
Ship inspection and survey organisations ( Regulation recast ) (
10 . Electronic communications networks and services (
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Trautmann report
The Commission accepts the following :
amendments 12 , 16 , 19 , 24 , 32 , 39 ( on the recitals )
amendments 40 , 41 , 42 , 45 , 56 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 79 , 84 , 89 , 92 , 96 , 99,105 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 115 , 116 , 117 , 124 ( on the articles )
plenary amendment 136 .
The Commission accepts the following in principle or in part :
amendments 2 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 26 , 27 , 31 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 ( on the recitals )
amendments 43 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 52 , 53 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 74 , 75 , 85 , 86 , 91 , 95 , 98 , 100 , 101 , 102 , 103 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 121 , 123 , 125 ( on the articles )
plenary amendments 128 , 132 , 134
The Commission rejects the following :
amendments 1 , 3 , 4 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 34 ( on the recitals )
amendments 47 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 54 , 55 , 57 , 73 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 87 , 88 , 90 , 93 , 94 , 97 , 104 , 109 , 110 , 114 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 122 ( on the articles )
plenary amendments 126 , 127 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 133 , 135 , 137 , 138 , 139 , 141 , 142 , 143
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we are about to vote on the Telecoms package , one of the most sensitive proposals of the closing period of this parliamentary term .
My fellow rapporteurs , Mrs del Castillo Vera and Mr Harbour , and I have worked together closely to achieve a coherent and efficient proposal for the end-users of these directives , namely the Commission and regulators , but one that is also positive and valuable to those looking for legal certainty , encouragement for investment , and a dynamic and balanced market , that is , operators and their employees , as well as for the primary beneficiaries of the numerous services and quality at a fair and accessible price : the consumers .
All of us - rapporteurs , draftsmen and shadow rapporteurs - were united in these aims and that is why we were able to reach a solid compromise , attested to by the small number of amendments on which we are to vote .
I would like to express my profound gratitude to all the rapporteurs , the chairmen of the committees responsible and committees asked for opinions , their secretariats and all the political groups .
I also wish to thank the colleagues that have shown an interest in this matter and contributed to our work .
I now call on my fellow Members to support their rapporteurs and draftsmen through their vote and to grant them a clear and decisive mandate for the period of codecision that will follow .
Finally , I hope that the Commission and Council will respond positively to Parliament 's amended version of the package , which , although it represents in many regards an alternative to the Commission 's initial vision , still presents as many areas of agreement between our three institutions .
- Before the vote on Amendment 132 :
( DE ) Mr President , with reference to Amendment 132 , on behalf of the signatories , I wish to withdraw this amendment , as regrettably , our efforts in this House to achieve a compromise which strengthens copyright have been unsuccessful .
- Before the vote on Amendment 138 :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , we have a relatively difficult decision with regard to Amendment 138 , for which three requests for a split vote have been tabled .
I personally tabled an oral amendment to the first part of the amendment , which is included on the voting list and reads : ' applying the principle that no restriction may be imposed on the fundamental rights and freedoms of end-users ' .
That is the first oral amendment .
Since then , we have been looking for a solution acceptable to the political groups in relation to the third part of the amendment .
I therefore propose a new oral amendment , with the backing of the signatories , including the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Mrs Niebler , and others , which would read : ' save when public security is threatened where the ruling may be subsequent ' .
This would replace the third part and clarify matters , as the third part proposed by Mr Bono is ambiguous as regards the exception .
By making this clarification , we have a readable and acceptable amendment .
Incidentally - for the benefit of Mrs Hieronymi - it has nothing to do with intellectual property , as she was saying .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
Voting time is being suspended very briefly while we receive the Lebanese parliamentary delegation , which is observing our work and to which we of course extend a warm welcome .
The delegation from the Lebanese Parliament , led by Boutros Harb , is visiting the European Parliament in the context of our interparliamentary meetings .
Allow me to emphasise the importance which we attach to this visit , after the difficult years Lebanon has experienced , with a civil war that lasted 15 years , followed by occupation and more recently the war that raged during the summer of 2006 and the paralysis of its State institutions .
We are particularly pleased to receive the delegation at a time when the political situation in Lebanon , but also in the region as a whole , has improved considerably , particularly following the Doha Agreement and the election of the President of the Republic .
We hope that , with the new electoral law being put to the vote within the next few days , the legislative elections scheduled for next year will take place under the best of circumstances and will give fresh impetus to Lebanese democracy , which the European Parliament fully supports .
On behalf of the European Parliament , therefore , I should like to welcome the members of the delegation , in the hope that the discussions in which they take part at the European Parliament will be extremely fruitful .
I thank the delegation once again .
1 .
European Electronic Communications Market Authority (
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
del Castillo Vera report
The Commission accepts the following :
amendments 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 15 , 20 , 21 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 42 , 43 , 44 ( on the recitals )
amendments 47 , 48 , 50 , 54 , 57 , 59 , 62 , 66 , 68 , 73 , 77 , 78 , 79 , 91 , 92 , 94 , 97 , 98 , 100 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 115 , 117 , 125 , 133 , 136 , 140 , 141 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 149 , 153 , 156 , 163 , 166 ( on the articles )
The Commission accepts the following in principle or in part :
amendments 12 , 17 , 22 , 32 ( on the recitals )
amendments 49 , 53 , 60 , 61 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 69 , 70 , 81 , 83 , 85 , 87 , 88 , 89 , 93 , 99 , 101 , 102 , 107 , 126 , 131 , 152 , 159 , 160 , 161 ( on the articles )
plenary amendment 168
The Commission rejects the following :
amendments 4 , 5 , 7 , 13 , 16 , 18 , 19 , 24 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 45 , 46 ( on the recitals )
amendments 51 , 52 , 55 , 56 , 58 , 67 , 71 , 72 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 80 , 82 , 84 , 86 , 90 , 95 , 96 , 108 , 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 116 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 132 , 134 , 135 , 137 , 138 , 139 , 142 , 148 , 150 , 151 , 154 , 155 , 157 , 158 , 162 , 164 , 165 , 167 ( on the articles )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am not going to speak for long as I am aware that we are subject to time pressures .
However , I too want to thank everyone who took part in this report and underline one very important point : what Parliament is offering today in relation to the legislative review of the electronic communications sector , as already stated by Catherine Trautmann , is wholly consistent and , we believe , will be very positive in terms of developing this market .
The negotiations now beginning must reach their conclusion within this parliamentary term .
I believe that this is therefore decisive for the sector .
2 .
Common approach to the use of the spectrum released by the digital switchover (
Voting time ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of voting time .
Formal sitting - Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew
Your Holiness , Patriarch Bartholomew , it is a great honour to welcome you to this formal sitting of the European Parliament during the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008 .
The first guest to address the European Parliament as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue was the Grand Mufti of Damascus in January .
He is from Syria and addressed us as a messenger of peaceful Islam .
Your Holiness , you represent the Christian faith , and the Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks will address the European Parliament in Strasbourg in November as a representative of the Jewish faith .
People from these three faiths - Christianity , Judaism and Islam - have lived side by side for centuries .
Unfortunately , this coexistence has not always been peaceful .
Even today , in the Middle East and elsewhere , there are areas marked by tensions between these communities .
We in the European Parliament support every effort to promote the peaceful coexistence of religions and cultures in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world .
In the Middle East , there are also examples of religious tolerance and harmonious relations between people of different faiths .
When I visited Syria a short time ago , I had the opportunity to meet the spiritual leaders of the various faith communities and they assured me that in their country , good relations exist , underpinning the dialogue between religions and cultures .
The European Union is a community based on values , and one of our most fundamental values is the dignity which is inherent in every individual .
In this respect , religious freedom is central to human dignity , and goes far beyond the powers invoked by state authorities .
The separation of church and state , which we esteem so highly , is a guarantee of the freedom of religious communities to manage their own internal affairs and external relations .
These principles are reaffirmed in the Treaty of Lisbon , whose entry into force we are seeking to secure .
The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , with its seat in Phanar in Istanbul , was founded in the 4th century and is an important spiritual centre for 300 million Orthodox Christians worldwide .
Phanar means ' beacon ' , and you , Your Holiness , have always been a beacon of reconciliation and peace for the faithful in the Orthodox world and beyond .
The latest enlargement of the European Union has brought countries with Orthodox majorities , such as Cyprus , Bulgaria and Romania , into the EU , while Greece has been a member since 1981 .
The late Pope John Paul II , who addressed the European Parliament in 1988 , used the following metaphor to describe this : he said that after overcoming its division , Europe is breathing with both its lungs again .
We could use this metaphor again today to describe the richness of the enlarged EU , brought about by the different perspectives of Western and Eastern Christianity .
Your Holiness , we thank you for your visit .
You are one of the very few figures to address the European Parliament for a second time .
You were here in 1994 , and you are honouring us with a further address on the occasion of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
We are looking forward to hearing your speech .
May I now invite you to address the European Parliament . Thank you .
( Applause )
Your Excellency Mr President of the European Parliament , your Excellencies , honourable Members of the European Parliament , distinguished guests , dear friends , first and foremost we convey to you salutations from the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , based for many , many centuries in what is today Istanbul - greetings replete with esteem and respect .
In particular , we express our gratitude to an old friend of ours , His Excellency Hans-Gert Pöttering , President of the European Parliament .
We likewise express our sincerest appreciation for the extraordinary honour to address the plenary sitting of the European Parliament for the second time ( as the President already mentioned ) , especially on this occasion that commemorates the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
As a purely spiritual institution , our Ecumenical Patriarchate embraces a truly global apostolate that strives to raise and broaden the consciousness of the human family - to bring understanding that we are all dwelling in the same house .
At its most basic sense , this is the meaning of the word ' ecumenical ' - for the ' oikoumene ' is the inhabited world - the earth understood as a house in which all peoples , kindreds , tribes and languages dwell .
As is well known , the origins of our religious institution lie at the core of the Axial Age , deep in the history of the Christian Faith - with the earliest followers of Jesus Christ .
Inasmuch as our See - our institutional centre - shared the centre and capital of the Christian Roman Empire , it became known as ' ecumenical ' , with certain privileges and responsibilities that it holds to this day .
One of its chief responsibilities was for bringing the redemptive message of the Gospel to the world outside the Roman Empire .
In the days before the exploratory age , most civilisations held such a bicameral view of the world as being ' within ' and ' without ' .
The world was divided into two sectors : a hemisphere of civilisation and a hemisphere of barbarism .
In this history , we behold the grievous consequences of the alienation of human persons from one another .
Today , when we have the technological means to transcend the horizon of our own cultural self-awareness , we nevertheless continue to witness the terrible effects of human fragmentation .
Tribalism , fundamentalism , and phyletism - which is extreme nationalism without regard to the rights of the other - all these contribute to the ongoing list of atrocities that give pause to our claims of being civilised in the first place .
And yet , even with tides of trade , migrations and expansions of peoples , religious upheavals and revivals , and great geopolitical movements , the deconstruction of rigid and monolithic self-understandings of past centuries has yet to find a permanent harbour .
The Ecumenical Patriarchate has sailed across the waves of these centuries , navigating the storms and the doldrums of history .
For twenty centuries - through the Pax Romana , the Pax Christiana , the Pax Islamica , the Pax Ottomanica ( all epochs marked by intercultural struggle , conflict and outright war ) - the Ecumenical Patriarchate has continued as a lighthouse for the human family and the Christian Church .
It is from the depths of our experience upon these deep waters of history that we offer to the contemporary world a timeless message of perennial human value .
Today , the ecumenical scope of our Patriarchate extends far beyond the boundaries of its physical presence at the cusp of Europe and Asia , in the same city we have inhabited for the seventeen centuries since her founding .
Though small in quantity , the extensive quality of our experience brings us before this august assembly today , in order to share from that experience on the necessity of intercultural dialogue , a lofty and timely ideal for the contemporary world .
As you yourselves have said - in this most esteemed body 's own words : ' At the heart of the European project , it is important to provide the means for intercultural dialogue and dialogue between citizens to strengthen respect for cultural diversity and deal with the complex reality in our societies and the coexistence of different cultural identities and beliefs ' ( Decision No 1983 / 2006 / EC ) and we would humbly append this noble statement , as we did last year in our address to the Plenary of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , in Strasbourg : ' Dialogue is necessary first and foremost because it is inherent in the nature of the human person ' .
This is the principal message that we propose for your consideration today : that intercultural dialogue is at the very root of what it means to be a human being , for no one culture of the human family encompasses every human person .
Without such dialogue , the differences in the human family are reduced to objectifications of the ' other ' and lead to abuse , conflict , persecution - a grand-scale human suicide , for we are all ultimately one humanity .
But where the differences between us move us to encounter one another , and where that encounter is based in dialogue , there is reciprocal understanding and appreciation - even love .
In the past 50 years , our human family has experienced leaps of technological achievement undreamed of by our forebears .
Many have trusted that this kind of advancement will bridge the divides that fragment the human condition .
As if our achievements had given us the power to overcome the fundamental realities of our moral and - may we say - our spiritual condition .
Yet , despite every conceivable benefit and technological skill - skill that seems to outstrip our anthropological wit - we still behold the universal banes of hunger , thirst , war , persecution , injustice , planned misery , intolerance , fanaticism and prejudice .
Amidst this cycle that cannot seem to be broken , the significance of the ' European project ' cannot be underestimated .
It is one of the hallmarks of the European Union that has succeeded in promoting mutual , peaceful and productive co-existence between nation states that less than 70 years ago were drenched in a bloody conflict that could have destroyed the legacy of Europe for the ages .
Here , in this great hall of assembly of the European Parliament , you strive to make possible the relationships between states and political realities that make reconciliation between persons possible .
Thus you have recognised the importance of intercultural dialogue , especially at a time in the history of Europe when transformations are taking place in every country and along every societal boundary .
Great tidal forces of conflict , and economic security and opportunity have shifted populations around the globe .
Of necessity , then , persons of differing cultural , ethnic , religious and national origin find themselves in close proximity .
In some cases , the same populations shun the greater whole and close themselves off from the dominant society .
But in either case , as we engage in dialogue , it must not be a mere academic exercise in mutual appreciation .
For dialogue to be effective , to be transformative in bringing about core change in persons , it cannot be done on the basis of ' subject ' and ' object ' .
The value of the ' other ' must be absolute - without objectification ; so that each party is apprehended in the fullness of their being .
For Orthodox Christians , the icon , or image , stands not only as an acme of human aesthetic accomplishment , but as a tangible reminder of the perennial truth .
As in every painting - religious or not , and notwithstanding the talent of the artist - the object presents as two-dimensional .
Yet , for Orthodox Christians , an icon is no mere religious painting - and it is not , by definition , a religious object .
Indeed , it is a subject with which the viewer , the worshipper , enters into wordless dialogue through the sense of sight .
For an Orthodox Christian , the encounter with the icon is an act of communion with the person represented in the icon .
How much more should our encounters with living icons - persons made in the image and likeness of God - be acts of communion !
In order for our dialogue to become more than mere cultural exchange , there must be a more profound understanding of the absolute interdependence - not merely of states and political and economic actors - but the interdependence of every single human person with every other single human person .
And such a valuation must be made regardless of any commonality of race , religion , language , ethnicity , national origin , or any of the benchmarks by which we seek self-identification and self-identity .
And in a world of billions of persons , how is such inter-connectedness possible ?
Indeed , there is no possible way to link with every human person - this is a property that we would ascribe to the Divine .
However , there is a way of understanding the universe in which we live as being shared by all - a plane of existence that spans the reality of every human person - an ecosphere that contains us all .
Thus it is that the Ecumenical Patriarchate - in keeping with our own sense of responsibility for the house , the oikos of the world and all who dwell therein - has for decades championed the cause of the environment , calling attention to ecological crises around the globe .
And we engage this ministry without regard to self-interest .
As you know so well , our Patriarchate is not a ' national ' church , but rather the fundamental canonical expression of the ecumenical dimensions of the Gospel message , and of its analogous responsibility within the life of the Church .
This is the deeper reason that the Church Fathers and the Councils have given it the name ' Ecumenical ' .
The loving care of the Church of Constantinople exceeds any linguistic , cultural , ethnic and even religious definition , as she seeks to serve all peoples .
Although firmly rooted in particular history - as any other institution is - the Ecumenical Patriarchate transcends historical categories in her perennial mission of service during 1 700 years .
In our service to the environment , we have , to date , sponsored seven scientific symposia that bring together a host of disciplines .
The genesis of our initiative grew on the island that gave humanity the Apocalypse , the Book of Revelation : the sacred island of Patmos in the Aegean Sea .
And it was in the Aegean that we commenced , in 1995 , an ambitious programme of integrating current scientific knowledge about the oceans with the spiritual approach of the world 's religions to water , particularly the world 's oceans .
Since Patmos , since 1995 , we have traversed the Danube , the Adriatic Sea , the Baltic Sea , the Amazon , the Arctic Sea ( last September ) , and we are now making preparations to sail the Nile in Egypt and the Mississippi River in the United States , both next year .
What we seek is not only an ongoing dialogue that is serviceable to practical necessities , but also one that raises human consciousness .
While we strive to find answers to ecological concerns and crises , we also bring the participants into a more comprehensive sense of themselves as belonging to and relating to a greater whole .
We seek to embrace the ecosphere of human existence not as an object to be controlled , but as a fellow-struggler on the path of increase and improvement .
As the Apostle Paul , whose 2 000-year legacy both the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic Churches are celebrating this year , says in one of his most famous epistles , the Epistle to the Romans , ' For we know that until now , the whole of creation groans with us and shares our birth pangs ' .
Every ecosystem on this planet is like a nation - by definition limited to a place .
The estuary is not the tundra , nor is the savannah the desert .
But like every culture , every ecosystem will have an effect that goes beyond far beyond its natural - or in the case of cultures , national - boundaries .
And when we understand that every ecosystem is part of the singular ecosphere that is inhabited by every living breath that fills the world , then do we grasp the interconnectedness , the powerful communion of all life , and our true interdependency on one another .
Without such an understanding , we are led to ecocide , the self-destruction of the one ecosphere that sustains all human existence .
Thus it is that we come before you today , highlighting this Year of Intercultural Dialogue , bringing parables from the natural world to affirm your transcendent human values .
As an institution , the Ecumenical Patriarchate has lived as a relatively small ecosystem within a much larger culture for centuries .
Out of this long experience , allow us to suggest the most important practical characteristic that enables the work of intercultural dialogue to succeed .
Chiefly and above all , there must be respect for the rights of the minority within every majority .
When and where the rights of the minority are observed , the society will for the most part be just and tolerant .
In any culture , one segment will always be dominant - whether that dominance is based on race , religion or any other category .
Segmentation is inevitable in our diverse world .
What we seek to end is fragmentation !
Societies that are built upon exclusion and repression cannot last .
Or , as the divine Prince of Peace Jesus Christ said : Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand .
Our counsel to all is to recognise that only when we embrace the fullness of shared presence within the ecosphere of human existence , are we then able to face the ' otherness ' of those around us - majority or minority - with a true sense of the consanguinity of the human family .
Then do we behold the stranger amongst us not as an alien , but as a brother or sister in the human family , the family of God .
St Paul expounds on pan-human relation and brotherhood quite eloquently and concisely when addressing the Athenians in the first century .
This is why Europe needs to bring Turkey into its project and why Turkey needs to foster intercultural dialogue and tolerance in order to be accepted into the European project .
Europe should not see any religion that is tolerant of others and respectful to the others as alien to itself .
The great religions , like the European project , can be a force that transcends nationalism and can even transcend nihilism and fundamentalism by focusing their faithful on what unites us as human beings , and by fostering a dialogue about what divides us .
From our country , Turkey , we perceive both a welcome to a new economic and trading partner , but we also feel the hesitation that comes from embracing , as an equal , a country that is predominantly Muslim .
And yet Europe is filled with millions of Muslims who have come here from all sorts of backgrounds and causations ; just as Europe would still be filled with Jews , had it not been for the horrors of the Second World War .
Indeed , it is not only non-Christians that Europe must encounter , but Christians who do not fit into the categories of Catholic or Protestant .
The resurgence of the Orthodox Church in Eastern Europe since the fall of the Iron Curtain has truly been a marvel for the world to behold .
The segmentation of Eastern Europe has led to fragmentation in many places .
Not only does the centre not hold ; it is hardly discernible .
Through this process , as nation states strive to re-establish themselves , it is the Orthodox Christian faith that has risen , even above economic indicators , to a new status that could not have been predicted even 20 years ago .
One of the vital roles of our Ecumenical Patriarchate is to assist in the process of growth and expansion that is taking place in traditional Orthodox countries , by holding fast as the canonical norm for the worldwide Orthodox Church , over a quarter of a billion people around the globe .
At this moment , we wish to inform you , dear friends , that in October - next month - at our invitation , all the Heads of the Orthodox Patriarchates and Autocephalous Churches will meet in Istanbul , in order to discuss our common problems and to strengthen Pan-Orthodox unity and cooperation .
Simultaneously , we will also concelebrate the two thousand years since the birth of the Apostle of the Nations , St Paul .
Currently in the City ( Istanbul ) we are experiencing great joy and enthusiasm as we are all preparing for its celebration as the European Capital of Culture in the year 2010 .
The City , which has a long history , was a crossroads for gatherings of people and served as a place of cohabitation of diverse religions and cultures .
This past week , we attended a luncheon hosted by the Prime Minister of Turkey in honour of the Prime Minister of Spain .
As is public knowledge , both are co-sponsors of the Alliance of Civilisations under the auspices of the United Nations .
We heard their wonderful speeches , which were harmonious with the diachronic tolerant spirit of our City .
And now dear friends , please allow us to conclude in French in order to honour the French presidency , and also because this week you celebrate the European Day of Languages , I think next Friday .
Excellency , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , the Ecumenical Patriarchate reaffirms its desire to do all in its power to contribute to peace and prosperity in the European Union .
We are ready to join you in other constructive dialogues like that of today and we will lend an attentive ear to the problems of the day .
It is in this spirit that our Patriarchate has been cultivating and nurturing meaningful dialogue with Islam and Judaism for the past 25 years .
We have held many bilateral and trilateral meetings .
Within this framework , we will be meeting in Athens at the beginning of November to resume , for the 12th time , our academic dialogue with Islam .
Alongside these discussions , we are continuing our theological talks with the Roman Catholic , Anglican , Lutheran and Reformed Churches and with the ancient Oriental Churches : Armenian , Coptic , etc .
At the end of October , at the Pope 's invitation , we will have the opportunity , the privilege even , to speak at the 12th Ordinary Assembly of the World Synod of Bishops in the Vatican .
This should illustrate that the Ecumenical Patriarchate is extremely active in the area of ecumenical dialogue and seeks to contribute to a better understanding between peoples , reconciliation , peace , solidarity and efforts to combat fanaticism , hatred and all forms of evil .
We would like to thank you for this unique opportunity to address your Assembly for the second time and we call for God 's infinite blessing for all your just ventures .
Allow me , from this distinguished platform , to present my best wishes to Muslims all over the world at the approach of the great festival of Ramadan and also to the Jews of the world on the eve of Rosh Hashanah .
We are all brothers and sisters , children of the same heavenly Father and , on this wonderful planet , for which we are all responsible , there is room for everyone , but there is no room for war or for those who kill each other .
Once more , we thank you with all our heart for allowing us the great honour and privilege of addressing you today .
( Standing ovation )
Your Holiness , the European Parliament has accorded you a standing ovation to show its great appreciation of your speech .
You spoke of pax , of peace for the human family and creation .
Peace is the culmination of respect for human dignity .
We do not have to agree with every belief that exists , and we do not have to accept every view .
What we must do , however , is respect our fellow men and women .
It is this respect which is the core of human dignity , and it is the core of tolerance .
In that spirit , we would like to express our warmest thanks to you once again for the contribution that you have made to the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
It is a valuable contribution which fosters understanding between the people of our continent and the world , and promotes reconciliation , peace and freedom .
Thank you very much , Your Holiness .
( Applause )
1 .
Electronic communications networks and services , protection of privacy and consumer protection (
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Harbour report
The Commission accepts the following :
amendments 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 20 , 21 , 32 , 38 , 41 ( on the recitals )
amendments 43 , 48 , 51 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 60 , 61 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 68 , 70 , 72 , 73 , 77 , 79 , 88 , 89 , 90 , 97 , 100 , 106 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 115 , 116 , 118 , 129 , 137 , 141 , 143 , 145 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 152 ( on the articles )
plenary amendments 191 , 192 , 167 , 182
The Commission accepts the following in principle or in part :
amendments 3 , 6 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 31 , 37 ( on the recitals )
amendments 44 , 47 , 53 , 62 , 67 , 71 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 80 , 82 , 86 , 87 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 99 , 103 , 105 , 109 , 114 , 122 , 127 , 132 , 134 , 135 , 136 , 138 , 139 ( on the articles )
plenary amendments 170,154 , 171 , 194 , 189 , 193 , 188 , 152 , 159 , 180 , 181 , 183 , 185
The Commission rejects the following :
amendments 1 , 10 , 17 , 24 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 39 , 40 , 42 ( on the recitals )
amendments 45 , 46 , 49 , 50 , 52 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 69 , 78 , 81 , 83 , 84 , 85 , 95 , 96 , 98 , 101 , 102 , 104 , 107 , 108 , 113 , 117 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 123 , 124 , 125 , 126 , 128 , 130 , 131 , 133 , 140 , 142 , 144 , 146 , 147 , 148 ( on the articles )
plenary amendments 169 , 153 , 160 , 177 , 190 , 176 , 165 , 178 , 155 , 172 , 168 , 173 , 166 , 157 , 163 , 174 , 156 , 158 , 175 , 179 , 184 , 186 , 187
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I know that I will not be popular for making a long speech at this time , but my two fellow-rapporteurs , with whom I have worked very closely as a team , have made short statements so I want to keep the team spirit together .
I would just like to say that there are more amendments in my report because my committee has been more ambitious in the improvements it wanted to make to the Commission proposal .
I ask for your support to ensure that we have confident , well-informed consumers for electronic communications , who are also secure and know that their personal data is protected .
I would like to thank all my colleagues on the committee who worked with me to put together some really big compromise amendments which we will pass today .
I would like particularly to thank Alexander Alvaro and the Civil Liberties Committee , with whom we worked very closely , for their part on the E-Privacy Directive .
I would like all of you to give us a huge majority for this so that , when we come to negotiate with the Commission and Council , we will do our very best for Europe 's consumers .
- After the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent work .
It was not easy : they have worked miracles and they have my respect .
I would also like to thank the honourable Members of the European Parliament for the strong signal they have given with today 's vote .
This is the signal for an open and competitive single market , for telecom companies and for Europe 's 500 million consumers alike .
Yesterday the Commission had to propose new rules to tackle excessive charging for SMS and data roaming in the EU .
These proposals will provide a fast cure for one of the most visible symptoms of the lack of a single market in telecoms , from which both companies and consumers are suffering .
Today , the European Parliament has gone an important step further by proposing to remedy the problem once and for all at its root : to get rid of the fragmentation by paving the way for a single market in regulatory terms .
I welcome in particular the fact that the European Parliament voted , after an intense debate - and probably to the surprise of many observers - for the establishment of an efficient European telecom regulator , as a facilitator for bringing together the national regulators , and for the dialogue between the national regulators and the Commission .
This is good news in the interest of a level playing field for the provision and use of telecom services across borders in Europe .
This new European regulator will make a strong contribution to enhancing cross-border competition and consumer choice .
Now , honourable parliamentarians , we need to sit together - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - in order to get this telecoms package up and running by 2010 .
There is not much time left .
We have to do it substantially ; we have to do it quickly now .
Everything the Commission can do in order to help to advance will be done .
I am convinced that the signal given today by Parliament goes beyond Europe : it is a signal that will be heard across the globe .
It will show that the single telecom market in Europe is open for business in the interests of a strong industry and of an empowered consumer . Thank you and congratulations .
( Applause )
2 .
International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 (
3 .
International Tropical Timber Agreement ( ITTA ) 2006
4 .
Commission 's Legislative and Work Programme for 2009
5 .
Preparation of the EU-India Summit ( Marseille , 29 September 2008 )
- Before the vote on paragraph 20 :
( ES ) My Group wishes to table an oral amendment to paragraph 20 .
In English , this must say as follows , from the last line :
' calls on India and the EU , particularly through the intermediary of the EU Special Envoy for Burma / Myanmar , to work together to prevail upon the Burmese military junta to release political prisoners and to respect human rights ; ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 25 :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have an oral amendment at the beginning of paragraph 25 .
I wish to add the following words : ' condemns every act of violence against Christian communities and ' , and then the original text follows .
The reason is that nowhere in the document is there any explicit condemnation of what happened in Orissa ; much weaker synonyms are used instead .
( The oral amendment was rejected and some Members chanted the slogan ' Europe is Christian , not Muslim ' )
( FR ) Mr President , when there are racist voices calling for a ' Europe without Muslims ' , I call on you to intervene !
( Applause )
Mr Cohn-Bendit has indeed spoken .
Voting time ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of voting time .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) Mr President , in the end I voted for the two reports on the updating of the Schengen Information System .
However , I should like to add that I still believe that the implementation of the Schengen Agreements has made our borders a sort of glorified sieve , that they have become much more insecure and less controlled .
Since Schengen we are absolutely all just as vulnerable as the weakest link in the border controls and that creates especially serious problems .
However , if the system does exist and continues to exist , I do of course have a duty to support controls that are applied as efficiently as possible and the exchange of information .
That is why I voted in favour , but that should certainly not be taken as approval of the open borders policy of the European Union .
( ES ) Regrettably , for reasons beyond my control , I could not take part in yesterday 's debate on this directive on ship inspection and survey organisations .
I want to take advantage of this opportunity to express my satisfaction that this directive has been adopted by Parliament with the recommendations of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
There were a couple of aspects that were not clear enough or properly dealt with in the common position adopted by the Council .
The first was that ship classification societies , when acting on behalf of national administrations - because it is the responsibility of flag States to guarantee the safety of ships - must be covered by the same legal guarantees as when it is the national administrations that are acting .
Secondly , I believe we have properly clarified the financial liabilities in the event of an incident .
The Council common position did not clearly distinguish between the three possible cases - where these incidents cause the deaths of people , where they cause personal injury or where they simply cause property damage - so Parliament has sorted this out and ensured that it is clarified .
I hope this will be accepted by the Council .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report , because I believe it will go a long way towards creating the competition that the European electronic communication industry really needs .
For too long , British telecommunication companies have struggled in other parts of Europe against enterprises , because they are still effectively run as a monopoly .
Spectrum trading has created a significant amount of revenue for the UK Government , which has been successfully reinvested , but the advantage of this report is that it introduces principles of service , technology and neutrality , which , by foregoing the practice of insisting on the service that spectrums are used for and the technological standards used , will go even further towards ensuring large companies do not dominate the market .
In the UK , BT has come a long way from nationalised telecommunication provider to a successful regulated company .
However , within my own constituency , I still see problems associated with the dominance of large service providers .
Particularly problematic are rural areas , where consumers suffer because they are deemed too commercially unviable to be given adequate broadband coverage .
I hope the report 's determination to see these disparities solved will be put into practice .
( CS ) It is true that the lack of a functioning competitive environment in the telecommunications sector makes the adoption of a new regulatory framework a desirable , even a necessary , step .
I consider the chosen solution to be an undoubted contribution in the field of functional separation based on the principle of voluntary commitment .
Every Member State will thus be able to decide , in the light of the local conditions , whether to agree to functional separation or whether to maintain the status quo .
I myself have reservations about functional separation , both because there is insufficient experience of it and because I consider competition between different types of network , which the Union 's activities should encourage , to be more important than competition within a single network .
In some case , however , regulation goes too far .
I cannot , for example , agree that the European Commission should have the right of veto in relation to remedial measures adopted by national regulators within their own markets .
It is inconsistent with the principle of division of powers for the Commission to interfere in matters of national , and not European scope .
I should like a balanced legislative framework reflecting the needs of operators and their customers , in which there is no room for regulation for its own sake , but only for regulation which helps to improve the quality and availability of telecommunications services .
( CS ) I must admit that I was surprised by the disagreements in the discussions on draft Amendment 138 , when some fellow Members were unable to interpret the draft amendment in accordance with the text .
As the co-author , I wish to emphasise that the provisions guarantee that users can only be disconnected from the Internet with the assent of the Board of Regulators .
Users ' rights may , however , be violated if this is necessary in the interests of general security .
The fundamental right of users to privacy will not be violated by blocking or filtering content without the consent of the competent public authorities .
I was attracted to this proposal by some examples from France , where the Ministry for European Affairs ' pages and some train reservation pages were blocked on the Paris Town Hall 's public network owing to the erroneous assessment of their content as pornographic .
Thank you , fellow Members , for eventually supporting our balanced proposal , and thank you , France , for falling into line with it .
( CS ) As the shadow rapporteur , I am pleased that the Body of European Regulators in Telecom ( BERT ) , on the basis of amendments adopted by the European Parliament , is saving European taxpayers tens of millions of euro each year .
Contrary to the Commission 's proposal , a slimmer and more flexible institution has been established , which is making the most of the advantages of the single market while retaining the independence of national telecommunications authorities .
I am pleased that , thanks to my initiative , the position of consumer organisations has been strengthened .
I also supported the broad consensus on the matter of the financing of the Body 's budget , but I would again point to the risks which might arise from the differing contributions of Member States .
This may lead to an imbalance in the influence of the Member States , especially the large ones , on decision-making on the cross-border regulation of their telecommunications .
( SK ) I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur for his many years ' work and consistent approach within the framework of the legislative package in the field of electronic communications .
I supported his report in today 's vote .
The telecommunications package represents a necessary update of the current regulations , especially as regards protection of individuals ' privacy and personal data .
This aspect was one of the main objectives of the proposal and I supported the view that the data protection and security aspects need to be understood in a broader context than the purely European context , since communications service and Internet system providers are based all over the world and work with personal data within different legal systems .
I also supported the proposal to improve and strengthen consumer rights , in particular more information on , and transparency of , prices and the terms and conditions for using telecommunications services .
Last but not least , I welcomed the draft report 's attempts to facilitate and improve access to electronic communications for the disabled .
( CS ) Mr President , the report just adopted is related to my own year-old report on consumer confidence in the digital environment and I therefore welcome the fact that the rights of end users and consumers are significantly strengthened .
I am particularly pleased that we have been able to deal with such matters as number portability within one day , which frees up the rigid market in mobile operators , and the emergency call number 112 giving the location of the caller , which will save more people 's lives .
There are many improvements , including the following : the European call number 116 will be extended beyond the scope of missing children , there will be a breakthrough in the transparency of contracts and prices , it will be easier to terminate contractual relations at an early stage , ordinary users will have easier access to protection software , disabled users will be guaranteed equal access and spam will be more precisely defined .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my disagreement with the dispute , which had not even been settled by the end of yesterday 's debate with the Commission , with respect to the legal basis for approval of this international agreement on the sustainable and lawful logging of tropical timber .
I firmly believe that it should require the approval of Parliament , not just consultation .
The agreement is inadequate , but we have nothing else at present and I am therefore pleased that we have adopted it so clearly today .
We are making a stand against the plundering of tropical forests , but I am afraid that millions of tonnes of tropical timber will continue to pour into Europe at dumping prices , because it has not been possible to force environmental requirements into European trade policy .
This is a paradox , because we pride ourselves on carrying the banner for the reduction of CO2 emissions throughout the world .
Something is not quite right here .
Perhaps the right hand does not know what the left hand is doing , or vice versa .
( SK ) I voted for the European Parliament 's resolution on the legislative and work programme for 2009 owing to its overall competence .
In my view , fundamental support for the European Parliament 's measures to stabilise the financial markets in the current financial crisis is a particularly good decision .
I believe , however , that this programme does not take any account of food safety , which will have to be covered by concrete measures and not just expressions of regret .
One particularly urgent element is maximising the agricultural potential in the new Member States , since the current discriminatory common agricultural policy is resulting in a serious deterioration of agriculture in these new Member States .
( NL ) Mr President , the recommendations this Parliament drew up for the work programme of the European Commission for 2009 were , all things considered , really quite strong .
However , one might have expected that this Parliament should , in the first place , have urged respect for a democratic legal order in Europe through the politically appointed mandarins of the European Commission .
What would that mean in practice ?
I shall give just two examples .
Firstly , for goodness ' sake , respect the decision of the Irish people , a decision that undoubtedly expresses the wishes of a large majority of our European citizens who do not even have the opportunity to speak out against the Treaty of Lisbon : so throw out the disguised European Constitution .
The second example , and this is the most crucial , is to stop the accession negotiations with Turkey , for which there is absolutely no democratic basis .
Of course we have already known for a long time that the Eurocrats do not care one bit about the wishes of the citizens , who nonetheless pay for their lavish lifestyle with their taxes .
( PL ) Mr President , during the vote on this resolution there was an appalling instance where an oral amendment was rejected .
It happened at the request of Mr Schulz , one of the main defenders of human rights and an advocate of non-discrimination .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , who is well-known for his defence of human rights across a broad spectrum , was also involved .
We are all fully aware , however , of the gruesome happenings in India , and of the blood spilt in that country .
It was precisely Christians who were affected .
I cannot therefore understand where this neo-racism manifested by leading European politicians has originated .
I cannot understand how these people dare to reject such a clear amendment to the report in this very Chamber .
After all , Parliament is supposed to be founded on defence of human rights and the principle of non-discrimination .
I believe that this issue is likely to provide abundant food for thought for Parliament and the general population .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted against the resolution on the EU-India Summit , not because I am opposed to cooperation with India .
On the contrary , as a Co-President of the Friends of India in this House , I am clearly in favour of strengthening cooperation with India .
However , this resolution is nothing short of a shopping list of all the topics that we could possibly think of in relation to this enormous country .
Paragraph 29 is a case in point : in this paragraph , we call for a Commission progress report on human rights in India and the outcomes of the EU-India human rights dialogue .
Despite that , we then have numerous paragraphs referring to specific population groups , such as the Christians in Orissa , the Muslims in Kashmir and the Dalits in other parts of the country .
To that extent , what we have just heard from the previous speaker was quite absurd , given that this topic is mentioned very frequently in the resolution .
I think everything has its proper time and place .
Just imagine if the Indian Parliament were to adopt a resolution on the status of the Roma in the Czech Republic , the Hungarians in Slovakia and the Russians in Estonia and Latvia .
We are not mature enough to focus on the most important matters ; instead , we always get distracted with a long list of all kinds of issues , and that really does narrow our influence .
I know we are not taken seriously as a result .
That is why I have voted against the resolution .
It is a great pity : this Ninth Summit is important .
The House has been talking about reform , and that is exactly what we need : we need to think about reforming this kind of resolution text as well .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - Costas Botopoulos ' report ' Amendment to Rule 121 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure on proceedings before the Court of Justice ' deals with a minor modification of the rules to Parliamentary procedure .
I therefore voted in favour of its recommendations .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on amendments to Rule 121 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament concerning proceedings before the European Court of Justice .
I did so because the issue in question is an example of respect for the rule of law .
Rule 121 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure states that the President shall bring an action before the Court of Justice on behalf of Parliament and in accordance with the recommendation of the committee responsible .
This provision refers explicitly and exclusively to complaints before the Court .
In such cases it is not possible to apply a broader interpretation according to which this provision could be applied to other cases of a different nature before the Court .
The provision is only implemented in cases involving the filing of a complaint ( on repeal of a legal act , for instance ) when Parliament initiates court proceedings .
In the interests of ensuring legal certainty and completeness , the rapporteur rightly proposed the addition of a new paragraph to Rule 121 .
The new paragraph would enshrine the established practice regarding the submission of comments by the President of the European Parliament to the Court and his or her appearances before the Court at the request of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The proposed amendment establishes a procedure to be followed should a difference of opinion emerge between the President and the relevant committee .
Thanks to this amendment , the procedure currently being followed will have a democratic legal basis .
in writing . - ( PL ) I should like to express my dissatisfaction that despite the fact that the SIS is a matter of such importance to the citizens of the European Union it is being with under the consultation procedure according to which Parliament simply presents its views .
The latter are not binding on the Council .
The SIS , the Schengen Information System , actually symbolises the Europe without borders that guarantees an area of freedom , security and justice across the Union .
The SIS has created the possibility for police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters in the old Member States .
It has allowed a unique European database of individuals and entities to be established .
This is particularly important in the context of issuing visas and residence permits .
When the 12 new Member States joined the Union it became necessary to include them in the SIS system .
SIS II has met that need .
This is a new generation system covering all the EU Member States and enabling complete data to be gathered , including biometric data and information on European arrest warrants .
The Union now needs to tackle the tricky operation of transferring all the data into the new SIS II system .
This is a particularly necessary operation but also a complicated one .
I therefore appeal for care and caution .
The data gathered in the so-called old system must not be allowed to leak and fall into unauthorised hands .
That data must be handled safely , because the safety of the EU citizens and Member States depends on it .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are striving to ensure that there is truly free movement of persons within Europe .
As a result , we consider that the ' Schengen area ' ( which does not include all EU countries and much less so all European countries ) , despite removing barriers between the participating countries , is actually reinforcing those barriers with other countries ( particularly countries with which Portugal has historic links ) .
Having said this , we cannot ignore the fact that , using the excuse of ' freedom of movement ' , an information system and databases are being set up which go well beyond this objective , making these into one of the central supporting instruments ( or ' backbone ' ) of the security offensive ( led by the EU ) and the progressive ' Communitisation ' of justice and home affairs , areas which are at the heart of Member State sovereignty .
In other words , we cannot agree to what the Council Presidency is proposing : first set up the system and then define its objectives .
This is particularly important because the objectives have been defined for a long time ( introduction of the European arrest warrant and biometric data , access by new entities , including data-sharing with third countries , and so on ) .
As we have said previously , these measures threaten the protection of citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
in writing . - ( FR ) On reading this rapport , one question comes to mind : is it because the ' first generation ' Schengen Information System did not work or was at least ineffective as a means of ensuring security within the Schengen area that a ' second generation ' system , intended to remedy these shortcomings , is being implemented ?
Sadly not , as this second-generation system is no more than an updated version of an already flawed system .
According to the figures given by the Commission , 400 000 illegal immigrants cross the Union 's borders each year .
Even supposing that biometric data will soon be available and ready to use to establish files for and send home illegal immigrants already registered as such , the European Union would be incapable of putting an end to the mass immigration that takes place along its coasts and land borders because of a lack of controls at the Member States ' internal and external borders .
The Schengen Information System will only ever be a useless gadget as long as the dangerous Schengen agreements are in place .
in writing . - ( DE ) The implementation of SIS II had to be postponed several times due to technical difficulties .
At the time , the new Eastern European Member States , for example , faced major problems at their borders and therefore pressed for the introduction of a ' stop-gap programme ' .
That may have been a sensible approach in view of the situation at that time , but it undoubtedly resulted in additional costs being incurred .
Experience with the current SIS model seems to be positive .
In the long term , the programme must of course be developed further .
Improvised interim solutions can cause security gaps , however , which is why I have rejected the planned introduction of the improvised version , as I believe that it is premature .
in writing . - In relation to RCVs 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 on the Sterckx Report , I and my Irish EPP-ED colleagues voted against or abstained on these amendments , so as to demonstrate our concerns over issues relating to the power of the independent authority and the scope of the Directive which would undermine Member State competence in a number of areas .
We fully support the general thrust of the Directive and wish to see a successful agreement reached between Parliament and Council .
in writing . - ( FR ) Europe wishes to protect itself against maritime accidents and the pollution of its seas and oceans .
We welcome this .
The recent terrible examples of the Prestige and Erika shipwrecks are there to remind us of our duty to be careful and to monitor vessel safety , but also of our responsibilities in the event of an environmental disaster .
A special reference should , moreover , be made in the proposal for a Directive to post-accident inquiries .
For the first time , it has been agreed that an investigative body should be set up that is charged with deciding , with complete independence and impartiality , whether or not to open an inquiry to determine the causes and circumstances of an accident .
The intentions are good ; let us only hope that they are not cast aside in the face of the huge financial interests at stake .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report by my Belgian colleague , Mr Sterckx , on the regulation of maritime traffic .
Since the Erika shipwreck of 1999 and that of the Prestige in 2002 , we have been waiting in vain for European solutions to ensure that such disasters never happen again .
Far from having decreased , the risk increases every day : maritime traffic is set to triple in the next 30 years .
In spite of this worrying prediction , the majority of Member States have been quick to ' sink ' the main measures put forward by the Commission and supported by the European Socialists .
One noticeable disappearance is that of an insurance policy , by means of a financial guarantee , that would make it easier for the victims of maritime disasters to be compensated .
Adopting this report means opposing cynicism and the irresponsibility of states .
Parliament can be proud of its unity , because , through its vote today , it is showing its unstinting commitment to safer and less polluted European waters .
in writing . - I and my Irish EPP-ED colleagues abstained on the report on the amendments to the Kohlicek Report .
We did so due to concerns relating to the impact of the division of investigations into technical and criminal and the problems that this would create under Irish law .
We support the general thrust of this and all the Maritime Reports adopted today in plenary .
in writing . - Representing Scotland , I recognise the importance of maritime transport and believe that this sector is one which has immense potential for future development .
It is vital that adequate measures are taken to maximise safety at sea and to prevent accidents ; accordingly this package , which will serve to prevent repeat accidents occurring , is one which I welcome .
in writing . - The Costa report deals with important issues for all maritime regions .
It is vital that the EU is serious about improving safety standards at sea whilst not placing unrealistic burdens on carriers .
I fully support the notion that national authorities and port authorities play a vital role in identifying risks involved in this area and am on the whole satisfied with the measures adopted by this House today .
in writing . - I and my Irish EPP-ED colleagues abstained on the vote on the Report on Port State Control due to concerns that the amendments as put forward would undermine and complicate the Paris MoU , and we feel that the issue of Flag States would be better dealt with in a separate Directive and that inclusion of such amendments would unnecessarily complicate this Directive .
in writing . - ( FR ) With our vote today , we have reminded the Council that the Erika III package forms a whole and should be examined as such .
That is why I agreed to the inclusion of the amendments to the Savary report in my report on port state control .
Furthermore , by reverting to our first-reading positions , we have refused to follow the Council in abandoning two important proposals on flag state control and shipowners ' civil liability , for which we received no common positions .
The French Presidency , whose hard work and ongoing commitment to finding a solution to this problem deserves a mention , has convinced the Council to resume work on the two missing proposals .
I am certain that it will manage to break the deadlock and that the conciliation procedure will produce an overall agreement on the Erika III package .
I hope that this procedure can be launched without delay so that we can reach a conclusion before the end of the year .
Maritime security should remain a priority on the European political agenda and it is with this intention that I shall continue to uphold our proposals .
in writing . - ( SV ) The moderates essentially support the proposal for a directive on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations , and also voted for it on first reading in April 2007 .
In preparation for the second reading , the Committee on Transport and Tourism decided to incorporate into this directive large parts of the proposal for a directive on compliance with flag State requirements , which was rejected by the Council .
The directive on compliance with flag State requirements was an attempt to extend EU competence to an area in which there are already UN rules .
We already voted against that extension on first reading in March 2007 and therefore also do not support this attempt to introduce these rules by the back door as part of the Directive on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations .
We have therefore chosen to vote against Mr de Grandes Pascual 's report .
in writing . - I am in support of this report from the Parliament looking at Ship Inspections and Survey Organisations and I am in favour of the other Parliament reports which , along with this one , make up the Maritime Package .
The issue of the two ' missing ' dossiers , on Civil Liability and Flag States , needs to be resolved by the Council one way or another , so it is important that Parliament keeps the pressure on by including them collectively in the Sterckx report on Vessel Traffic Monitoring , the Vlasto report on Port State Control and this report .
Much work has been done , and I feel that agreement on the five dossiers we have voted on today could be easily reached , However without Civil Liability and without Flag States we will not be able to move any further forward .
The Council must find a solution to their internal stalemate or else we will not be able to deliver a safer Maritime sector to the citizens of the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) Following the shipwrecks of the oil tankers Erika and Prestige , the European Socialists led the fight for ' high-end ' EU legislation on maritime safety .
The seven Third Maritime Safety Package reports are a decision step towards achieving that aim , provided the Council does not empty them of their content .
Since the first reading in 2007 , the Council has rejected most of Parliament 's recommendations on the other five .
At this second reading , and after a great deal of amendment work , Parliament reaffirms the absolute priority it attaches to the creation of a European maritime policy that affords a high level of protection with regard to :
flag state control ,
a Community vessel traffic monitoring system ,
liability of passenger carriers ,
ship inspections and survey organisations ,
the designation of an independent competent authority for the accommodation of vessels in distress ,
the application of the ' polluter pays ' principle to the maritime sector .
I strongly support this message to the Council .
I appeal to Nicolas Sarkozy and Dominique Bussereau to ensure that the French Presidency allows the creation of a maritime area in Europe that can serve as a model for all .
in writing . - ( LT ) The main purpose of all legislation on medicinal products has to be to protect our society 's health .
However , this aim should be achieved by measures that do not interfere with the development of industry in the European Union or the trade in medicinal products .
Despite the fact that earlier regulations have drawn up a list of food colourants , different countries have different laws on their use .
These differences can hinder the trade in medicines containing these colourants , and that is why the regulation must be amended ; this would bring more clarity and make the work of quite a few institutions easier .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal seeks to amend the regulatory framework for electronic communications in order to improve its effectiveness , ensure simpler and more efficient access to frequencies available in the radio spectrum and reduce the administrative costs needed to implement the regulations .
As a result , wherever they are in the EU , European citizens should benefit from more efficient and cheaper communication services , whether they are using mobile phones , broadband connections to the Internet or cable television .
The new system for the radio spectrum is intended to promote investment in new infrastructures and allow all citizens to have broadband access .
An internal communications market that is operating correctly and a competitive information society economy , benefiting consumers and businesses , can only exist if the regulatory framework for telecommunications is coherently applied .
To this end , the Commission 's coordination role should be reinforced , acting in strict cooperation with the NRAs ( National Regulatory Authorities ) and the new Body of European Regulators in Telecom ( BERT ) , in order to improve the coherence of both national decisions with an impact on the internal market and the imposition of remedies .
I therefore support this report and the main amendments which seek to extend the offer to consumers by reinforcing competition .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Catherine Trautmann 's report on electronic communications networks and services because , in my opinion , the legislative framework for electronic communications must be improved in order to offer the consumer more choice , better protection , a cheaper service and improved quality .
Together with the creation of a new Body of European Regulators in Telecom , this new legislative framework will ensure better protection of consumers ' private data , increase competition , offer consumers more choice and make contractual terms clearer .
It should also be highlighted that the ' package ' will facilitate access for people with disabilities to telecommunications services .
in writing . - ( PT ) Like other natural resources , spectrum is a public good .
It is therefore an area which should remain within public management to ensure that it serves the public interest .
This is the only way to offer public goods which are essential to developing an information society for all .
That is why we fundamentally disagree with the resolution adopted and voted against it .
Experience has shown that combined approaches ( policies and market ) always end up serving the interests of economic groups rather than the interests of the people .
The same applies to the allocation of spectrum released by the digital switchover , where the priority should be social , cultural and economic value ( better public service , wireless broadband to underserved areas , growth and jobs , and so on ) and not increasing public revenues .
Spectrum management is the exclusive competence of each Member State .
However , there are certain aspects of the resolution with which we do agree , bearing in mind that spectrum knows no borders and that effective use of spectrum in the Member States and EU-level coordination are useful , particularly for the development of pan-European services and the negotiation of international agreements .
However , we disagree with the idea of using an approach identical to commercial policy .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Telecom package is one of the most important packages submitted to EP scrutiny in this session , given that one of the major pillars of globalization is communication in real time , both in the domestic and the international space .
Hence the multitude of amendments due to the different approaches of the 27 Member States , each with its own national realities .
Despite the differences of approach shown during the debates , I believe that the Trautmann report represents a step forward for the entire European space , even if amendments such as 132 or 138 caused lively debates .
I believe that the current version adopted by the European Parliament ensures both a common approach to the development of communication within the European space , and a constructive form of control over virtual space , concerning such aspects as data protection or organised crime via cyberspace .
Therefore , in my capacity as Member of this Parliament , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) On behalf of the 40 signatories , I have withdrawn Amendment 132 to the Trautmann report because it was not possible to reach a compromise on strengthening the basic right to protection of intellectual property during the European Parliament 's deliberations on the Telecoms Framework Directive .
The aim of Amendment 132 was to develop new ways of achieving a more balanced relationship between the basic right to free access to information and the Internet , on the one hand , and the basic right to protection of intellectual property in response to the dramatic rise in piracy on the Internet , on the other .
The PPE-DE Group withdrew its support for this amendment after the left-wing groups ( PSE , Verts / ALE , GUE / NGL ) linked their support for the del Castillo Vera report ( creation of the European Electronic Communications Market Authority ) to this issue .
in writing . - ( FR ) The telecommunications sector is developing at such a rate that it became necessary to adapt the legislative framework .
However , it was obvious to me that this framework should be clear and precise and , above all , that it should not stop investment by European telecom companies , which face stiff competition from the American and Asian markets .
Our businesses must be able to plan and invest in new technologies without any delay .
Although it is of benefit to all to strengthen the internal market in the telecoms sector , I am delighted that the Commission has not succeeded in imposing its authority on us but that Parliament has proposed the Body of European Regulators in Telecom , a credible alternative that enhances cooperation among national regulators and avoids the additional bureaucracy the European Electronic Communications Market Authority would have meant .
The Luxembourg telecommunications market ( 4.7 % of the working population are directly or indirectly employed in this sector ) , for example , requires a powerful national regulator that is close to and aware of its peculiarities .
In this case , it was the right decision to apply the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - The telecoms industry is rapidly evolving .
Consequently , new measures are required to preserve and enhance consumer protection and the rights of the telecoms user .
Catherine Trautmann 's report on electronic communications networks and services aims to encourage the development of the next generation of telecommunications networks in Europe .
I believe this to be a positive contribution to the advancement of telecoms regulation that will promote investment in new communications infrastructure and strengthen consumer rights .
My vote reflects this view .
I voted in favour of the amendments proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left : they guarantee a greater degree of freedom on the Internet because this is a freedom of expression as important to democracy as freedom of the press .
It is a positive sign that Parliament , despite massive pressure from lobby groups , has expressed its objections to such arbitrary exclusion from the Internet and has not accepted that any user can be denied access to the Internet .
Nevertheless , in the final analysis , the report remains negative .
The EU should attach great importance to public dialogue in order to ensure both freedom of expression and the protection of personal data , in cooperation with civil society .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have to say that the telecoms package is one of the most difficult legislative proposals I have seen since I came here .
On the one hand because it is technically complicated , with overlapping legislative proposals ; on the other hand because the balance between confidentiality and security , by its very nature , calls for careful consideration .
I took the view that , while the Internet cannot be left entirely unregulated , the principles of a society subject to the rule of law must nevertheless apply undiminished .
I cannot accept the privatisation of the administration of justice , which is what would happen if private companies were allowed to intervene and censor content on the Web before users got the chance to have their say .
If the view is that transparency should be a guiding principle , filtering is deeply problematical .
While it must be clear that surveillance of civil Web users must never be allowed for commercial reasons , of course I will not have any part in legislation which , for example , would prevent the police from investigating child pornography or in some other way pose a risk to public safety .
It was important not to contribute to a European legal framework which would impede the development of the technology and restrict the democratic , social and professional scope and potential of the Internet .
Finally I took the view that sufficient protective mechanisms were in place to enable me to vote in favour of the liberalisation of the telecoms market which is otherwise so important .
in writing . - ( FR ) I wanted to vote in favour of Mrs Trautmann 's report , as it enshrines the social , cultural and economic value of radio frequencies while providing for better management of the spectrum of radio frequencies for the benefit of all operators and consumers .
This first reading also allows us to suggest a balanced alternative to the initial Commission proposal by making the Commission arbitrator rather than judge as regards the monitoring of competition .
It is important for the national regulatory authorities to continue to play a full role .
I regret , however , the adoption of Mrs Trautmann 's oral amendment .
While it seems perfectly acceptable , in practice this amendment introduces a hierarchy of end-users ' fundamental rights by banning all preventative action without a prior court ruling regarding the communication and online distribution of content .
Yesterday 's events in a Finnish school show more than ever why we should put in place well-thought-out and proportionate prevention mechanisms .
This was what the cooperation amendment I supported was all about and I therefore regret the current situation within Parliament .
in writing . - ( RO ) As IMCO rapporteur for this report , I am pleased to see that the work carried out by my colleagues over the last three months has materialised in this balanced report containing significant improvements to the electronic communications sector .
I trust that these changes are to the benefit of consumers , providing them with a wide array of choice ; I am also confident that these changes will support a competitive market .
I believe that maintaining functional separation as an option available to national authorities will give them a chance to promote competitiveness in this field .
European economic growth and consumer welfare depend on a dynamic and competitive telecommunications sector .
Competitive markets have more broadband available , and new-comers on the market have brought with them increased speed and innovative services .
In this way , the objectives of the new directive have been attained : reformed spectrum management , improved consistency of the regulations governing the internal e-communications market , and increased level of security and integrity , to the benefit of service users .
in writing . - ( PT ) Begun in 2001 , the liberalisation of telecommunications has given free rein to the European markets , which are now more competitive , more innovative and highly profitable .
European consumers have without doubt been the main beneficiaries of this development , with more and better services , forms and content , which are increasingly accessible .
This was a technological , economic and sociocultural ( r ) evolution .
Despite this clearly positive assessment , we cannot rest on our laurels .
Bottlenecks still remain that are preventing the creation of a genuinely integrated market .
These are basically due to disparities in the application of European regulations for which each National Regulatory Authority ( NRA ) is responsible .
I therefore support the creation of BERT , or the Body of European Regulators in Telecom , which is an updated and reinforced version of the European Regulators Group for electronic communications networks and services ( ERG ) .
It will be responsible for the more coherent application of regulations and will be able to rely on the participation of the NRAs which have precious experience of the day-to-day situation on the ground .
By creating BERT , a coherent regulatory approach will be followed throughout the EU with regard to the corrective measures taken by the NRAs , with total independence from government and industry .
BERT will also play a role in raising consumer awareness .
In this respect , the EU already has reason to be satisfied given its role in substantially reducing the price of roaming .
in writing . - ( LT ) The liberalisation of the European telecommunications market has been beneficial to the whole of the European Union .
More active competition within the sector has become the main driver of investments and innovations .
I agree with the Commission that the telecommunications market still needs control until it begins to work in line with general competition laws .
However , in principal I cannot agree with the Commission 's proposal to establish another institution to regulate this market , as it would further increase the bureaucratic burden and would be distant from the regulated markets of the Member States .
In the vote I will be supporting the amendments proposed by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) , which aim to expand the role of the existing Body of European Regulators in Telecom ( BERT ) as well as give the European Commission additional powers .
National telecommunications market regulators should cooperate more closely with BERT and the European Commission .
In my opinion , the proposal of the Committee on Industry would enable market participants to be regulated more effectively and guarantee the effective participation of the national regulatory authorities and the use of their experience at EU level .
This in its turn would help prevent taxpayers ' money from being wasted in establishing yet more bureaucratic apparatus .
in writing . - I welcome Pilar del Castillo 's report on the European Electronic Communications Market Authority .
The report 's vision for a Board of European Regulators that acts as a bridge between both the Commission and National Regulatory Authorities is one that adequately accounts for the complexity of the market and its ever-expanding nature .
This is reflected in my vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) The aim of this proposal is to promote coordinated action at EU level in order to ensure effective use of the digital dividend .
The switchover from analogue to digital terrestrial television by the end of 2012 , given that the superior efficiency of digital technology will free up a significant amount of spectrum , will create a unique opportunity for the EU to open up possibilities for market growth , expansion of quality and choice of consumer services .
It is therefore hoped that Member States will be able to release their digital dividends as quickly as possible in order to allow European citizens to benefit from a whole new range of innovative and competitive services .
Member States must therefore decide how to use the digital dividend and ensure that all these types of electronic communications service are offered in available radio-frequency bands , in accordance with the respective national frequency allocation plan and the regulations of the International Telecommunications Union .
However , it is vital that there is a coordinated Community approach so that we can avoid prejudicial interference between Member States , and also between Member States and third countries .
This will allow the benefits of using the spectrum to be maximised , thus guaranteeing optimal use in social and economic terms .
in writing . - Spectrum is a finite resource in the telecommunications industry .
With Member States set to switch to entirely digital television broadcasts by 2012 , more spectrum will become available .
Consequently how we use it needs careful consideration .
I believe Patrizia Toia 's report on the Common approach to the use of spectrum released by the digital switchover recognises the competing demands for spectrum and accounts for the issues of service and technology neutrality when allocating new licences .
I therefore voted in support of her recommendations .
in writing . - ( IT ) We Radical Members abstained from approving the Harbour report today in order to highlight the missed opportunities for taking immediate , binding action to promote the inclusion of people with disabilities .
Although some progress has been made , too few mandatory requirements are to be imposed on the competent authorities and telecommunications operators as regards the inclusion of disabled people .
For example , no account has been taken of the proposals drawn up jointly with the Luca Coscioni Association for the subtitling of all public service broadcasts such as news and current affairs programmes ; service operators will not be obliged to inform disabled users periodically about services intended specifically for them and about the reduced tariffs available to them .
Furthermore , a good deal of confusion persists about the guarantee of Internet neutrality and the safeguarding of users ' fundamental rights .
The web is increasingly being subjected to military-style monitoring and , on the pretext of protecting security , users ' freedoms are once again being eroded whereas , given the possibility of systematic filtering of the web , protection and guarantees for users have yet to be demonstrated .
With its new package of proposals on electronic communications , the EU is promoting measures to police and intimidate users of the Internet and all electronic communications , by introducing ' filtering ' systems on the pretext of public safety and protection of rights .
At the same time , it is uniformly placing the internal EU market for telecommunications , the Internet , audiovisual production and transmission , radio and television media and satellite connections under the control of a strengthened ' independent ' authority for the benefit of the monopoly companies .
Profits are being secured and the position of the European monopolies vis-à-vis international competition is being strengthened by liberalising and unifying the markets at European level .
First there will be complete liberalisation and privatisation at national level , and then radical restructuring , over-concentrating of the media and an accumulation of capital at the expense of workers in the sector and of users .
There are two separate infrastructures : on the one hand , there are public services funded by the government ; on the other , we have free market trade .
The government funds public services with money from the state , and as this is unprofitable , the services are sold off to private operators .
The acceptance of these proposals by centre-right and centre-left forces once again reveals their enthusiastic support for the choices made in the interest of capital .
This confirms the need to change the balance of power in favour of the workers with a radically different policy to make use of new technology for the benefit of the workers .
in writing . - ( PL ) The report adopted on universal services and the rights of users of electronic communications services aims to improve the consumer 's position in the market for electronic services .
Universal services should ensure consumers have access to public telephone services at an affordable price , and guarantee national and international connections and emergency calls .
Adoption of this report will enhance consumer rights .
Consumers will have the right to change telecommunications service provider whilst retaining their existing telephone number .
In addition , transfer of the number must not take longer than one day .
That is very important .
The maximum length of time for which a telecommunications undertaking may enter into an agreement with a subscriber will be limited to 24 months .
Nonetheless , an operator should also be able to provide the user with the option of entering into a contract for a maximum period of 12 months including all the services and equipment involved .
Access to the 112 emergency number must also be increased .
This is very important in crisis situations .
The Member States should ensure full access to public telephone services in cases when the network collapses as a result of a disaster or force majeure .
Access to the 116 emergency number for missing children should also be improved too .
Currently , this number operates on a voluntary basis in just seven EU Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) I warmly welcomed the report on the amendment of the Directives on users ' rights in electronic communications networks drawn up by Mr Harbour .
It is a balanced document intended to significantly improve the condition of the market in electronic services .
It was right to draft compromise amendments that were accepted by a significant majority of Members of this House .
This made it possible to adopt the report as a whole , despite the very large number of amendments .
The Union 's legal provisions in the area of telecommunications date back to the 1990s .
I believe that the amendments to the Directives represent a great opportunity to adjust them to the tremendous technological changes that have taken place .
This is particularly important since we intend to add mobile communications and broadband Internet access to universal services .
Licence holders should be assured of the right to full information on all restrictions concerning access to legal software .
Service providers must ensure security of the network , protect users ' personal data and stem the flood of so-called spam .
I believe that it is especially important to take account of the needs of disabled and elderly people , who need to have easier access to telecommunications services .
It is to be hoped that appropriate new technical solutions for equipment will emerge .
I trust that such developments will result in a significant reduction in the cost of telecommunications services across the entire Union .
At present , we are still obliged to pay unfair high prices for the transmission of data across the Union 's internal borders , despite the existence of the Schengen system .
in writing . - What Malcolm Harbour 's report shows quite emphatically is that Internet and phone users are currently getting a raw deal .
In these tough economic times consumers need to be confident that they are getting value for money .
The proposals in the report mean that customers will be better informed and their personal data , be it online or off , will be more secure .
The stipulation that disabled users receive equivalent access to the Internet and other communication services is also essential to ensure that everyone benefits from today 's digital age .
I voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) Today , an attempt is being made to assert economic interests by hook or by crook .
Suddenly , a framework directive on telecoms provision is to include a raft of copyright legislation .
It is quite enough for the EU to introduce an obligation for suppliers to caution customers about the risks of violating ' intellectual property rights ' , with penalties being regulated at national level .
Everyone can then blame each other afterwards .
Moreover , in the report before us , major software developers have attempted to put stumbling blocks in the way of their smaller competitors .
There may well be violations of the law occurring on the Internet - child pornography being a case in point - where we need to take action , but we must not allow data protection to be sacrificed to the economic interests of a handful of large corporations and multinationals .
The original concept behind the Telecoms package was very sensible , but with the mass of amendments - and one or two of them with the type of critical content that I have just described perhaps having slipped in - I abstained in the vote .
in writing . - ( RO ) The liberalization of the telecommunications market , which has been carried out by the EU for 10 years , is an undisputed success .
The reform of the regulatory framework of electronic communications is part of the Commission 's global strategy concerning the internal market , and is essential to achieving the Lisbon Strategy objectives , because , from a macroeconomic perspective , telecommunications contribute to rendering activity more effective in other sectors .
I appreciate the rapporteurs ' work on this set of coherent and effective measures , reflecting both EU objectives , and the points of view of most MEPs concerning a vital field for the development and strengthening of ties between education , research and innovation , and in particular for the building of the European information society , adapted to global economy and capable of contributing to economic growth by generating employment and providing better services , thus improving the overall quality of life of European citizens .
The positive vote on essential aspects such as clarifying and extending users ' rights , strengthened protection of personal data , creating a body of European regulatory authorities ( BERT ) , and better spectrum management , shows PPE-DE 's concern with striking a balance between the European citizens ' fundamental right of being integrated in information society , and the creation of a favourable framework for innovation and economic development .
in writing.- ( NL ) My vote against the Telecom package ( Harbour report ) was prompted by the loopholes left in the Directive , which might be a potential breach of our freedoms .
Member States authorise providers to follow the activities of individuals on the Internet .
I hope that , when implementing these new rules , the Member States will not be tempted into filtering the content of the Internet .
That task should be reserved solely for the police .
I understand that infringements of property rights on the Internet have to be dealt with , but that should not mean encroaching on the freedom of an individual Internet user .
Surely we cannot create a situation where we are like a postman who opens letters to see whether the contents are actually legal ?
The amendments with which the Greens sought to improve this text were rejected and so I can no longer support this proposal .
I would gladly have voted for the many consumer benefits , but I think it is unacceptable to make Internet providers responsible for the contents of the Internet .
That was not the purpose of this legislation either .
in writing . - ( SV ) Illegal logging and deforestation are causing serious damage to the environment , and there is general agreement that the clearance of sensitive tropical forests must be reduced .
Junilistan is therefore favourably disposed to the idea that individual states should draw up codes of conduct on the import of tropical timber .
We also welcome labelling initiatives , for example through the Forest Stewardship Council , which would give consumers more scope for taking conscious decisions based on facts regarding the purchase of timber or timber products .
Unfortunately , the salient feature of this report is its manifest desire to advance the positions of the European Parliament on matters concerning forestry policy in general .
Junilistan is firmly of the view that a common forestry policy within the framework of EU cooperation is not desirable .
Instead , responsibility for questions relating to or associated with the forestry policies of individual Member States should remain at national level .
In view of these considerations , Junilistan has chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - I was happy to support my colleague Ms Lucas 's report on the ITTA .
Millions of hectares of tropical forest are lost annually and the resultant carbon emissions are bound to have a drastic effect on the planet .
In future the EU must ensure that it plays a lead role in minimising destructive and unnecessary practices .
in writing . - I welcome Ms Lucas 's report on the International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 .
A serious approach to preserving the environment requires an effective framework for consultation , international cooperation and policy development regarding the world timber economy .
The EU needs to support conservation , reforestation and the restoration of degraded forest land .
I believe this report helps set the EU on the right track towards achieving a sustainable timber economy and I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( FR ) More than 20 years after the first tropical timber agreement was concluded , we are obliged to admit that overexploitation and illegal logging continue to be a problem .
It therefore became imperative for us to revise the agreement in order to reflect better these new objectives .
It is now a fait accompli : the International Tropical Timber Agreement , negotiated by the Commission within UNCTAD ( the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ) in 2006 embodies the new concerns for sustainable and legal exploitation of forest areas .
I warmly welcome the inclusion of these objectives .
However , producers in the countries concerned should not be forced to bear the inevitable cost of these new provisions .
The international community must establish a suitable financial compensation scheme .
I would also like the Commission to go further and to draft a comprehensive piece of legislation to ensure that only timber and timber products derived from forests managed in the interests of sustainable development and legally exploited are placed on the European market .
This is the only way to encourage producers to operate legally and respect the environment and therefore to promote , at global level , the sound and sustainable exploitation of tropical forests .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today I supported the resolution concerning the 2006 International Tropical Timber Agreement ( ITTA ) .
I did so because I believe that supporting measures aimed at resolving regional or global environmental problems in the international arena is actually one of the European Union 's most useful areas of activity .
I trust that we are all aware of the need to ensure protection and sustainable management of tropical forests , and to provide for the regeneration of degraded areas of those forests .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are extremely supportive of much that is contained in this resolution .
We strongly support the calls for a reduction in administrative burdens , the pursuit of the Lisbon Strategy on growth and jobs , support for SMEs , further progress on completing the Single Market , measures to boost consumer rights , further action on climate change , cross-border health care initiatives and boosting relations with the United States .
However , we cannot support the text on the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , the call for a common immigration policy , the call for a common asylum policy or the call for the creation of a European External Action Service .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today I voted against the European Parliament resolution on the European Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2009 .
The Commission 's ambitious plans provide for further unnecessary harmonisation and directives to be imposed on the Member States in the coming year .
I should also like to lodge a strong protest against the pressure exerted on Ireland and other Member States to continue the process of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , as expressed in the first point of the resolution .
The aforementioned Treaty was rejected in the referendum held in Ireland .
in writing . - ( PT ) It must be symptomatic that the European Parliament has not managed to adopt any resolution on the priorities of the European Commission 's programme .
Obviously the European Parliament elections are drawing nearer , which is influencing the decisions of the Members , particularly those who want to cover up their conduct and their responsibility for the policies that have worsened the social situation , increased unemployment and precarious and poorly paid work , brought about the financial , food and energy crisis - which is particularly affecting the economically weaker countries and the more vulnerable sections of society - and increased the militarisation of international relations , with all the dangers that this represents for world peace .
However , at the same time , they do not want to accept the need for a break with the policies that have led to all this .
They prefer for the European Commission to continue with the same instruments and policies that have led to this situation , albeit with a few pink and green touch-ups to keep up appearances .
We therefore insist on the proposals contained in our Group 's resolution , including the revocation of the Stability Pact , an end to privatisation and liberalisation , priority to employment with rights , eradication of poverty and social justice .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Commission 's Legislative and Work Programme for 2009 and regret the fact that it has not been adopted .
It is vitally important for the Commission to present a communication assessing implementation by the Member States of the Directive and the Regulation on the coordination of social security systems in the Member States .
While preparing this document as a shadow rapporteur I pointed out that these documents are of great importance to every EU citizen .
They determine procedures and tackle people 's every-day problems .
The document does not aim to unify social security systems .
It implements procedures allowing for different social security systems in the Member States .
At the same time it prevents people from losing out on social security because of these differences .
The everyday welfare of every EU citizen depends on the implementation of these documents .
Unfortunately , the Commission will not be given the responsibility of assessing what has been achieved in the Member States in the sphere of establishing transeuropean energy networks or how long the creation of the common energy market could take or ensuring energy security throughout the European Union .
This issue is vitally important to Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia and therefore the EU institutions and primarily the Commission must take concrete measures in order to lift these Member States out of their energy isolation and dependence on Russia , their sole supplier of gas and electricity .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted against the resolution on the Commission 's legislative programme for 2009 because it took over draft amendments requiring new legislation in the social sphere .
Since the social sphere falls almost exclusively within the competence of the Member States , our group rejected the amendment of the Directive on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the minimum standards concerning the unfair dismissal of individual workers , the protection of workers with untypical employment contracts and the improvement of working conditions and reduction of the number of accidents at work .
Matters of legal protection against discrimination differ between Member States , in particular with respect to reproductive rights , the traditional family , education and religion .
Our political group therefore considers it necessary in this matter to retain the principle of subsidiarity whereby each Member State is entitled to apply these principles in accordance with its national traditions and customs .
The question of Turkey 's accession to the EU is also a sensitive matter in our political group , many of the members being German and French conservatives .
in writing . - ( PT ) In 2009 the Commission 's activities will be governed by the European election timetable , resulting in a reduced chance of action , particularly by one of the institutions .
However , this circumstance does not prevent us from developing a realistic plan of action .
The world demands a review of the paradigms and an understanding that the reality has largely gone beyond many of the theoretical debates on economic and social models and on the multiple polarities in international relations ( in terms of both hard power and also economic powers or relationships between commercial forces ) .
We want the Commission to respond to this new reality with a long-term view that is flexible and adaptable in its implementation .
At the same time we want an agenda for 2009 that will help to clarify , in the eyes of voters in each Member State , the importance of and benefit to our economies and our societies of the EU 's policies .
This evidence , which will stem much more from the quality of our policies than from communication issues , must form the crux of our activities and , as a result , the activities of the European Commission .
Unfortunately , the resolution put to the vote did not reflect this approach which is why I voted against it .
in writing . - There is still a need to promote children 's rights .
Currently there is too little being done to tackle child poverty across the EU .
One in five children lives on the brink of poverty in the EU - that is one too many .
I am pleased that Parliament has rejected the Commission 's work programme for 2009 .
We need to do more to promote decent work in order to tackle poverty across the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's joint resolution on the preparation of the EU-India Summit because I feel that it is essential to adapt our strategic partnership with India , adopted in 2004 , to the new challenges that the EU and India are facing , such as the food crisis , the energy crisis and climate change .
I would highlight the fact that the resolution encourages India to continue its efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , particularly in the area of gender equality .
It is also important that the resolution reminds India of the EU 's values , calling on the Indian Government to abolish the death penalty .
in writing . - ( PT ) In addition to the many other issues raised by this resolution that we value , we consider it essential to stress that we unquestionably support the deepening of genuine and effective cooperation and friendship between the countries of the EU and India .
This requires a relationship that is based on responding to the needs of each population , that is mutually beneficial and that contributes to reciprocal development , while respecting the principle of non-interference and respect for national sovereignties .
However , based on these principles and assumptions , we clearly cannot agree with many of the proposals contained in this resolution , particularly on the conclusion of a ' free trade ' agreement which aims to include , among other aspects , an ' agreement on services ' , ' competition ' , ' public procurement ' and the ' abolition of ... ongoing restrictions in the field of Foreign Direct Investment ' between the EU and India .
This proposal ( and objective ) seeks to respond to the desires for expansion of the major economic and financial groups - which were not formalised in the WTO negotiations aimed at liberalising world trade - in which the need to increase the accumulation and centralisation of capital is pre-eminent .
This objective is contrary to the needs of workers and people in India and in the various countries of the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) We need to develop our relations with India , which , with a population of more than a billion and a booming economy , provides a counterweight to the Muslim world and China .
However , the motion for a resolution tabled , which reflects the views of Mr Sarkozy and the Commission , runs counter to the interests of the nations of Europe .
The ' comprehensive free trade agreement ' it calls for will contribute to the destruction of our economies and social systems , which are forced to compete with countries that engage in social dumping .
Furthermore , India 's demand for a seat on the United Nations Security Council is one of the proposals for UN reform , which also aim to strip France and the United Kingdom of permanent membership of the Security Council and give it instead to Brussels .
Moreover , describing India as a ' model for religious pluralism ' is an insult to the Christians massacred in Orissa .
India is defending its national interests and age-old values .
In order to have a balanced relationship with India , our Member States must do the same .
They can only do that in a different Europe : a Europe of sovereign nations rooted in the Christian and Greco-Roman values of its civilisation .
in writing . - As a member of the EU-India Delegation , I support the Joint Motion for a Resolution on the preparation of the EU-India Summit 2008 .
The motion addresses the issue of the failure to reach agreement at the WTO and expresses a desire for renewed efforts to reach agreement .
However , the motion does not reflect the key stumbling block to such an agreement , namely the failure of the US and India to reach agreement on a special safeguard mechanism to prevent dumping of products onto the Indian market to the detriment of India 's large rural / farming population .
Without such a mechanism there are fears for the very survival of the subsistence farmers in India .
The key issue of food security is not adequately addressed at the WTO and perhaps this is why ultimately the talks failed to deliver .
Any renewed effort to re-open the talks must ensure that food security concerns of members are adequately addressed .
Import surges can have a very negative and dramatic impact on local food production , and in developing countries with a large farming base import surges would be hugely damaging to efforts to develop a local agriculture / food production base .
in writing . - ( PT ) Sometimes we need to remember that India is , demographically speaking , the biggest democracy in the world .
This fact , combined with its economic vitality and its growing role in international relations - primarily within its own neighbourhood - suggests that we should rethink our relationship with this important partner .
It would clearly be a mistake to ignore the weaknesses in the Indian democracy , its economic structure or its social organisation , which is why these aspects should be at the top of the agenda in our relationship with this country .
However , this agenda must be broader and , in particular , be more in line with the new realities and circumstances .
The reinforcement of political ties and greater closeness to this giant must be regarded as strategic .
Likewise , we must be alert and ready to reinforce India 's role in the concert of nations , particularly with regard to the institutional architecture and framework .
While it is often said that the 21st century will be the century of the Pacific - a suggestion that warrants Europe 's close attention - India should be added to this prophecy and our strategies adapted accordingly .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation of the world financial system and its consequences on the European markets ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation of the world financial system and its consequences on the European markets .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are witnessing the end of an era .
The next few years will change the face of world finance as we know it .
We have to deal not only with the US crisis but with a crisis affecting the international financial system and sparing no region of the world .
For a number years , there had been criticism of the growing imbalances in the financial sector : an unreasonable exposure to risks for many players , the relative inability of financial controllers to keep in check the rapid introduction of increasingly complex financial products and , as the Commission will no doubt mention , a taste , too marked for some , for greed .
Now we are seeing the results .
The US financial sector is in turmoil and the US authorities have been forced to intervene more and more heavily to avert a full-scale crisis .
Europe and the rest of the world are experiencing fallout from this crisis at a level not known since the 1930s .
The French Presidency is convinced that the events of the past few days make a strong and united Europe even more necessary on the economic and financial stage .
We must first come up with an immediate response to the financial disruptions .
In the European Central Bank the Economic and Monetary Union has a powerful central bank that has been able to intervene promptly , resolutely and effectively when tensions have been at their highest , in close cooperation with the other major central banks .
This is a considerable asset in these turbulent times and we should praise the actions of the European Central Bank , which is ready to step in in any situation .
Faced with the worsening disruption of the last few days , the regulatory authorities in the majority of Member States have decided , like the US authorities , to issue a temporary ban on short sales .
This is an emergency measure , but it is welcome as it can help to the calm the tension on the markets .
At present , we do not envisage the type of initiative just announced by the US federal authorities for the large-scale buy-back of ' toxic ' products held by financial players , and Mr Almunia was right in what he said in this regard .
The Union 's financial system remains robust overall and there is therefore no call for this type of measure , but we must remain vigilant , and nothing can be ruled out in the name of whatever ideology .
Realism and pragmatism are the order of the day .
If necessary , we will have to address possible systemic risks using the means at our disposal .
Emergency interventions by central banks and regulators are vital , but all experts recognise that they cannot resolve the crisis by themselves .
Europeans must face up to their responsibilities and intervene in the other areas in question .
We must respond to the economic slowdown .
This was the subject of the joint European approach adopted by the Ministers of the Economy and Finance at an informal Council in Nice .
The Ministers , together with the Commission and the President of the European Central Bank , decided to leave the automatic stabilisers to operate freely as regards budgetary matters in those Member States with room for manoeuvre .
They also approved a finance plan for European SMEs , with EUR 30 billion to be provided by the European Investment Bank between now and 2011 , which will lend the sector substantial support , as , paradoxically , even though the financial crisis in Europe is less pronounced than in the US , there are just as many risks to the real economy .
A stable financial system and robust banks can be called on to restrict or to increase the cost of loans as necessary , particularly in the case of SMEs .
Direct action was required with regard to the latter .
We must also reform our financial system along two main lines : the first is prompt legislative and regulatory measures to restore the transparency of the financial system and make financial players accountable .
With this in mind , on 13 September 2008 Ministers showed their determination to speed up the implementation of the roadmap adopted in 2007 to respond to the initial signs of the financial crisis .
This roadmap sets out four key measures to address the financial turmoil : transparency , prudential rules , the valuation of assets and the functioning of the markets , including credit rating agencies .
It is now time to deliver on the supervision of credit rating agencies , the revision of banking controls and the adaptation of accounting standards , which have undoubtedly played a procyclical role in the financial arena .
This is a real priority for the French Presidency and we will discuss it at the next European Council .
The Commissioner will confirm this , but I believe that the Commission will shortly propose that the directives in force since 2006 concerning the requirements for own funds should be amended .
This is one of the measures currently under way in various areas to tackle the financial turmoil , which , of course , also include the recent recommendations drafted by the Financial Stability Forum .
I know that the Commission will able to table these proposals very quickly and we are counting on Parliament to reach an agreement with the Council at first reading , before the end of the present term , on these urgent proposals .
A proposal concerning credit agencies is also expected from the Commission in a few weeks ' time .
It will follow on from the request issued by the July 2008 Council of Finance Ministers and , in this regard too , I am counting on Parliament to reach an agreement on this ambitious proposal as quickly as possible .
I also note with satisfaction that a decision has been taken to set up a working group to examine how the prudential supervision of banks and insurance companies should take account of the cyclical nature of developments , particularly as regards capital .
Specific measures should also follow .
These are the essential components of financial sector reform and will most probably be accompanied by other initiatives , as European examination of the financial crisis progresses .
Parliament must play its full role in this examination and the Presidency notes with great interest the recent contributions the institution has made .
I am thinking , in particular , of hedge funds , which some experts say could be the next victims of the crisis .
I am also thinking , as I said earlier , of the issue of accounting standards but also that of financial sector salaries , on which we must take immediate action .
Saying , as I have heard from some European leaders , that we must continue in our laissez-faire approach and that no regulation is necessary is a mistake .
It is more than a mistake : it is an assault on the stability of the financial system ; it is an assault on reason .
I shall be plain about this : if we need to consider regulating hedge funds , then the European Union must do so .
We must think about the transparency of risks , the supervisory powers of regulators and the salaries at this type of institution .
The second basic line of approach is to strengthen financial supervision .
The Finance Ministers welcomed the agreement by the European committees of regulators on the harmonisation by 2012 of the requirements for data transmitted by European banks to the supervisory authorities .
These are the first significant results , but they must be followed by others , and the Ministers have agreed to continue their efforts to improve the coordination of the monitoring and supervision of financial players .
The Presidency is ready to work with Parliament and the Commission to strengthen the integration of supervision and prudential monitoring of groups that are increasingly cross-border in nature .
The Union requires a more effective and more integrated supervisory system in order to be better equipped to tackle financial crises .
Ladies and gentlemen , France is presiding over the Council of the European Union at a time of great disruption .
In these difficult circumstances , we are fully aware of our responsibilities .
The time has come to take important decisions with regard to the organisation of our financial system , its place within the European economy and its role , which should remain the financing of businesses and individuals .
The Union has not been idle over these last few months .
The Presidency can therefore draw on the reflections made and work carried out by the Commission in this area , as well as on the work of a number of experts , including , in France , Mr Ricol .
The October European Council provides an opportunity to set strict guidelines at European level : that is our aim .
It is clear that Europe should not act alone .
It needs to be proactive and encourage fresh international cooperation , as President Sarkozy said at the United Nations yesterday .
We also propose to hold an international meeting before the end of the year involving the G8 and their financial regulatory authorities .
Our goal is to help to produce the first principles and new joint international rules for an overhaul of the international financial system .
The European Union is showing , through an initiative of this kind , the importance it attaches to a new , balanced world governance .
The European and international response must address the short , medium and long term .
In the short term , we need emergency measures ; in the medium term , a revision of our legislation ; and in the long term , a more comprehensive examination of the role of our economic model in terms of growth and employment and the continuation of structural reforms , which remain essential .
This concludes the information I wished to provide you with today .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the series of events we have witnessed in financial markets during the last year , and in particular during the last few days , are of a magnitude that exceeds anything we have seen in our lifetime .
Many believe - and I tend to agree - that this will trigger important changes in the functioning of the international financial system .
Since the outbreak of the crisis in August 2007 , disclosed losses have totalled more than USD 500 billion , a sum equivalent to the GDP of a country like Sweden .
And , unfortunately , the final figure is considered to be larger still .
The acceleration of declared losses in the US during the last few weeks , and the subsequent decline in investor confidence , have pushed several major financial institutions to the brink of collapse .
In cases where the fall of one of these institutions would have implied a systemic risk - that is to say , put the entire financial system at risk - emergency rescue operations have been required .
Some of these rescue operations took the form of public interventions , such as those carried out by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve to avoid the bankruptcy of the world 's largest insurance company , AIG , or of the mortgage financiers Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , that together underwrite half of all mortgages in the US .
Others took the form of private takeovers , such as the purchase of the investment bank Merrill Lynch by Bank of America .
For others , like the case of investment banker Lehman Brothers or almost two dozen US regional banks , bankruptcy was the only option possible .
In short , we have witnessed an extraordinary transformation in the US banking landscape .
Consequently , we have reached the point where the US financial system is facing a substantial confidence problem .
At this juncture , according to the US authorities , a series of bail-outs is not the answer any more .
A systemic solution is urgently needed .
In the short term we all need a response that will restore confidence and stabilise markets .
The US plan announced by Secretary Paulson last week is a good initiative .
In short , the US Treasury Secretary proposes to set up a federal fund to remove from the banks ' balance sheets the illiquid assets - those mortgage-linked securities that are at the root of the problems we face .
Removing these from the system would help to remove uncertainty and refocus the market on fundamentals .
However , the details of this proposal need to be properly defined - and quickly - if it is to succeed .
I should say that we are talking about a US plan , adapted for the circumstances in the US , where - it should be recalled - the crisis originated and where the financial sector has been most severely affected .
But we all have to analyse why this has happened .
We all have to cope with the consequences and react to the present situation .
To do this , we first have to understand how we arrived at this point .
The origins of the turmoil we see today lie in the persisting global imbalances in the world economy , which created an environment of high availability of liquidity and poor assessment of risks .
The interconnection of global financial markets , the high level of leverage and the use of innovative and complex financial techniques and instruments , which were only poorly understood , caused these risks to spread across the international financial system on an unprecedented scale .
What is clear is that market participants - but also regulators and supervisors - were unable to properly understand the risks of this situation and , therefore , could not prevent the consequences that we see today .
True , in the months leading up to the crisis , the IMF , the European Central Bank and the Commission , among others , all warned of these underlying risks .
We knew the situation was unsustainable , but what we could not know , and what no one was able to predict , was how , when and just how violently the crisis would be triggered by rising defaults in the sub-prime mortgage sector .
What we are now seeing is the process of the last few years going into reverse , with the financial system grappling with the consequent need to deleverage .
Because of the exceptionally high leverage and the scale of linkages between risks , this process of unwinding is proving particularly painful .
The lack of transparency in the system and the inability of supervisors to piece together an accurate and complete picture of the situation , has led to a dramatic fall in confidence .
The financial sector has been most severely affected , as nervousness among banks has caused liquidity to dry up in the interbank lending market .
Several key credit markets remain disrupted , and recently there has been a renewed flight to quality among investors , accompanied by widening spreads between benchmark bond yields and yields on relatively risky investments .
Thanks to the swift and coordinated intervention by central banks - with a relevant role here for the ECB - we have managed to avoid a severe liquidity shortage .
Nevertheless , banks remain under pressure .
The crisis of confidence has provoked a fall in asset prices , compounding the strain on banks ' balance sheets .
Combined with the situation in the interbank market , banks face difficulties to recapitalise .
The situation we face here in Europe is less acute , and Member States do not , at this point , consider that a US-style plan is needed .
Taking a medium-term perspective , it is evident that we need a more comprehensive structural response .
The latest events in financial markets have made it clear that the current model of regulation and supervision needs to be revamped .
In the short term , we rapidly need to address the weaknesses in the current framework , and in this respect - and I fully agree with the Council position - the ECOFIN road map of regulatory actions and the recommendations of the Financial Stability Forum contain all the elements necessary .
As you know , this includes concrete initiatives on enhanced transparency for investors , markets and regulators ; revised capital requirements for banking groups , and clarification of the role of credit-rating agencies .
Work is progressing at the Commission , and the Commission will soon come forward with proposals on a revision to the Capital Requirements Directive - next week - and new legislation on credit-rating agencies , I hope , before the end of October .
But given the latest developments , it is likely that we will need to explore additional issues that have come to light .
We will continue to discuss what else should be done to better ensure financial stability and to correct the reasons underlying this crisis , and in this regard I fully share the words of welcome that the Presidency of the Council gave to your contributions .
Finally , let me turn to the impact of the financial sector crisis on the economy - on the real economy .
There can be no doubt that events in the financial sector are hurting the real economy .
These effects have been compounded by the inflationary pressures of the rising oil and other commodity prices and the severe housing-market corrections in some Member States .
This combination of shocks has impacted directly on economic activity through higher costs and negative wealth effects and , indirectly , via a sharp erosion of economic confidence .
The result has been a brake on domestic demand at a time when external demand is fading .
Leading indicators on economic activity point to a marked deceleration in the underlying growth momentum both in the EU and in the euro area .
Against this background , GDP growth for this year was revised down significantly in our last interim forecast to 1.4 % in the EU and 1.3 % in the euro area .
At the same time , for this year inflation forecasts have been revised up to 3.8 % in the EU and 3.6 % in the euro area .
Inflation could , however , be at a turning point , as the impact of past increases in energy and food prices gradually fades in the coming months .
This could possibly be reinforced by a further downward correction in oil and other commodity prices , although this remains to be seen .
Overall , the economic situation and outlook remain unusually uncertain .
Risks to the growth outlook remain on the downside , while risks to the inflation outlook are on the upside .
These uncertainties are even higher regarding economic developments next year , but we expect growth in both the EU and the euro area to remain relatively weak next year .
How should we respond to this economic slowdown ?
The best answer is to make use of all the policy instruments we have at our disposal .
Firstly , in budgetary policy , we must preserve our commitment to fiscal discipline and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact while letting the automatic stabilisers play their role .
In this regard , the reform of the pact in 2005 is proving very helpful .
Secondly , a clear commitment to implement structural reforms , as defined in the framework of the Lisbon Strategy and the national reform programmes , would be crucial to boost consumer and investor confidence in the short term and to improve the resilience and dynamism of our economies in the longer term .
Measures to strengthen competition in retail and energy markets and improve the functioning of our labour markets would be particularly valuable at this juncture .
Finally , delivering improvements in financial-market regulation and meeting the goals of the ECOFIN road map is , as I have already stressed , more urgent than ever before .
An effective and rapid solution to the difficult challenges we are facing could go a long way to restore confidence quicker than expected and limit the damage to our economies .
In each of these policy areas our actions will be more efficient and effective if we coordinate them at the euro area and European Union level .
Inevitably , we will need to overcome some resistance by Member States to agree common action , yet the consensus we reached during the last informal ECOFIN meeting in Nice should be deepened and developed .
European countries face common challenges .
We will overcome them most effectively if we work together to find common solutions .
In this respect , the Economic and Monetary Union is a formidable asset , and we should exploit the opportunities it provides to strengthen coordination , along the lines we proposed in our EMU @ 10 report and communication last May .
However , events make clear that internal European action is not sufficient to confront global challenges .
We need to reinforce common external action in the Financial Stability Forum , in the Basel Committee , in the G7 , as well as devoting more attention to the future role of the International Monetary Fund .
Looking ahead , we need to think about how we can shape the future of our financial systems and global governance , and the role of the European Union in this regard is vital .
Europe can be a driving force behind reinforcing global coordination and should take a leading role in international debates in this area , and this first requires European countries to work together and agree on internal solutions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , listening to the Commissioner 's statement just now , it felt as if I was in the wrong film .
He repeatedly emphasised that swift and rapid action is being taken .
In reality , the only thing that has moved swiftly in recent weeks , months and years is the market , which is frequently invoked in our regular debates here .
The fact is that the market regulated the problem of the investment banks very quickly on its own .
We were unable to react as swiftly .
' Swift ' is certainly not the word that we can use when we look at the Council and particularly the Commission .
We are now being kindly invited by the Americans to pay a share .
I do not wish to comment on that at this juncture .
It is enough , at this stage , to monitor developments .
However , what I expect from the Council - although when it comes to the Commission , I am not sure whether the Barroso Commission is capable of this - is to ensure , at the least , that we overcome the American and British resistance to transparency in the financial markets .
I need only remind you of the German Presidency , when President Sarkozy and Chancellor Merkel came up with an initiative and the Barroso Commission sat back and said , ' Who is Sarkozy and who is Merkel anyway ? ' and took no action .
' Swift ' is really not the word we can use .
I need only remind you of Enron and Parmalat .
At the time , the European Parliament had adopted a relevant report by Mr Katiforis - I was the shadow rapporteur - on the issue of credit rating agencies .
That was back in 2003 .
Now , in October 2008 , the Commission may well present proposals , but the IOSCO is already saying that we should not deviate from the Securities and Exchange Commission and US rules , for otherwise the international financial system will be disrupted .
Europe must go its own way here .
That is why I do not really care what the SEC is proposing , and if the Commission plans to move in the same direction as the SEC , all I can say is that it should wrap up warmly .
We must do what we think is right , and the Americans can then follow us .
That is all I have to say about rating agencies .
It has been said that we should deal with the revision of Basel II at one reading .
I hope that the Council representative is listening , as that is something that he mentioned .
We can do it at one reading , as long as the Council gives up its opposition to a European supervisory regime .
What the Council has achieved so far through its closer cooperation with the European supervisory authorities is lamentable .
Nice was based on intergovernmental cooperation .
That being the case , the Council should jump over its own shadow for once and think along European lines .
Hedge funds have also been mentioned , along with private equity .
Commissioner McCreevy told the House only this week that we must not be overhasty .
We can accuse Mr McCreevy of many things , but being overhasty is not one of them .
( Heckling and applause )
I have regularly attacked Mr McCreevy in the House on the issue of hedge funds and private equity .
We must ensure that the Commission now presents proper analyses and does not remain in a state of denial .
This is no longer Mr McCreevy 's problem ; it is now Mr Barroso 's problem .
( Applause )
I would be delighted if we were now to make it clear to the US that the SEC - the Securities and Exchange Commission - should put its own house in order for once .
Siemens is the subject of a rigorous investigation , but no one looks at the US .
I expect the Commission and the Council to enable us to set out a European policy course in this area .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we have listened very attentively to what Mr Radwan has to say .
The Bavarian election campaign casts a long shadow .
Yes , Mr Radwan , some of what you say is absolutely right .
The market has regulated it , but the US taxpayer is footing the bill .
It is the state which is paying the price .
What we are witnessing at present is not only the bankruptcy of investment banks and major insurance companies .
It is the bankruptcy of an economic philosophy which has been ' sold ' to us for years : a philosophy which claims that in a supposedly modern economy , growth and prosperity are generated through speculation , not in the real world .
That is the system that is going bankrupt now .
( Applause )
Incidentally , Mr Radwan , we have a very clear memory of the Katiforis report .
You are an astute politician , I will give you that .
You are standing for election to the Bavarian State Parliament on Sunday .
Good luck with that .
However , the person who applied the brakes to the Katiforis report was you , Mr Radwan .
That is also something that we recall very clearly .
Charlie McCreevy is not here , which is a pity .
Joaquín Almunia has presented a very sound analysis .
Commissioner Almunia , I would ask you to brief your colleague Mr McCreevy on the measures which are necessary and which we must now adopt .
I do not know where he is .
Perhaps he is back at the race track ; perhaps the betting shops at the race track are better regulated than the international financial markets .
However , one thing is clear : we expect the Commission to adopt the measures that are possible and necessary , and we expect this action by the end of the year , or by spring at the latest .
This means , for example , adopting rules for the credit rating agencies , and doing so very swiftly .
It is vital , too , to decouple City bonuses from short-term speculative profits .
That is a very important point .
If a manager knows that he himself will bank 5 % of a billion that he generates in speculative profits , because his bonus is coupled to the speculative billion , then it is only human nature that he will attempt to generate the billion in profits by whatever means , whatever the cost : even if tens of thousands of jobs are lost as a result , which is what we have seen happening all over the world in recent decades .
Without turning a hair , the financial managers - the smart young things we run into here in the corridors - are wrecking entire companies and entire business locations , with all the social ills that this entails .
The costs of this devastation are included in the 700 billion which the US taxpayers now have to invest in rescuing the major banks and insurance companies .
The amateurism of governance in the US is apparent from the fact that even in this massive crisis , it is these major corporations which are being rescued , costing ordinary taxpayers more than 700 billion dollars from the US budget .
Unfortunately , the fates of these ordinary taxpayers , their debts and mortgages do not feature in the US Government 's rescue plan .
A perfect example , once again , of how profits are privatised and losses nationalised .
That must stop as well .
( Applause )
We heard all about it in Monday 's debate .
I almost have the impression that we should be handing out membership forms for the Social Democratic Party to the PPE-DE Group : it seems that they cannot change their opinions fast enough , and the Liberals , I have to say , are even worse .
In a debate last November about the European Union 's role in globalisation , I made the following comment : ' The Wild West capitalism that dominates the financial markets is threatening entire economies , including the US economy now , and needs international rules .
We need control , transparency and restrictions on the power of the financial markets . '
In response , the leader of the ALDE said : ' Mr President , we have just heard the language of the past ' .
At least he is not present for today 's debate , which will obviously enhance its quality .
What I said , however , was not the language of the past .
Now , more than ever , control and government supervision of a deregulated market - which has no respect for anything or anyone - are the way forward .
I therefore have one thing to add , if I may .
Of course , we must act swiftly , but we also must act in the area which is closest to my heart and the hearts of my colleagues here in the European Parliament .
The speculation bubble will not burst : even if we ban short sales for the time being , they will be back .
Another thing which we are bound to see happen again is that investors will be encouraged to speculate on rising food prices , for example .
Food price rises occur when there is less food available .
That means that those who have an interest in high food prices must ensure that the supply of food is reduced .
However , food scarcity means hunger in the world , and if we have a system which makes it possible for hunger in some regions of the world to generate profits in others , our 700 billion dollar rescue package will not help us .
Sooner or later , the system , in all its perversity , will have bitter consequences for humankind as a whole .
What we are discussing here , then , is not about short-term necessity .
It is about how we can guarantee humane social development for the long term .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the global financial crisis has spread through the markets with unforeseeable consequences .
Some people may feel a sense of satisfaction at the sight of bankers falling from grace and losing their jobs .
However , this is very short-sighted , for the real losers are not the company bosses or the traders .
It is ordinary families who are hardest hit by the credit crunch and the collapse in the value of shares and savings .
It is their financial security which is shattered when the value of pensions and savings is put at risk .
That is why it is essential to undertake a precise analysis of the financial crisis and its causes to ensure that it does not happen again , and I am pleased that we are doing so today .
Martin Schulz used his speech to rail against the markets .
In light of Mr Schulz 's predictions last November , which he has kindly reminded us of , this might give him the chance to earn some extra income as an oracle .
However , it is money which drives the markets , not hot air , and he needs to recognise that fact .
The appropriate response to the current crisis is not a move away from free enterprise .
It is enterprise which creates jobs and prosperity .
Do the financial markets really need more regulation ?
Ludwig Erhard , the father of the German economic miracle , summed it up neatly .
He said that the state should establish the rules for the economy and the financial system , but like a referee , it should not involve itself in the game .
What this means , of course , is that it must take action against fouls and violations of the rules .
Regulation is appropriate and necessary in order to avoid excesses , but it is not the market economy which is to blame for the crisis ; that blame attaches to those who refuse to abide by frameworks and rules .
For years , experts have been warning against high-risk loans , unsecured credit and a bubble waiting to burst in the financial and property markets .
We need common and transparent rules for Europe as a whole , and for the world .
Yes , we need international controls , but with a sense of proportion .
It is no good to anyone if we immobilise capital movements with more rules and trigger an economic downturn .
Above all , we need to restore confidence in a free and open market .
The economic stability of Europe 's and the world 's citizens depends on whether we show ourselves to be capable of action .
However , the international markets will not stop and wait for decisions in Europe , and nor will they wait for Parliament to make its pronouncements .
Commissioner , Minister Jouyet , my group is expecting you to take rapid , rational and successful action , and to do so now .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , the President of the European Central Bank , Jean-Claude Trichet , recently said that , when the market stabilises , we will not return to business as usual , but instead we will experience a new normality .
Given the failings and weaknesses in the market and institutions that have been brought to light in devastating fashion over the last year , a move away from the abuses and faults of the past is only to be welcomed .
The financial crisis has caused terrible panic , but it has also served to emphasise the need to eliminate obscurities and to introduce transparency , and for we legislators to regulate .
But we also must avoid panic , because if we panic we will make poor decisions .
In the US , out of the scramble to avert catastrophe , radical alterations to the landscape of high finance are emerging .
Our institutions have stood steadier than those in the States - understandably as the crisis originated across the Atlantic - yet certain cases are a reminder that we are in no way invulnerable .
To ensure the stability of our markets in the future , we must implement structural and systematic reforms and be prepared to act quickly .
There may be three things that will happen or have happened already , such as reforms - for example ensuring that central banks prevent runs on banks and financial institutions - and there has been significant action in this regard already .
Secondly , treasuries must remove the reason for runs occurring in the first place , namely the presence of distressed assets in the balance sheets of financial institutions .
Lastly , it is pivotal for the financial system to be recapitalised .
We have passed the initial stages of the crisis .
The effects on banking and the political response to this initial trauma will not be known for some time .
However , we now have to face up to ensuring that the new financial reality that emerges from the other end of this crisis is a strong and healthy one .
To this end , it is necessary to address the root of the crisis and to remove distressed assets and clean up balance sheets .
To emerge from the quagmire of the crisis , it is also necessary , for both localised and global economic health , to show there is sufficient capital in the finance system .
Whether this is from public or private injection or a combination of both is another discussion , but we must have one soon .
We do not know yet what the full and lasting impact of the world 's financial crisis and its consequences on European markets will be .
However , what we do know is that , to emerge standing from this crisis and to be sure that investors , markets and citizens are protected in the new normality that will result , we must keep our heads - even in time of doubt and turmoil - and take concrete steps towards implementing structural and systematic reforms that will safeguard the health of our European system and the financial well-being of citizens of European countries and globally .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , if the main European leaders wished to illustrate the gulf separating them from European citizens , they need only react as they did to the financial crisis following the meeting of Finance Ministers on 14 September 2008 .
What are the main measures that have been announced , apart from a welcome but insufficient increase of EIB loans to small and medium-sized enterprises ?
They can be summarised in three points .
Firstly , as regards hopes for a fiscal stimulus , I quote Jean-Claude Juncker : ' We have ruled out adopting a European revival plan . '
We are going to apply the Stability Pact , the whole Pact and nothing but the Pact .
Next , with regard to the deregulation process under way , I quote Christine Lagarde : ' We must not allow any slowing-down of the structural reforms ' ; Jean-Claude Trichet : ' Anything that can be done to improve the flexibility of the economy is good enough for us ' ; and Jean-Claude Juncker : ' We must reform the labour market and the markets in goods and services .
Competitiveness needs a bigger playing field . '
Finally , the question on all our minds is who should foot the bill ?
Again , I quote Jean-Claude Trichet : ' Banking watchdogs should not have disproportionate requirements regarding credit agencies ' , and , on the other hand , according to Jean-Claude Juncker : ' Everything must be done to prevent salaries from getting out of hand ' .
We wish to tell them this : come out of your bubble and try to put yourself in other people 's position .
They see , on the one hand , finance ministers moving heaven and earth for the major global speculators - a sum of EUR 110 billion has been released by the ECB alone - and , on the other , the employees who are at risk .
In attempting to reassure the markets , you are unsettling companies .
The truth is that , in the name of the free movement of capital and the famous open market economy with its free competition , financial leaders have collectively fuelled devilish mechanisms that they can no longer control .
Let me remind you that , five months after the beginning of the subprime crisis , Mr Trichet , representing the 10 main world central banks , was still talking only of simple ' market corrections ' and announcing ' robust growth , even if there is a slight slowdown ' .
Three months later , he was urging Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to ' give the private sector a chance to rectify itself ' .
What insight !
If a system can lose its own cronies in this way , it is in the midst of an existential crisis .
This is why , if we wish to avoid further increasingly painful collapses , we must have the courage to make a break .
Firstly , we must break with the idea of productivity based on the lowering of salary costs and social expenditure .
We must reverse the continuing trend of reducing the share of salaries in added value .
That is not the source of inflation ; it is the immoral actions of financial operators .
Secondly , we must end the complete reliance on financial markets to fuel the economy , as they are not feeding but poisoning it .
The European Central Bank has a decisive role to play in directing money towards a socially effective economy , one that creates jobs , promotes training and develops public services , that ensures sustainable production and useful services , that has a place for research and development , respects public enterprises and the public interest and puts cooperation above economic warfare .
However , to achieve that , the mission of the European Central Bank must change .
It should refinance banks at very different interest rates depending on whether the loans benefit the sound economy I have just described or , on the contrary , are to be used as the basis of unsavoury financial operations .
The conditions of access to loans should be advantageous in the former case and extremely dissuasive in the second .
At the same time , rigorous controls are needed with regard to banks and funds and a tax should be introduced on financial capital movements .
Finally , work should begin on radically reforming international economic institutions , as called for recently by President Lula in his address to the United Nations .
Thirdly , there needs to be an end to the self-satisfaction and condescension of a small elite explaining to citizens that the only valid choice is its own .
If we could at least discuss all this seriously with an open mind and a sense of responsibility , then the crisis would , in one respect , have brought some benefit .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , the first news item when I switched on the car radio on my way to the airport early on Monday morning was that my bank was undergoing a serious financial crisis .
Fortunately I am just a saver so I shall not lose any money - but shareholders are in tears .
The worldwide financial crisis has reached my little bank .
The heart of the problem lies in the development of globalisation - not least the right for capital to move freely across borders .
We have seen unheard-of speculation , with no aim other than a profit for some owners .
This practice only goes to harm the real economy , just as we are seeing now , with speculation on the US housing market triggering an international financial crisis .
Therefore , there should be an end to the thinking that the free movement of capital is the way to growth and wealth .
This free movement only benefits speculators and tax evaders .
I dare say that ordinary citizens and people wishing to invest in companies and finance the purchase and sale of goods can live with controls on who moves large amounts of money across borders and for what purpose .
Controls on capital movements would give democracy greater insight and opportunity for influence .
What is the solution to the immediate crisis , then ?
A safety net funded by taxpayers is guaranteed to increase aggressive , speculative foreign policy in the financial sector and promote the worst of capitalism .
The banks themselves must clear up after crashes and crises ; it is not up to national banks and thus taxpayers to do this .
Danish financial consultant Kim Valentin suggests a rescue fund financed by the banks themselves .
It is crucial that the banks ' contribution to the new fund is large enough to give them a real interest in keeping an eye on one another and intervening when a crisis looms , as they themselves must pay to clear it up .
I propose that we use the EU to lay down tough rules on the size of banks ' rescue funds .
This would also help us fulfil the wish of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for a responsible global economic policy .
The banks must stop behaving like children who have never tried falling down and do not know that they can hurt themselves .
Madam President , I do not share the views of my colleagues who blame the Commission for their non-delivery .
I think the biggest mistake the European Commission could have made would have been to think that more regulation is always the right answer .
All proposals from the Commission should be proportionate , balanced and well-targeted .
I have been moderately content with how this Commission has responded until now , and I remain confident that the Commission has all the right tools to improve the regulatory framework for financial services .
Improvements should be based , in the first place , on existing legislation and legal bases .
In the second place , soft-law measures should be considered , and finally , if there is no improvement otherwise , then we should turn to legal , new regulations .
I think that sometimes there is a tendency to forget how much we have already done in Europe .
Since 2000 we have gone through a serious overhaul of our financial services laws , and we have updated many of the relevant regulations already .
We have a modern and sophisticated legal framework in Europe .
I think it is followed by most of the people in America already , so I do not think we need to radically change our approach .
Finally , I would like to say that it of course needs to be considered that the supervisory framework is not as good as it could be .
We should develop - based on the ECOFIN road map - the way the supervisors work in Europe , but also we should remember the global scale of things .
We should remember that the financial industry is probably the most global industry in today 's world , and we cannot act in a vacuum .
We should remember that we are living together with the outside world , and we should try to develop standards , mutual recognition and convergence with transatlantic players - because that is the way to currently open competition - and also very good rules on the protection of retail clients and the way these things go forward .
Finally , one thing about the ECB .
I think we need to thank the ECB .
The ECB did a very good job .
The consequences to the European economy , both in the financial economy and also the real economy , would have been much more severe without the very good delivery of the ECB in terms of liquidity .
I think the ECB should be congratulated for that .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Jouyet - we are sorry the minister responsible cannot be here - Commissioner , the Socialists are supporters of the market , but they know that , on any market , there are honest traders and there are thieves , meaning that a police force is needed .
It is astonishing to think that , when one tries to put in place a modern police force to deal with modern thieves , one is suddenly accused of archaism .
We need modern supervision and regulation .
There is no danger here that we will rush into adopting ill-advised and hasty legislation of the Sarbanes-Oxley kind , as it is more than a year since the crisis began .
When Mr McCreevy addressed the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 11 September 2007 , he pointed the finger at the credit agencies as the chief culprits .
More than a year later , we still have no proposal .
I do not think this can be described as better regulation .
As for the roadmap that was drawn up in October and December 2007 , I have it here and I have checked it off , point by point .
Quite frankly , first of all this roadmap was perhaps not designed for the level of crisis we are experiencing today and , secondly , when I look at how the timetable has been respected , well , it is hard to know where to start on that issue .
The French President has announced a plan : he is going to condemn those responsible and gather everyone around the table for discussions .
However , what is he going to discuss ?
Returning to the roadmap drawn up by the Financial Stability Forum and that no one can implement , because no one in Financial Stability Forum has the authority to do so ?
He proposes all this , yet his initial reaction to the crisis was to rush off to London in autumn 2007 to approve Gordon Brown 's strategy to set up an early warning system rather than strengthen Europe 's capacity to deal with the problem , which Mr Barroso is today defending in Washington .
I hope that he will be able to persuade his Commissioner , Charlie McCreevy , so that European intervention in terms of the regulation and supervision of financial markets is as vigorous as it is necessary .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( Off-microphone comment from Mr Purvis on speaking time )
I am sorry .
I interrupted Mrs Kauppi and I interrupted Mrs Berès .
I am generally fair , Mr Purvis .
Madam President , are only greed , euphoria and cheap money to be blamed for the whole mess ?
What about the flaws of the originate-and-distribute model , which has enhanced systemic risk ?
What about skewed pay schemes with a lack of ethics , which have stimulated reckless risk-taking ?
What about investment-grade values assigned to trash ?
What about conflicts of interest ?
What about banks engaging in casino-type transactions ?
What about the ' shadow ' banking sector , with its extreme leveraging and speculation ?
Why have policymakers not learnt from previous crises , though stern warnings were sent ?
Just remember what Lamfalussy , Gramlich , Volcker and Buffett said years ago .
The argument that regulation stifles financial innovation I find ludicrous .
Not all financial innovation is sound .
Is a quasi-international Ponzi scheme , as it has been developing via toxic products during the past decade , to be tolerated ?
The issue at stake is the lack of proper regulation and supervision , and a poor understanding of financial markets , of the way they function and of systemic risk .
Free markets are not synonymous with deregulated markets .
Correction is going to be very painful , especially in the United States , but Europe is not immune to economic downturn .
Solutions should not be patchy - consider that markets are global .
International coordination is needed to restore confidence .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( LV ) I think that we can use a familiar phrase to describe the situation on the financial markets : ' the party is over , and now it is the morning after . '
Somebody will pay dearly for the upset stomach , but , of course , there are some states and businesses that will profit from this extremely bad situation .
In other words , there are several energy resources and particularly developed states and businesses that shifted their extra profits in that direction , and this will clearly also change the centre and balance of political influence in the world .
In Europe , in my view , it is the small , new EU Member States that are the most vulnerable in this situation .
Mistaken structural and taxation policies at a time of high economic growth are now creating obvious economic and social threats in most of these states , including in my own , Latvia .
The large volume of domestic private loans in euros from banks in euro area states , the large proportion of non-resident money in the banking sector and the rapid increase towards the levels of European average wages expressed in euros may lead to a revaluation of national currencies .
In that case , long-term repayment to financial institutions in the euro area may become a new burden for the citizens and businesses of those Member States .
If a national currency 's exchange corridor is widened with respect to the euro , then inflation , which is already high , may gain ground and further postpone the entry of the new Member States into the euro area .
If the total amount of private loans in payments to the bank adds up to a two-figure percentage of GDP , then the citizens of those states will not be optimistic .
This will instead create pronounced political pessimism and will impact on public opinion regarding the European Union as an institution , with all the attendant consequences for Parliament , too , in political terms in the new Member States .
Madam President , the financial crisis rages on and euro-zone countries are facing recession .
The answer , we are repeatedly told , is that we need more regulation to make the financial sector work better .
But we have a problem now , and changing the rules after the problem has arisen is not going to help us with that problem .
I urge Members to consider a completely different reaction to the current economic difficulties .
They are a signal that we cannot continue as we are and that , thanks to borrowing that has been too cheap and imports that have been too cheap , we have all been living above our means and we cannot go on consuming at the same rate .
Adjustment will be painful , but it is necessary , and in these hard times there is another message that is even more salient but will not be heard in these institutions .
It is that the EU cannot continue with its massive legislative programmes in the name of health and safety , consumer protection , social equality , for instance , for the overriding effect of all these schemes is to add costs and to crush the productive activity on which our very prosperity depends .
In these hard times , the one message that should be heard is that European countries can no longer afford the European Union , its institutions and its immense outpourings of legislation .
( ES ) Mr President , I will try to be very clear , given the wide variety of opinions expressed from my bench .
Firstly , the current crisis is not a biblical curse or a punishment from the gods .
The markets have failed and these failures have prompted interventions which would have delighted Keynes himself .
If the markets have failed , then we must correct what has failed in the markets ; in other words , we must do something .
This something involves various things .
Firstly , we must administer a shock treatment to bring the patient out of his current coma .
I would remind the Commission and the Council that , while the liquidity problems can be solved by the European Central Bank , the solvency problems are something which directly affects you : the Council , the Commission and the Member States .
Secondly , to stop this happening again , we need to know what has failed in the markets and what principles we should re-establish .
There has been a failure in the management of risk , in governance and , finally , in ethics .
This means that we must re-establish some basic principles : transparency in products , in companies and in markets ; responsibility of managers ; confidence between the financial economy and the real economy , and the central role of politics .
I agree with the Council that the times of total deregulation are over .
Neither the markets nor industry can self-regulate .
The final prescription - which is needed to vaccinate the patient and ensure that this does not happen again or in any other way - is that we must continue with market integration .
We have to achieve a sufficiently critical dimension , as they have done in the United States .
We have to establish a democracy of the euro so that our currency can have some influence in the world in a crisis that is global .
Finally , we have to review the regulatory framework and the supervisory framework which are what have failed .
I therefore do not agree with soft legislation , with codes of conduct or with self-regulation .
It is up to us all to offer a response to our people who are , after all , the ones who will ultimately pay the price .
( PT ) In one minute , what conclusions can I draw on the current crisis ?
It is the result of choosing not to adequately supervise the activities of the financial markets .
Competent regulation does not kill markets but , on the contrary , is essential for their survival .
There are people who are responsible for the losses , but there are now also citizens who are paying the price for their excesses and for the failures in public supervision .
Warnings were given some time ago .
The Rasmussen report , which this Parliament adopted yesterday by a very large majority , makes specific proposals on the risks of excessive leverage , lack of transparency and conflicts of interest , but this report stems from work begun by the Socialist Group years before the crisis began in 2007 .
The own-initiative report by Ieke van den Burg and Daniel Dăianu takes the same line .
The European Union is a major partner in the international context and I congratulate Commissioner Almunia on his announcements today ; but will Commissioner McCreevy agree with these ?
The paralysis affecting the Commission in relation to these matters has no possible justification .
Parliament is doing what it should .
The other institutions should also act accordingly .
Mr President , it is a pity that Mr Schulz has already left .
I wanted to make the point that it is too early to say who will go bankrupt , because nobody knows who the end-investors in the toxic assets are .
Maybe they are state-owned banks .
Nevertheless , I would like to encourage a broader view of events and to recall that Parliament , as early as the beginning of this year , put forward some valid proposals which were not accepted by the Council and the Commission .
Firstly , we asked for economic management at EU level to be brought into line with global developments and for the broad economic guidelines to be updated .
We also suggested ensuring vigorous enforcement of EU competition rules and not allowing the crowding-out of small and medium-sized business from the market , or the creation of monsters which are too big to fall .
We have to promote and preserve our national , traditional business culture because the slogan of the European Union is ' in diversity we are united ' .
Mr President , let us hope that the American proposals for purchases of toxic assets do work , because , if they do not , the contagion will almost certainly spread over here .
I would like assurance from Mr Jouyet and Mr Almunia that we really do have our defences in place .
Do we have our lenders of last resort ready to meet the very worst which might occur in such a circumstance ?
We are moving from a liquidity problem to a solvency problem .
It is true that , in due course , we will have to review our regulatory defences , but this cannot and should not be done precipitately , in the heat of the crisis .
We would risk overreacting , imposing unnecessary , wrongly directed , over-draconian conditions which would only harm the prospects for investment in our economies and jobs for the future .
The most vital thing , which we must bring about immediately , is the restoration of confidence .
Mr Almunia , you mentioned the word several times .
Let us see how we can set about it .
I would urge that the leaders of the world 's most important economies of America , Europe , the Middle and Far East meet together within days and assure the world unequivocally that whatever is necessary to douse the flames will be provided unequivocally wherever those flames may erupt .
Only when the flames and embers are extinguished can we turn to post-mortems as to how this happened and what is needed to avoid it happening again .
Confidence is the vital base on which a vibrant financial system and a vibrant global economy rests .
It is now up to the political leaders of the highest level - a summit indeed - of the free-market economies to come together - no excuses , no holding back , no arguments - to take full responsibility for restoring confidence .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson called the past few weeks a ' humbling ' time for the United States as he unveiled his rescue package of up to 700 billion dollars for the country 's crippled financial sector .
The situation in the US is indeed alarming .
The US financial system with its investment banks , hedge funds and structured products , which are not subject to normal banking supervision , and its numerous business operations conducted through single-purpose companies which do not appear in any balance sheet , has virtually collapsed .
It is unlikely to be resurrected very quickly in its original form .
The last two pure investment banks - Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley - have now switched to the commercial banking sector .
The promise of cheap money for everyone to fuel ever more growth , profits and liquidity has been revealed as an illusion : this type of perpetual motion simply does not exist .
A debt-fuelled high standard of living for everyone with a car , house and everything else early on in life simply cannot be maintained over the long term .
The real economy has caught up with us : without employment , there can be no savings , without savings , there is no investment , and without investment , there is no sustainable growth .
We Europeans should learn from the US disaster .
There is no alternative to budget consolidation .
Money does not grow on trees .
A plentiful supply of cheap money , which is what the Socialists are always demanding from the ECB , will not solve the problem ; it will simply make it worse .
The Commission should implement the proposals which have the European Parliament 's support as regards securitisation , maintenance of structured products on the initiators ' books , more supervision , a code of conduct for market participants and various other measures as swiftly as possible , albeit with a sense of proportion and diligence .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Jouyet , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Jouyet for being available and for the great competence he displays in all areas .
Europe cannot go on periodically suffering the consequences of crises that are rooted in American capitalism .
This has been made quite clear by previous speakers .
This position is not one of hostility towards the United States .
It stems from an obvious fact : the crisis is the result of serious malfunctioning which requires vigorous remedies .
Self-regulation is not enough .
Today , however , the crisis is global .
Mr Jouyet said earlier that we needed new measures - legislation and regulation - and to assess the balance sheets and solvency of banks , the sovereign wealth funds , salaries , transparency , supervision and accounting standards .
All of this should be built upon and improved .
It has also been said many times that we need to restore confidence in the financial system , which is an integral part of economic life .
I disagree with the criticism that has been voiced and believe that , in this regard , the French Presidency has been quick to react .
The proposals put forward by President Sarkozy , speaking on behalf of the European Union , gave a strong signal in New York and the extended G8 meeting he has proposed will allow the world 's various economic players to come together round the table , which is truly a significant step .
In order to come up with global rules , we cannot simply settle matters in Europe .
Of course , there needs to be progress in Europe and , in this respect , it is unfortunate that there has been some slowness to act .
However , rules also need to be adopted internationally .
The economy is global , meaning that the rules must also be global .
There is a great deal of work ahead of us and I am confident that the measures Mr Jouyet announced earlier will ensure that , over the coming weeks and months , possible solutions are found .
It would be foolish to think that these matters can be resolved in a few minutes .
( DE ) Mr President , over the last few days , we have seen great turbulence in the US financial system , and that is putting it mildly .
One of the major news items was that the company Lehman Brothers Holdings was forced to file for bankruptcy protection from creditors .
I would like to make two points in this context .
Firstly , the US is planning a massive support package .
However , this will not end the crisis or protect us from further surprises as events continue to unfold .
Secondly , yes , it is necessary to determine which regulatory mechanisms could be improved and where more transparency could be created .
Unfortunately , though , more and better regulation will not rule out all the unpleasant surprises that might occur in the financial markets in future , because we are not familiar with all the existing banking mechanisms .
Why do I say that ?
Let me give you an example .
Surprises can arise , for example , in the netting agreements between banks , which are very important in minimising risk .
Of course , banks can only take netting agreements into account in risk assessment if these agreements are enforceable in law .
Could better rules in future rule out any uncertainty about the validity of netting agreements ?
I do not think so .
In my view , therefore , even sound and reliable regulations will not rule out unpleasant surprises in future .
( PT ) Mr President , the current financial crisis , which in the short term will be economic and cannot fail to be social , perhaps also political , could have been anticipated because it was predictable .
It is a shame that ultraliberal dogmatism and the economy of financial speculation , the so-called ' economy of the devil ' , have taken the upper hand over social concerns and the economy of entrepreneurial spirit and action , which is the only economy capable of generating wealth and serving the citizens .
Regulation has failed , as Commissioner Almunia stated .
It has failed and must now be radically overhauled , after being punished .
The crisis in the world 's financial system is structural , as Commissioner Almunia also stated .
As a result , merely using the political instruments at our disposal today is not enough .
The attitude of the European Central Bank , which is insisting on applying remedies that the current disease is rejecting , the blindly optimistic autism of certain members of the Ecofin Council , who just 15 days ago expressed surprised at the dimensions of the crisis , and the attitude of Commissioner McCreevy , who is proposing changing something so that everything stays the same , are unacceptable .
The Commission now has a responsibility to use all its instruments and to put pressure on the Member States to create new instruments .
This responsibility particularly involves paying heed to the correct and ambitious recommendations made by the European Parliament following the Rasmussen report .
( RO ) They say that you can run , but you can 't hide from globalization .
The same holds for global financial markets .
While there was profit all around the world , there was normalcy ; now that losses occur , it is the fault of capitalism .
In our opinion , the blame rests to a great extent with the state which has forgotten about one of its main infrastructures , the financial one , which is just as important as roads , railways and airlines .
What the United States and the European Union , as well as Member States , are trying to do now , is to lay the foundations for a new infrastructure : the global financial infrastructure .
Unfortunately , state intervention comes rather late .
This is not a new regulation , but a fluidization , a supervision of global financial flows , and all the states should take part in it , thus enabling the financial system to regain credibility .
Mr President , on Monday we were told by Commissioner McCreevy that hedge funds and private equity were not the cause of the current turmoil .
In today 's Guardian it was reported that the billionaire John Paulson was revealed yesterday as one of the hedge fund bosses who has been short-selling UK bank shares , placing a nearly GBP 1 billion bet that their shares would fall dramatically .
His New York-based Paulson & Co was last year 's most successful hedge fund after it bet against the sub-prime mortgages that later turned toxic in the credit crunch .
Paulson & Co has placed bets on four high street banks , including HBOS , which was forced to agree a rescue takeover by Lloyds TSB last week after a precipitous collapse in its shares .
If Commissioner McCreevy is not prepared to regulate all financial institutions , then he should be forced to step aside .
The Commission has a responsibility to ensure that these institutions are not allowed to pick the pockets of pension funds , of savings and of jobs .
They have to be stopped and the only way to do it is to bring transparency and regulation into this area .
The so-called ' invisible hand ' of the market is in fact a pickpocket and the more invisible it is , the more pockets it picks .
I think that Mr De Rossa is proposing that Commissioner McCreevy be offered a subscription to The Guardian .
The President 's office will look into it .
( SV ) Mr President , we have every reason to react to unreasonable compensation and bonus schemes .
I think that we all do that and it is entirely understandable , but I will say nevertheless , having listened to the debate , that strident political rhetoric is not the way to resolve global financial crises .
Do not sound as though you are throwing the baby out with the bathwater and adding to the panic which raged on in the financial markets last week .
That must not happen in this House .
We must be reasonable , we must be sensible .
That is the responsibility we have been given by our voters .
My friends , we must take a balanced view , we must create good and effective rules and laws which allow scope for growth and self-regulation .
I worry when I hear this strident rhetoric .
It makes me anxious , and I fear that it will lead to an overregulated financial community which will not be able to deliver the growth we all need so much .
It is growth and the prospect of creating more jobs which our voters are looking for .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened in amazement to the views of the socialists and communists , who tell us that it is the failure of the system .
They obviously have a short memory , they who , in the 20th century , bankrupted every economy in their hands .
The problem is global and the solution must therefore be European .
Regarding the financial question , Commissioner , I would like to know whether or not you are going to implement Article 105 ( 6 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , under which the Council may , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission , confer on the European Central Bank a task relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions .
I believe that , today , citizens consider that is time for us to monitor the arrangements in place for the prudential supervision of financial systems .
We cannot build an internal market without a European regulation policy .
Mr President , this crisis has demonstrated that the global financial system is seriously flawed .
First the supervisory agencies failed to prevent irresponsible behaviour by investors .
We have seen the development of new financial instruments that are , however , not transparent enough and do not allow for proper risk assessment .
Secondly , owners and shareholders of financial institutions failed to supervise properly their own managers , who paid themselves exorbitant salaries and bonuses , and for what ?
For driving their companies into bankruptcy !
We need urgent action at least in these two areas .
We do not want a repetition of the American meltdown scenario in Europe .
We do not want in Europe a situation in which chief executive officers of financial companies go away with tens of millions of dollars while taxpayers are left to pay their bills .
We expect the Commission to take serious action on this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank Members for this exciting debate .
We could stay here for hours , as the subject is certainly worthy of a great deal of discussion and the thoughts they have shared have been fascinating .
Unfortunately , however , our time is limited .
I shall draw the following conclusions .
Firstly , as regards the laissez-faire approach and the lack of regulation , bearing in mind the reserve that comes with my job , I think I have expressed myself quite clearly .
It is my opinion that we must move beyond the regulation / no regulation debate .
Financial deregulation is now an outdated notion .
Strong , modern financial regulation will be the solution from now on .
It must be adapted ; we must go beyond what has been done so far .
This is the first point I wish to make and , on this , I am extremely clear .
I also listened carefully to what Mrs Koch-Mehrin was saying and I repeat what she said , namely that regulation is not the enemy of the market .
Everyone must face up to their responsibilities .
It is the job of the public authorities to regulate and to adapt the rules in force , because the stability of the system , the protection of individual savers and the protection of depositors are at stake .
I would also say to Mr Wurtz : it is also employment and growth , which have a direct impact on the real economy , that are threatened by this crisis .
That is why we must act , including for the least wealthy , and quickly .
My second belief is that Europe must act within a framework of enhanced international cooperation .
There is no alternative .
As has been said , Europe must make its voice heard , otherwise we will be subjected to the effects of US solutions .
It has already happened with Sarbanes-Oxley .
We saw the consequences that had for some European companies ; we saw the effect it had on accounting and market standards .
We can begin as of now .
The only advantage we have is that , today , Europe can , as Mr Almunia and President Sarkozy have both stressed , assert itself firmly , make its voice heard on the international stage , take the reins and get a head start .
I call on Europeans to coordinate themselves so that the Union has a strong presence on the international stage , and to reflect upon international financial structures and on international regulatory authorities .
Because if no international measures are adopted , we cannot complain about having no alternative but to draw on sovereign funds , which , moreover , we wish to keep .
I am not passing judgment , but there needs to be a certain consistency in this respect .
We need to know what we want to do and that if Europe fails to act , we will have to rely on other funds to stabilise the financial system .
My third belief is one that has been mentioned by several speakers , including Mr Schulz .
It is true that we must address the issue of salaries and the problem of profits linked to cyclical market activities .
The issue of market operators ' salaries should also be seen in the context of this international reflection .
I am not the first to say so .
Gordon Brown has also said so in the past .
It seems logical to me , and in-depth thought must be given to this issue .
It is clear that this is not just an economic and financial crisis , but also one of ethics and responsibility .
It is a crisis of economic ethics and concerns all actors and political leaders , whatever their leanings .
As Mr Wurtz and other speakers have stressed , finance must continue to serve the economy ; the economy must not be the victim of finance .
As I have said , thought must be given to the role of financial institutions and to the roadmap concluded by the Finance Ministers on the basis of Commission proposals .
Let us talk about specific progress .
To Mrs Berès , I say that we must go further and , with regard to the timetable , act quickly .
I repeat what Mr Almunia said : the Commission must act quickly because it is a question of restoring confidence , and I wish to conclude on this point .
Even if Europe is less affected , it is still important for us to send out messages of confidence .
This means action , international cooperation , not being afraid to adapt rules , acting quickly and having proposals on the table ready for the European Council on 15 October , applying the suggestions made by Parliament and , as has been said , being aware of the fact that we are dealing with transactions that affect not only the liquidity but also the solvency of the entire financial system .
It is now economic confidence that will kickstart growth and that is why we must cast aside dogmatism to take firm action and use the full range of tools at our disposal .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The US financial system has been jolted in the last few days as Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy and Merrill Lynch , fearing a similar-type collapse , agreed to be taken over by the Bank of America .
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 4.4 % on 15 September , and another 4.1 % two days later .
The decline in stock prices worldwide on 15-17 September resulted in about USD 3.6 trillion in losses for the investors .
The stock of AIG has plunged more than 90 % , from USD 72 last year to USD 2.05 .
The U.S. government took control of AIG with an USD 85 billion bailout on 16 September .
These ' developments ' point to the largest financial crisis facing the US since the opening of the Great Depression .
They have occurred a week after the US federal government seized control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the giant mortgage companies .
The problem is that Lehman Brothers and AIG owe many billions to creditors not only in the United States but in Europe as well .
Is Europe prepared to absorb the shock induced by its indissoluble link with the US market ?
Is the EUR 36.3 billion injected into the market by the ECB and Bank of England enough to make the danger disappear ?
in writing . - ( PL ) I should like to draw the attention of the House to the following issues .
1 .
The US Government and the Federal Reserve have so far allocated a sum close to USD 1 trillion to combating the effects of the financial crisis .
The so-called Paulson package contains additional proposals estimated to cost a further USD 700-800 billion .
This suggests that the current crisis is comparable to the great crash of 1929 .
2 .
In addition , the ECB made available around USD 750 billion to improve liquidity , whilst the Bank of England released approximately USD 80 billion .
These moves provide further confirmation of just how serious the situation of Europe 's financial markets is deemed to be .
3 .
All the measures mentioned indicate that strong and decisive government intervention is back in favour .
Even the most liberal economists recognise the need to introduce rules to stem the crisis , and are actually prepared to accept the involvement of governments and international financial institutions in these processes .
4 .
The scale and extent of this crisis will impact negatively on the course of transactions in the real economy .
This will result in recession in the US economy , which means negative economic growth .
It will also mean a slowdown of economic growth in Europe .
5 .
In view of this situation , it is imperative for all countries to strengthen institutions providing financial supervision .
This is particularly true of the EU .
These institutions need to be able to exercise stronger supervision of the activities of the major banks , investment funds and insurance bodies .
Stronger supervision is the only way to improve financial security and ensure financial stability in the future .
( FI ) Now we know that the state is needed as a guarantor of capitalism financially and not just militarily .
The Government in the United States of America , that fatherland of predatory capitalism , has privatised the profits from speculation and is now socialising the biggest losses to the trash bank through speculation in the history of its economy .
Raubtier ( predator ) is the German name for that type of capitalism that is based on another word Raubgier ( rapacity ) , which is close to Raub ( robbery ) .
Both are better .
Savers who have prepared for rainy days everywhere in the world will be robbed of the value of some of their savings in the years to come when , as a result of the events of last week , the world economy is inflated and / or we go into economic decline .
It is hard to imagine how the United States could otherwise pay the enormous debts it is only now incurring and how , in a time of inflation , the weakening of the value of money , it will respond to its own worsening ability to pay off its debts and normalise its overpriced assets .
The time bombs permitted by the American Government and made by the market terrorist banks of predator capitalism there , based as they are on swap deals , the virtual packaging of financial products , the insolvency of customers who are not creditworthy , and bogus loan insurance policies , have exploded in the face of the taxpayers ; and the rest of the world is paying the price .
Getting a grip on energy prices ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Hannes Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group - B6-0460 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Commission on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Hannes Swoboda , on behalf of the PSE Group - B6-0461 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Council on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Giles Chichester , Anne Laperrouze , Sophia in ' t Veld and Eugenijus Maldeikis , on behalf of the PPE-DE , ALDE and UEN Groups - B6-0463 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Commission on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Giles Chichester , Anne Laperrouze , Sophia in ' t Veld and Eugenijus Maldeikis , on behalf of the PPE-DE , ALDE and UEN Groups - B6-0465 / 2008 )
the oral question to the Commission on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Rebecca Harms and Claude Turmes , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group - B6-0466 / 2008 ) ,
the oral question to the Council on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Esko Seppänen and Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group - B6-0468 / 2008 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on Getting a grip on energy prices , by Esko Seppänen and Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group - B6-0469 / 2008 ) .
author . - Mr President , I am sorry the Socialists have chosen to vent their old prejudices about profits and social issues in what is , essentially , an economic and industrial question .
Clearly , oil price rises are serious for the real economy - especially any volatility or instability in those prices - but let us remember the lessons that we learned from the 1970s .
Those lessons include the fact that higher prices will encourage more exploration and the development of resources .
They will discourage excessive consumption , and they will drive efficiency .
I submit the issue of fuel poverty is an important one , but it should be tackled via social security measures and not through market distortions such as seeking to cap prices .
Let us also remember that prices can come down as well as rise , and that markets always tend to overshoot before settling down at a realistic level .
Establishing a truly competitive market is an essential prerequisite for pursuing other policy objectives .
This prices issue underlines the fundamentals of EU energy policy and the EU energy situation - the three pillars , namely : the essential need for truly competitive markets - markets which will deliver the lowest prices and the most efficient services ; the security of supply issues in our dependence on imported fuels ; and the convergence of sustainability objectives with the other two elements of our policy .
Let us beware throwing out the baby with the bathwater because we are concerned about price rises last summer and forget that prices come down as well as go up .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Mr Chichester , of course the prices can go down as well as up , but I think almost all of us here would agree that given the scarce energy resources and their limited availability , and the growing competition worldwide over access to , and shares in , these resources , it is likely that prices will remain very high over the long term .
Current developments and the problem of energy poverty demonstrate that we have not yet responded adequately to this situation .
In my view , the acute social problems related to high energy prices must always be tackled through social policy , but we also have to ensure in structural terms that our societies are no longer wasteful of energy resources .
Mr Piebalgs will undoubtedly have something to say about this , as he showed such commitment to this issue at the start of his term in office .
The goals of energy saving and energy efficiency must be pursued much more consistently than has been the case so far .
We have often said that we should build a different type of house , and that we need different types of heating and cooling systems and more efficient electrical appliances , but where is the large-scale concerted action that we need to harness the major potential available to us in relation to energy efficiency and energy saving ?
If there is an area where we need some kind of European master plan or national plans , it is here .
In my view , the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Fund and European Investment Bank programmes etc. should be utilised in a joined-up way in order to pursue seriously the objectives that you , Mr Piebalgs , repeatedly proposed three years ago .
If we look at the current debate about oil prices , for example , and see what has been proposed in this House in order to apply the brakes to the Commission , which after all wanted to make cars more energy-efficient , the question we should be asking ourselves is whether the idea that prices will remain high for the long term is actually being taken seriously .
Commissioner , I would like to encourage you to place your earlier proposals on energy efficiency and energy saving at the heart of the Strategic Energy Review , because this will be the area which will determine whether we do the right thing for our societies or not , and whether we serve their needs at times of permanently high prices .

author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Borloo , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the increase in energy prices is having all kinds of negative effects , the most obvious being the rise in the cost of living for our fellow citizens .
This again illustrates just how reliant we are on energy .
Various actions are needed if we are to reduce energy price fluctuations and , more especially , drive down prices .
I have three proposals to make in this regard .
The first course of action concerns the economic management of energy prices .
This is something that has to be done right away , in other words the Member States need to develop financial mechanisms whereby the factor of rising prices can be deleted from company budgets and from household budgets too .
They also have to promote social measures aimed at combating energy poverty in low-income households .
The second line of attack is to work on the prices being charged for imported energy .
What are you proposing that will enable the European Union to speak with one voice when dealing with the producer countries - and people are always talking about ' speaking with one voice ' - so that all these neighbourhood policies and partnership agreements can at last take proper account of the energy dimension ?
Allow me , perhaps naively , to put forward a solution that might help ease relations in our negotiations with Russia .
Why not interconnect the Nabucco gas pipeline operation with the South Stream project ?
Perhaps this would help calm things down a bit .
The third course of action is to reduce imports , or even stop them completely , which would be the ideal solution .
To achieve this we need to break the symbiotic link between increasing growth and increasing energy consumption .
It is really important that growth should not automatically generate a proportionate rise in energy consumption .
Of course we need to develop renewable and low-CO2 forms of energy , and the report presented by our colleague Mr Turmes is a step in this direction .
Being efficient in energy also means saving energy , which is something we are not doing sufficiently at present .
The texts that will be tabled here are therefore well overdue .
We need to focus on physical and technological energy storage capacities and indeed on those elements that are acting as vehicles for energy consumption .
Could you tell us , Mr Borloo , if you have high hopes of the energy-climate package being adopted at any time in the weeks ahead ?
What would need to happen before an ambitious package of measures is put in place to meet these various objectives ?
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the compromise resolution the significance of speculation in the rise in the cost of energy is excluded from energy prices .
Virtual oil is , however , being sold on the derivatives markets for six times more than physical oil .
The price of electricity is also tied to the securities market : virtual electricity is being sold on the energy markets for more than physical electricity , and on the European Energy Exchange it costs five times more .
There is massive evidence of fraud in the OTC derivatives market , which is unregulated and not monitored by the stock exchanges themselves .
The harmonisation of electricity will result in automatic windfall profits for big companies , and by 2013 emissions trading will increase the scope for speculation many times over .
In the energy derivatives markets , consumers are being forced to pay the price of speculation , the same way they did in the subprime mortgage market in the United States : the profits were privatised and the losses are being socialised .
Capitalism is a casino where the price of energy is raffled in the stock exchanges .
Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after having listened to the various questions that practically everyone seems to be asking , allow me to make a few remarks of my own .
The first concerns the erratic way in which prices have been changing : at one point USD 10 , then 140 a short time ago , now it is back to 100 .
In fact there seems to be a disconnection between the way the product itself is appreciating and the financial market that is based on that very same commodity .
However , in the long term , it seems to me to be fairly clear that speculators will always be active as long as it is our perception that global energy needs - which continue to grow - are not based on a new energy mix that is less reliant on hydrocarbons .
Moreover , I note that in Jeddah at the end of June , where Commissioner Piebalgs and I attended a gathering of all the producer and consumer countries , the common message was absolutely clear .
The expectations were unmistakable : the main consumer countries have to indicate their clear intentions to modify their energy mix , implement energy efficiency measures and become less reliant on hydrocarbons .
The producers themselves are all for this .
I think that this is what the forthcoming climate-energy package is all about and I believe that Europe 's 500 million consumers are saying : let us have more locally produced energy , more self-sufficient energy , and let us have a more direct link between producers and consumers .
That said , in the very short term it is obvious that there are various regulatory problems to be solved , including access to information on commercial stocks , and this does not just mean strategic stocks .
The United States does it , Japan does it .
The Commission has been asked to think about this .
I believe that by the end of October or early November the Commission will be putting forward a proposal aimed at providing greater transparency in this area in the very short term .
However , a proper strategy for energy self-sufficiency and a different energy mix still represent the most effective response in the medium and long term .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think these are very timely questions and this is a very important debate .
The Commission is now finalising the second Strategic Energy Review , which is also based on the debates in this House .
I expect that this second Strategic Energy Review will be adopted in November , and it will particularly cover the issues that we have been addressing today .
Definitely there is a limit to what we can propose in the strategic energy review due to the Lisbon Treaty ratification , because there is an energy article that would give much more opportunity to streamline the response .
But still we can do quite a lot .
The Commission shares the opinion that oil prices are likely to remain high in the medium and long term .
The justification for this type of prognosis is volatility in daily markets .
Even if now , the oil price is USD 106 or USD 110 per barrel , which is much lower than it was some time ago , at USD 145 , the daily volatility still makes the situation relatively difficult to predict , and it is definitely making a major , wide-ranging impact and deserves a response .
While there is clearly a need for short-term action by Member States to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable households , the main policy response should aim at facilitating our transition towards clearly more sustainable ways of producing and consuming energy .
In other words , to pursue our aim of becoming a low-carbon and energy-efficient economy .
In order to do so it will be vital to take forward the Commission 's proposals on climate and energy policy , following up on the political commitments of the European Council .
On the structural reforms .
It is important to underline that we are facing an energy price increase , not only for oil : it also goes for coal , it also goes for gas and , as a result , it also has an impact on electricity prices .
Links between these prices are related by pricing structure : for example , gas contracts often use oil price benchmarks ; gas-fired electricity generation is increasingly marginal and thus price-setting .
So I think it is very important to address not only issues about oil prices but all the sectors .
The situation clearly reinforces the need for encouraging competition throughout the whole energy sector .
That is why , again , I would like to underline the importance of swiftly reaching an agreement on the third internal energy market package .
Europe can and must develop its own strengths to deal with the fast-changing global energy economy .
A well-functioning , fully interconnected and competitive EU-wide internal market is a response .
This will diminish European vulnerability to energy-supply disruption and facilitate our cooperation with energy producer and transit countries .
Solidarity between Member States in crises will be enabled by European networks .
On European energy oil stocks , we have now prepared legislation that will clearly address two things : one , that these oil stocks will be always available at moments of crisis and can be easily used ; and second , it is issues of precedence addressed , it is transparency and reporting on a weekly basis on commercial stocks .
In this respect , even though we are not the biggest oil consumer in the world , we are able to influence transparency in the market and diminish volatility and the level of speculation in the market .
Speculation is definitely an issue .
We have done an analysis .
The available evidence suggests that supply and demand are the main drivers of oil prices , and that these fundamentals are set to underpin high prices in the future .
But , at the same time , we will continue our work on analysing what impact speculation has at a particular moment and whether there is really the ability to diminish volatility and have more supervision in the energy market .
In any case , it is very clear that transparency in oil markets , both in terms of contracts and related financial instruments and fundamentals , is a must .
I would also like to say that both Commission and national competition authorities are acting against anti-competitive behaviour .
This is a way in which we can pass the changes in oil prices to the consumers , because consumers use refined products .
The Commission will make additional efforts in this respect - we are following this issue - and a lot of competition authorities in member countries have already started investigations into the issue of how soon and how fast the oil price changes are being passed to the consumers .
At the same time it is very clear that there are differences between different member countries , because there are different sourcing strategies for the companies concerned .
Also , in some countries there are biofuel blends that also influence the velocity of the possibility to change prices according to the oil price .
Nevertheless , it should be very clearly in the focus of attention in all anti-trust authorities .
Energy efficiency , renewables and diversification : it is very clear that our main lines are in our energy and climate policy , and it will be prominent in our Strategic Energy Review .
There is already a substantial European legal framework in place .
In addition , there are many actions being pursued under the current Energy Efficiency Action Plan , including also legislative initiatives and studies .
And there are also support actions , for example under the Intelligent Energy Europe programme .
Regarding existing EU legislation , it is implementation that is very essential .
The ambitious 2020 target for energy savings cannot be met without adequate transposition by Member States .
The Commission is vigorously pursuing infringement procedures to ensure that member countries are really implementing their existing EU legisaltion .
This year the Commission also will adopt an energy efficiency package .
This will include a communication with a comprehensive overview of the Commission 's ambitions for energy effciency , as well as legislative and policy initiatives - in particular , prominent proposals for an ambitious recast of the Directive on the energy performance of buildings ; also for a modification of the Energy Labelling Directive , to ensure more effective and dynamic labelling .
Needless to say , continued high energy prices further support the need for action in this area .
And also we get clear involvement of the European Investment Bank in this area .
The European Council , when analysing the appropriate responses to the high oil price situation , underlines the importance of a sustainable and adequate tax framework .
There is considerable scope for the EU and its Member States to make more systematic and effective use of taxation to encourage energy savings .
The Commission intends to present proposals and recommendations on the cost-effective use of taxation and specific tax incentives , including reduced VAT , to promote the demand and supply of energy-efficient goods and services .
Furthermore , in its review of the Energy Tax Directive , the Commission will look at how it can better support the EU 's energy and climate policy , encouraging energy efficiency and emission reductions .
More widespread and systematic use of road pricing , in line with the principles of the Commission 's ' Greening Transport ' Communication , would also encourage a shift to more energy-efficient transparency rules .
On financing alternative energy technologies and research , let me draw your attention to the fact that we are in the process of preparing a communication on financing low-carbon technologies as a follow-up to the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
The Communication will analyse the resource needs for long-term research and development , large-scale demonstration projects and the early-stage commercialisation phase .
We are considering measures that best use public investment to leverage additional private investment , such as the creation of a specific facility for large-scale demonstration projects .
This could be built on existing instruments such as the Risk Sharing Financing Facility , a joint initiative of the Commission and the European Investment Bank .
The Commission also encourages Member States to use national resources , for example potential resources that could be raised through the auctioning of CO2 allowances in the revised ETS schemes .
On energy security and foreign policy aspects , I come back to the idea that Europe can and must reinforce its own strengths to deal with the fast-changing global energy economy .
Internal and external policy in energy work together .
The stronger a common European energy market is , the stronger it will be towards external energy suppliers .
We are pursuing diversification with countries like Azerbaijan , Turkmenistan , Egypt , Iraq , Nigeria , but it is clear that we also encourage predictable relations with current suppliers like Russia , and definitely we are looking very much at the possibility that Norway could increase supply to the market , because it is very clear that the EU market is attractive for suppliers , and we should not be afraid that we will run out of gas , but we should really work for competitive supplies to the European market and not be in a situation where we could be blackmailed on prices .
Regarding the issue of assistance to oil-importing developing countries .
Given the strong impact of access and price of energy on development and global climate change , energy cooperation is increasingly important throughout our development assistance activities .
It was a central theme of my joint visit with Commissioner Michel to the African Union and a number of African countries earlier this month .
We invest substantial resources in supporting movement of these countries , not only to eliminate energy poverty , but to power themselves with clean and new energy sources .
On macroeconomic and social aspects , the increase in oil price levels certainly put a strain on consumers and certain sectors of the economy which face difficult adjustment processes .
More immediately , most member countries have undertaken - or are currently considering - short-term measures in response to the recent surge in energy prices .
In line with the European Council conclusions , most of these policies focus on vulnerable households .
Some Member States have also implemented or discussed temporary measures targeted at specific sectors .
As high energy prices are expected to prevail in the long term , it is essential that the policy measures aim at facilitating the structural shift to more sustainable patterns of production , transport and consumption .
This also points to the significance of flexible product and labour markets and the Lisbon agenda , and to the importance of the transition towards a low-carbon and highly energy-efficient economy .
But I believe there is clearly not one answer to these issues .
Still , the framework that we propose with the energy and climate change package and the internal energy market package is a backbone , because , the sooner it is adopted , the stronger we will be , and also there will be more competition and lower prices for consumers .
At the same time we should be open and honest and say to the people : do not expect oil prices to come back to USD 20 per barrel .
That means each of us also should change our behaviour , because part of the issue is also our behaviour , and I believe that we should really pay true attention in our everyday lives .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are confronted by two different problems .
The first relates to the price of oil and gas .
The Union imports most of the aforementioned resources .
The second relates to the price of electrical energy .
Regarding the first point , I should like to say that oil and gas prices could fall , if the producers , not just the consumers , become subject to market forces .
This is a subject for our negotiations as a Union with Russia , the North African countries and OPEC .
We must also significantly improve energy efficiency and energy saving .
It is our duty to do so and we should give priority to this task .
We have been discussing it for a long time now .
Obviously , we must also develop the use of renewable energy , as it exploits our indigenous resources .
It will certainly not suffice for our purposes , however .
That leaves us with our coal and our nuclear energy .
If we wish to forestall drastic price increases , we cannot afford to disregard either of these two energy sources .
This leads on to the second point , namely electrical energy .
The cost of electricity could be reduced through a determined effort to create a common European market in energy .
Swift implementation of the third energy package is needed .
We can also control electricity prices through sensible and gradual implementation of the energy and climate change package .
This is particularly important for the electrical energy sector .
In connection with the latter , it is important to consider benchmarking or phase-in arrangements in the directive on the emissions trading scheme .
I should like to thank the Commission for undertaking such hard work on these matters , and the authors of the resolution for raising the subject .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , on 2 January 2008 Richard Arens , who is a trader at Nymex , offered USD 100 000 for a consignment of one thousand barrels of oil .
The price of a barrel of oil had reached USD 100 for the first time .
The trader laid out some USD 5 000 for this transaction .
He sold it on immediately and in doing so accepted a loss of USD 800 .
It was a small loss that he fittingly celebrated with his colleagues as being the first to break the psychological barrier of USD 100 a barrel .
New York traders were frequently to celebrate new records in the months that followed .
On 14 July oil reached USD 148 a barrel .
Even if prices are now falling again the damage has been done .
The explosion in oil prices has triggered an orgy of speculation in raw materials , including foodstuffs .
The global economy cannot do without markets , but it is unacceptable for the financial world to be indulging in wild commercial gambles more worthy of a gaming casino .
With a lever of a mere USD 5 000 the New York trader had succeeded in triggering a wave of speculation on oil that was to wreak havoc throughout the world economy .
The stock-market authorities finally put the brakes on this unadulterated speculation by prohibiting traders , at least temporarily , from selling shares they did not hold , a process known as ' naked short selling ' .
If we are to curb this unhealthy practice it is not temporary rules that we need but absolutely strict regulations .
We therefore have to be more consistent in the way we control the gambles being made by the speculators .
The US Senate is now debating a proposal aimed at increasing to a minimum of 25 % the actual stake being put up by traders for each transaction .
This would prevent many of the risky gambles that at the moment are based on nothing more than small change .
The amount of money invested in the US raw materials market alone has increased tenfold in the course of the last four years .
The price index for the 25 main commodities has exploded by more than 200 % .
Price levels are no longer being determined by physical supply and effective demand for raw materials but by the speculative mechanisms of the financial markets .
During the first six months of this year 60 % of the deals being done on the American oil market were for virtual oil that was repeatedly sold and re-sold .
The stock exchange is no longer being used as a means for adjusting the complex interplay between available supply and actual demand but has become a venue where bets are being placed on financial products whose complexity is even too much for those in charge of the finance companies to understand .
The only thing that matters to the traders and their bosses is the bonus .
All these ' golden boys ' from this global casino have pocketed millions while losing billions belonging to their clients .
The profits were cashed in while the losses have now been nationalised .
American taxpayers are going to have to fork out more than USD 1 000 billion to pay off the bad credits of the financial world .
This is equivalent to seven times the total EU budget .
In Europe , too , purchasing power is down , credit has become more expensive and recession is looming .
The Commission and the national governments have always refused to introduce too much regulation to the financial markets , which were renowned for their efficiency .
However , with the total demise of these financial geniuses the public authorities now have to act quickly by imposing stricter rules and by introducing effective measures to prevent the wild speculation running through the markets , including the oil market .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I welcome the fact that this debate is encompassing all energy prices , and not just that of oil - which of course is a major concern .
Over the past year it is not only oil that has experienced a price shock : the cost of coal and gas is rising just as fast as oil , if not faster .
As is always the case , the consumers are the worst affected .
Spikes in energy prices put huge pressure on the budget of the average consumer .
As representatives of the people at policy level , it is up to us to implement policies that will ensure a sustainable fuel supply at a reasonable price .
How can we achieve this as fuel wells ' supplies approach depletion ?
We should be concentrating to an even greater degree on renewable energy and resources .
We should increase study of , and investment in , alternative fuel sources .
This is by no means a new idea , yet to date we have not done enough in this regard .
We have a duty to the European people , and for the sake of our environment , to turn our words into actions .
Environmental protection and consumer financial welfare are not mutually exclusive goals .
By spending more money , time and resources on the area of renewable energy , we can achieve them both and can ensure a sustainable supply of energy for the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Goebbels is quite right that there is massive speculation in oil prices , and indeed Mr Borloo and Mr Piebalgs have said the same .

The Greens , the Socialists and the United Left have all tabled amendments aimed at ensuring that our resolution takes this issue into account and those on the Right who today applauded the idea of measures to combat wild speculation in the oil market - and I am delighted about that - will , I hope , be voting for our amendments tomorrow .
It would be ridiculous if this House were to vote for a resolution that did not deal with the subject of excessive speculation in the oil markets .
The second important matter is the social aspect .
We have to help the poorest members of our society to overcome this situation .
I for my part would recommend targeted aid .
It would be better to give poorer households EUR 100 than to float so-called good ideas such as reducing VAT .
This notion , so dear to Mr Sarkozy , will clearly be rejected tomorrow by Parliament , for we would rather side with Mr Borloo , who is for encouraging the bonus-malus system , by giving citizens access to services and appliances that consume less energy .
Let me just make two final remarks .
Firstly , we shall only be able to deal with the issue of the allocation fund by making progress in the area of energy management and renewables management .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner if the Commission is once again set on looking foolish by presenting a strategy document on energy and energy security that fails to deal with the issue of transportation ?
In all the drafts that I have seen there is no mention of transportation .
This is ridiculous , for Europe is most heavily reliant on oil , not on gas , and there is nothing about this in your documents .
Now a final remark to Mr Borloo : today Coreper discussed renewable energies and I for my part no longer comprehend the French Presidency .
You are undermining things with the rendez-vous clause , including the 20 % target .
Thankfully , this proposal was today rejected by the majority of the Member States .
I would therefore appeal directly to the French Presidency : stop jeopardising this directive , for it is a very important document .
( SK ) Europe has a great opportunity to influence energy prices by achieving sufficient production of its own energy based on resources other than oil and gas .
Is Europe going down this route , however ?
In the 1980s , Slovakia and Hungary began the joint construction of the Gabčíkovo-Nagymaros hydroelectric power plant .
Hungary subsequently withdrew from the project and Slovakia completed the hydroelectric power plant alone .
Rather than the production of peak energy , the consequence was an international arbitration dispute , the results of which , however , have been ignored by Hungary .
In the 1990s , Slovakia invested significant resources in improving the safety and extending the service life of the Jaslovské Bohunice nuclear power plant .
The International Atomic Energy Commission confirmed that the safety standards were satisfied .
As part of the process of accession to the European Union , however , Slovakia was obliged to close two reactors at the power plant prematurely .
The European Commission is currently considering the matter of the construction of two additional reactors at the Mochovce nuclear power plant .
The first two reactors are already operating safely and efficiently .
The European Commission , however , is taking its time in producing a response .
The example of Slovakia shows that the aim of increasing our own production and thus controlling energy prices in Europe is still a long way away .
( EL ) Mr President , the rise in oil prices this year is a major scandal , which hits the lowest-income households in Europe .
It demands answers in terms of policy because , as well as adjusting to a green economy , a policy for pipelines , and an energy package policy , we must resolve the fight against the oil cartels without fail .
There are currently two oil cartels operating at the expense of European citizens .
One is the international oil cartel , which we do not address in one voice - or any voice at all - because when OPEC acts , it feels under no pressure from the EU to refrain from doing so .
There is a second cartel , within the European market itself , Commissioner ; your fellow Commissioner responsible for Competition is still observing it without interfering .
I think that beyond the profiteering issue that Mr Goebbels has quite rightly raised , we have to deal with a lack of transparency in the internal market for petroleum products .
This is a shining opportunity for the European Commission 's Directorate General for Competition , from which we expect some action in the interests of citizens , as , if I am not mistaken , competition policy remains a Community responsibility .
If , then , we have difficulties with OPEC , let us implement competition policy within the EU .
Mr President , there are going to be radical changes in the way the EU produces and consumes its energy .
This has been based on a three-pronged strategy by the Commission : security of supply , sustainability and competitiveness .
But the Commission left out a fundamental part of this important debate , namely the issue of affordability .
Since the publication of the Green Paper on energy , Socialists in this Parliament have been asking for consumers to be put right back into the driving seat .
We want to see energy poverty as a part of this debate .
So far in the EU there are no national definitions and there is no data collection , so we have no idea of the scale of this problem .
We know that energy prices have been rising exponentially and they are hitting the most vulnerable in our society the hardest .
I would like to give fair warning to the Council that , in the negotiations on the electricity and gas directives that we are about to begin , the issue of energy poverty will be fundamental to our agreement .
We are not going to step on your toes .
We are asking for domestic action on this - not Community action - but we do expect action for the poorest people in the EU on energy poverty .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would venture to suggest that one cannot possibly say how to curb rising energy prices in just over one minute .
Let us try to sum up the situation : first of all we need national social policies in favour of the most vulnerable groups and small businesses , such as fishermen , but also public authorities .
I am therefore in favour of targeted social measures , as Mr Turmes said .
Next , we need a different policy towards producer cartels and countries , as Mr Buzek and perhaps others have said .
This is without doubt essential .
I also wish to stress another aspect on which we often draw a blank .
It is the question of excise duty .
If the maximum price governments could charge for fuel were capped , excise duty would automatically be adjusted to this ceiling without infringing either fiscal subsidiarity or the laws on free competition .
Why not consider this idea ?
It seems to me that Mr Piebalgs was implying that he favoured something similar .
Generally speaking , in my view , we need a strategy which rewards those who consume less and penalises those who consume more : in other words , a strategy which rewards energy efficiency .
However , we also need measures to clamp down on speculation , which do not exist as yet , and a two-way adjustment of retail prices and production costs .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the trend in energy prices is throttling the economy and eroding the purchasing power of families , who are seeing energy bills rise relentlessly .
In this new context the link between energy prices and foreign policy , and hence the increased political clout of producer countries , is obvious .
Clearly , Europe must pursue a short strategy based on speeding up the use of renewable energy sources , the promotion of and search for new methods of exploiting natural , clean energy , and the building of new pipelines .
Therefore it is also necessary to increase our oil and gas reserves .
All of this is not enough ; new initiatives are required .
I would emphasise the two proposals made by Prime Minister Berlusconi in recent weeks : a coming-together of all energy-purchasing countries and hence the setting of a maximum price ; and the launch of a major plan for nuclear power stations .
Can the Commission respond to these two proposals , Commissioner ?
Furthermore , when elucidating its strategies for mapping out a different future in terms of supplies , can you tell us whether - as far as you know - financial speculation is taking place , and what the Commission intends to do about it ?
( FI ) Mr President , this resolution is important and we have our own basic view of it .
This situation is as stormy as the Bermuda Triangle , and dependence , climate problems and prices that the poor just cannot pay are making the sea churn - not to forget the speculators and the price of food .
Saving energy is necessary and the most effective solution ; that we know .
The carbon footprint of the poor , however , is tiny compared to the rich , who have no intention of actually reducing it but are ready simply to pay more .
Should we in this situation therefore introduce legislation on energy taxation that is progressive ?
Those who can afford to pay would pay relatively more for energy .
Or should we impose a higher price on goods that consume a lot of energy or services that waste it ?
The speculators must obviously be brought under control .
We speak of sustainable development : its heroes are the energy-poor and their situation needs to be organised sustainably .
That is our basic view .
Mr President , among the projects that the EU has encouraged is the single electricity market on the island of Ireland .
Can the Commission explain why it is not working for consumers in Northern Ireland and why , instead of stability and price savings , we have seen a massive 52 % hike since January of this year and an ever-widening gap with prices prevailing in the rest of the United Kingdom , where in the same period the price rise was 29 % ?
Big in itself , but a lot less than 52 % .
Will the Commission investigate the failure of this scheme to deliver the promise of Minister Dodds , when he launched it , of efficiency savings and enhanced competition to help minimise the wholesale cost of electricity , with the vast bulk of the benefits , he said , going to the consumer ?
For my constituents , less than a year on , that rings very hollow indeed .
In particular , will the Commission investigate the contribution to the non-delivery of the single electricity market of the failure adequately to address the dominance of the ESB in the southern market and the resulting lack of competition , which of course is the imperative to success in any single electricity market ?
Mr President , we always talk about renewable energy when we talk about prices .
Well , we know that it is going to cost us an arm and a leg and so financial responsibility regarding energy prices often has gone with the wind .
What about this 80 % ?
What about meeting the needs of tomorrow 's increasing energy consumption ?
Look at Nord Stream .
We are just talking about the environmental standards regarding Nord Stream .
Well , that is a little bit like looking at the standards of the rope that is a noose around your neck , because Nord Stream and such projects are reducing our energy independence when we have to increase our independence .
So , what are we going to do ?
The only really responsible answer is the nuclear one : it is independent , it is cheap , it is competitive and the price is foreseeable - it is also emission-free and Russia-free .
( BG ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the conditions of growing energy prices it is especially important to ensure more transparency in respect of price formation .
Common rules have to be regulated for the development of a single European energy market .
This will provide greater security for new investments in the energy sector and in electricity and gas transmission networks .
It is precisely the third energy package that must be adopted as soon as possible , and the role of the Commission and the Council in this respect is particularly significant .
The package strengthens the rights and independence of energy regulators , and harmonises their activities through the newly established agency .
It is also necessary to pay particular attention to the notion of " energy poverty ” and to the national definition of this notion , among other things in order to ensure , through the mechanism of public services of general interest , a minimum amount of energy in winter for people below the poverty threshold .
I believe that the problem of high energy prices could also be brought under control by an adequate energy policy , intended to offer incentives to energy efficiency , renewable energy sources and environment-sparing products .
We will consider with interest the proposal on the matter of energy efficiency that Commissioner Piebalgs discussed in his statement .
( RO ) According to research , at least 20 % of the energy consumed in the EU is wasted .
We should stress that households have an energy-saving potential of nearly 30 % , which means that one third of the energy currently consumed by apartment buildings can be saved .
A handy solution is the heating rehabilitation of houses , but this solution is unjustly ignored and underfunded by the European Union .
In Romania , for instance , rehabilitation would lead to savings in excess of 600 000 tonnes of oil equivalent every year .
I believe that the European Parliament should support the increase by at least 10 % of the EU funding that can be allocated to improving household heating efficiency .
This is a concrete , convenient and sustainable solution to the problems caused to citizens by the increasing price of energy .
Mr President , I would like to speak about only one aspect of energy prices , namely the price of district heating .
In Hungary , hundreds of thousands of households use district heating - mostly families with modest incomes - and its price is a crucial social issue .
However , due to the run-down infrastructure and for other technical reasons , district heating is far more expensive than individual heating .
This contradicts common sense and the basic interests of the environment .
That is why , whenever I can , I urge the Commission and the Council to provide financial support to improve district-heating systems in order to make it socially acceptable and environmentally efficient .
As long as district heating is more expensive in some Member States than individual heating , it is nonsense to speak about energy efficiency .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the European Commission has unveiled a package of measures for the safety and security of nuclear power plants .
Will you ensure that this package is now finally put on the agenda of the Council working group so that it can become a success for the French Council Presidency ?
I would like to ask Commissioner Piebalgs whether it would be possible to talk to Commissioner Kovács to see whether we could get some incentives and opportunities to write off investment in the energy sector , so that the profits can be invested sensibly .
This could also drive down prices .
( LT ) In order to solve our energy problems , it is essential to have a common energy policy with foreign policy aspects .
We have to establish the internal market .
The third energy package forms the basis of this .
However , the directive itself is not the answer .
We need financial input and the creation of proper links in the sphere of both gas and electricity .
This would guarantee our energy security .
With regard to the external aspect , the European Union , like the WTO , should speak unanimously .
The Commission should have the power to negotiate energy prices .
This should not be a matter for every individual state to speak about ; we should negotiate this subject jointly as one major world market participant .
We should take a wider view of who our energy suppliers are .
Are we not building gas pipelines that could potentially have no gas , as is suspected with Nord Stream ?
Do we view the Arctic as a potential energy source ?
I would also like to point out the importance of short-term measures .
Here I am thinking of talks with the OPEC countries and the issue of value added tax .
Mr President , during this debate colleagues from the Socialist and Green benches have referred to speculation and how unacceptable that is in terms of energy prices , and I agree with them .
I would ask them also to reflect on the political context of energy pricing , and in particular on the career of former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder , currently employed by Gazprom , who quite clearly is pursuing an interest which is nuclear-free , but as Ari Vatanen has reminded us , is not free of Russian politics .
I should like to ask the Council if it could explain in its reply the route map towards achieving a common energy policy in the EU , giving the timescale .
And I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he has produced a table for the Council of relative costings of oil and gas , for example from Russia , as opposed to liquefied natural gas from Qatar , nuclear energy , and all the others , because it seems to me that our governments are not actually producing energy at the prices that the consumers would want .
They are pursuing their own political interests .
Mr President , here are three pieces of information .
I really think that the era of producing energy in one place and then transporting it and selling it all around the world has taken us into a territorial situation that for good reason has become part of the global financial crisis , for there is rainfall that is beneficial and then there is flooding .
When we suddenly have too much rain in a place that cannot absorb it we call it a flood and a disaster , and this results in a stream of by-products and in all this accumulated money supply being managed in an unreal way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , energy is the subject of the century .
I have listened to Mr Goebbels speaking just now and I was struck by the emotive tone of his contribution .
I am of the view that we not only have to reduce our consumption levels but also localise it in a way that removes our dependence on the type of energy involved .
This will also create problems , as is the case with coal , which is a localised resource and one that has to be taken into account .
We also need to localise speculation , we need to limit it and we need to combat it .
The EU-OPEC meeting one and a half months ago proposed calling in specialists to carry out a major review in an attempt to understand what has been happening from a short-term perspective in various market sectors .
Then we have the matter of long-term anticipation .
The only response as far as anticipation is concerned is to abide by what was decided at Jeddah , namely that Europe , which means every country in Europe and Europe as a whole , has to move towards energy efficiency and reduced consumption .
If we give up six to nine billion , and if we follow this model , then the anticipators will clearly always be right .
The question may arise , Commissioner , about a certain course of action , about increasing the global financing for various areas of research .
As for energy efficiency , that is a subject to which we will certainly be returning .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I really would like to reassure you that oil prices will go down .
But I would like to draw attention to the issues that somehow we have underestimated .
Oil markets have ensured the physical delivery of oil , gas markets are delivering physical supplies of gas and coal markets deliver coal .
That means that the interaction between financial markets and oil markets can work .
In other words we do not need to question the market , but we need to change the way we produce and consume energy inside the European Union .
This is the real answer , because we cannot expect the market to become easier .
There is growth .
If growth is there , then there is more demand for energy resources , and none of the existing energy resources are in such quantities that we can say easy access is guaranteed .
So for this we need a paradigm shift , we need to really invest in energy efficiency , renewables , research and development : a new investment .
But for this we need money , coming from both private investors and public investors .
So we should be able to do this only if there is a really functioning market .
A really functioning market means that everybody pays the real price to cover not only the cost but also the interest on investment .
What we need to concentrate on - and there is EU existing legislation on this - is public service obligations that apply to households or small and medium-sized enterprises that really need it .
But we should not deviate from this course .
I believe - and I have said it again and again - that the proposals made in the second package are crucial to making this change , and for this to be strengthened we will add a couple of elements in the second strategic energy review under the headings : infrastructure needs and diversification of energy supplies , external energy relations , oil and gas stocks and crisis mechanisms , energy efficiency and making the best use of the EU 's indigenous energy sources .
We are on the right track .
We do not need to deviate and believe that there is a magic solution that will bring prices down immediately .
But , if we follow this path , we can really guarantee that already in this generation we will have efficient , affordable , clean energy .
If we are slow in changing the energy sector , then not only will we suffer but also the next generations will suffer .
So we are at this critical stage and , as the Minister said , energy is this century 's main issue .
It is a main issue , but the public perception is not always there .
The belief is that we have this silver bullet which will change everything .
We should continue on the path we have started with Parliament , and I believe it is consistency that matters , and I very much hope that the proposed legal proposals will be adopted during this Parliament .
It is crucial : this is the best response to the rising oil prices .
I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) We recently saw an unprecedented rise in fuel prices .
This mainly resulted from speculation engaged in by companies which have made very high profits from the speculative valuation of oil stocks purchased at lower prices .
This scandalous rise in prices has worsened the living conditions of the general population , particularly the economically weaker sections of society , and has had a devastating impact on economic activity in various sectors , such as transport and other services , industry , agriculture and fisheries .
However , despite a significant fall in the price of crude oil , in some countries high prices are being maintained and the victims are the consumers .
This should prompt the creation of a tax , by each Member State , imposed solely on extraordinary and speculative profits in order to bring these into the State coffers , which can then help to support the sectors and people most affected by the situation .
However , the main changes should be structural , with a halt to the liberalisation of the energy sector , bearing in mind that this is a strategic sector for development .
As a result , this should be nationalised in order to guarantee public policies that serve national interests and the population as a whole .
in writing . - How appropriate that the European Parliament is debating energy prices just as the summer ends .
Many of my constituents are already watching the thermometer with a real sense of dread .
Falling temperatures mean that they have to calculate whether they can justify switching on the oh-so-expensive heating .
The day the bill for a household 's gas or electricity is expected is anticipated with dread .
It is not just the poorest families who have to make the decision of which essential purchases they will have to do without this autumn and winter in order to keep themselves warm .
Households with small children or elderly residents are especially hard hit .
They have the most limited budgets and at the same time the greatest requirement for energy .
Any action taken which alleviates the burden of energy costs placed on the most venerable in society gets my wholehearted support .
In the civilised heart of Europe , in the 21st century a warm home cannot be treated as a luxury item .
in writing . - ( HU ) In recent months , right before our eyes , energy prices have risen as never before .
The soaring costs of energy consumption may have extremely harmful consequences for Europe 's competitiveness .
Furthermore , the process has a severe impact on the most defenceless layers of society .
The problem is made even greater by the fact that some countries subordinate the reserves of raw materials available to them to political goals .
For these reasons , the increase in energy prices has become one of the most sensitive political questions .
Although not a single Member State can pull itself out from under the impact of price increases , some countries are in a particularly defenceless situation .
Thanks to drifting , erroneous government policy , Hungarian consumers have been forced to bear an increase in gas prices four times in 2008 alone .
For this very reason , the increase in energy prices has become one of the most important sources of social dissatisfaction in Hungary .
Coordinated , consistent action is needed in order for prices to remain manageable .
Everything must be done to ensure that the system of long-term international agreements that define energy supply is transparent .
Furthermore , competition must be tightened up both at Community and Member State level , together with measures aiming for an improvement in energy efficiency .
The European Union must take real steps in order to make a firm stand , primarily through building alternative energy transport routes .
At the same time , we feel it is appropriate to coordinate measures aiming to protect the most defenceless .
We feel that the increase in electricity prices may not combine with an exacerbation of social differences .
in writing . - ( ET ) It is essential that this coming winter the Governments of the Member States do everything possible to support individuals for whom the rise in energy prices may be too much .
Price rises of up to 30-40 per cent are also forecast in Estonia .
I am especially worried about the impact which rising energy prices may have on those on low incomes , the poor and vulnerable groups .
I agree one hundred per cent that the Member States must take adequate measures to guarantee affordable energy prices .
These include dedicated income support and abatements , and incentives to improve the energy efficiency of domestic households .
I am also convinced that the Member States should compile action plans to combat energy poverty .
There is above all a need to define ' energy poverty ' .
Definition of the concept would help focus attention on the objectives .
We must lift everyone out of fuel poverty !
Unlike for example in Great Britain , at home , in Estonia , the term ' energy poverty ' is very strange .
It is a typical example of Euro-jargon which , whether intentionally or not , is creeping into use .
Behind it , however , is a very interesting idea with which the authors of legislation must familiarise themselves .
Dedicated support for the elderly , large families and the disabled along the lines of ' winter fuel payments ' or ' cold weather payments ' in Great Britain play an important role .
Measures such as these are , in my view , a magnificent example to others .
There is much talk of savings but little action , although action would be the quickest way of changing anything .
The better insulated and energy-efficient our homes , the less we will have to spend on maintaining the temperature inside them .
The savings would be large because in Estonia , for example , buildings absorb 40 % of primary energy .
But on this point we must not rely on leaving things to the initiative of each person feeling the cold .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0462 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Eurozone budget deficit limits
Under the rules of the European Union 's Stability and Growth Pact , eurozone countries should remain inside a budget deficit limit of 3 % of GDP .
Can the Commission provide an up-to-date assessment of current adherence to the rules ?
Does the Commission consider current fiscal rules to be flexible enough to allow governments to react to economic trouble but strict enough to ensure the sustainability of public finances ?
What , if any , are the circumstances in which eurozone countries may be permitted to exceed the 3 % budget deficit ?
Member of the Commission . - The subject of the first question is covered in detail in the Commission 's 2008 report on public finances in the EMU .
The only significant budgetary development which is not covered there is the recent launch of the excessive-deficit procedure for the United Kingdom .
Given that the budget deficit in the UK is expected by the Commission to exceed the 3 % reference value in both fiscal years 2008-2009 and 2009-2010 , in accordance with Article 104 ( 6 ) of the Treaty , the Council has decided this year that an excessive deficit does exist in the United Kingdom .
On the same occasion , in accordance with Article 104 ( 7 ) of the Treaty , the Council set a deadline of one year for the correction of this excessive deficit .
More generally , in line with its mandate under the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact , the Commission is continuously monitoring the economic and budgetary development in Member States and stands ready to activate the instruments of budgetary surveillance where necessary .
The answer to the second question is positive , particularly with reference to the corrective arm .
Since the 2005 reform , excessive deficits have been corrected , with currently only the UK and Hungary subject to the excessive-deficit procedure .
Overall , in 2007 the euro area recorded its lowest structural fiscal deficit since 1973 .
Nevertheless , the application of the preventive arm has sometimes been uneven .
So , in the April 2007 Berlin Declaration , the euro-area Finance Ministers committed themselves to reaching their medium-term budgetary objectives by 2010 at the latest .
In principle this commitment was reiterated this year .
At the same time , the 2005 reform introduced enough economic rationale into the pact to be able to react flexibly to serious disturbances where necessary , in particular through the revised flexibility clause and the incorporation of implicit liabilities in MTOs .
The functioning of the revised pact is well documented in the Commission reports on public finances in the EMU of 2006 , 2007 and 2008 and in the accompanying communication .
In this year 's report , the methodology proposed for incorporating implicit liabilities in the MTOs of the preventive arm is also presented .
Regarding the third question , according to the reformed Stability and Growth Pact , only under tightly constrained circumstances are budget deficits in EU Member States permitted to exceed the 3 % reference value without resulting in the existence of excessive deficit .
In particular , these deficits will always have to be close and also temporary .
In addition , either the excess over the reference value must be exceptional , and / or it must include a deficit occurring under circumstances of severe economic downturn , which is defined as negative growth or accumulated loss of output .
If the deficit is close and temporary , various other element factors always need to be taken into account , but this must happen in a very balanced way .
Other relevant factors include , for instance , growth-enhancing expenditure on research and development .
However , a direct deduction of any spending items from the deficit is excluded .
Finally , in any event , an annual structural fiscal improvement of the order of 0.5 % of GDP as a benchmark must be delivered .
I will take time to digest the detail in your answer .
You mentioned in particular the UK .
I have an interest , obviously , in the Irish situation and we are expecting a tough budget in Ireland in a number of weeks .
I would like you to comment if you will on the conversations you have had with the Irish Minister about our deficit and , indeed , whether we will exceed and what impact that will have from an EU perspective .
Member of the Commission . - Well , we always follow facts .
Any conversation between my colleague Joaquín Almunia and Irish colleagues is for more information , but we analyse the facts and figures at the end of the year .
That is why , unfortunately , I cannot answer this question , but it is very understandable .
As I said today , we have excessive-budget procedures against the UK and Hungary .
Does the Commission accept that under the Treaty - as opposed to the Stability Pact - the 3 % is not a limit , it is a reference value ?
The Commission 's report on any Member State that exceeds that reference value has to take account - and I quote Article 104 ( 3 ) of the Treaty - ' of all other relevant factors including the medium-term economic and budgetary position of the Member States ' .
Does he not think that in the last few days and weeks the economic positions of Member States have necessarily changed , and perhaps warrant an extra degree of flexibility ?
Member of the Commission . - I think we have a rather good track record when we start the procedures .
Three per cent is a threshold that we really looked at .
If it is exceeded , then , in very exceptional circumstances , we will not start the procedures .
So , basically , 3 % is the threshold that we are looking at , and I think we will follow the procedures we have always followed .
We will not change the goalposts , even in the current situation .
Subject : Mortgage crisis and financial regulations
During the spring , there were further economic problems and strains in the global financial markets , caused particularly by the spreading mortgage crisis . With both Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac now receiving capital injections from the US State , the mortgage market is rocking on its foundations .
I was in Washington in July and met a number of Senators who believed that the bottom of the mortgage crisis had not yet been reached and this would not happen before 2010 .
How long does the Commission think the financial crisis will continue ?
What does the Commission think of the signal sent to the market by the USA bailing out companies in financial straits , even though these are not generally protected by the State - first Bear Stearns and now Fannie May and Freddy Mac ?
Finally , what does the Commission think of the current and upcoming reviews of existing legislation such as Lamfalussy and the Capital Requirements Directive , given the major risk nowadays of the changes spilling over and damaging the competitiveness of the European financial market ?
Member of the Commission . - International financial markets have now been in turmoil for about one year and the interaction between accumulating losses in the financial system and the deteriorating global economic outlook make it very difficult to predict when the turmoil will end .
The current situation in financial markets illustrates how the problem that seemed initially limited to a specific market segment , for the United States and sub-prime mortgages , can rapidly affect the international financial system as a whole .
As losses linked to the US sub-prime mortgages have spread via interconnected markets and complex financial products , several key credit markets have been disrupted .
Problems in the functioning of these markets have been felt , though , most severely within the banking sector , where substantial losses have been incurred and market liquidity shortages have required support by central banks .
Nevertheless , a number of financial institutions in the United States and in Europe have been rescued from insolvency after experiencing serious difficulty in accessing liquidity .
These public sector interventions have reflected concerns about risks to financial stability and have been met by a generally positive response from financial markets .
In the United States , as a consequence of the mis-selling of sub-prime mortgages in the past , reset of these mortgage contracts is expected to continue until mid-2009 .
Problems in the international financial market remain acute - you have already discussed these issues today - driven partly by developments in the financial sector itself and partly by the implications of the deteriorating economic environment .
Uncertainty about the ultimate scale and location of credit losses continues to undermine investor confidence , and the total losses so far disclosed by banks remain well below estimates for overall losses across the financial system based on various projections of future mortgage losses .
Banks are increasingly forced to recapitalise , often at high cost and in difficult market conditions .
Moreover , problems in the banking sector are increasingly reflected in tightening lending standards and reduced bank lending activity .
The implied higher financing costs and the reduced access to credit are likely to interact with other headwinds , such as high oil prices and rising inflation , facing the global economy .
On this basis , the economic outlook for the EU and the euro area economy has further deteriorated since the Commission 's spring 2008 forecast .
Economic prospects vary across the Member States .
As economic conditions deteriorate , the pressure on bank balance sheets is set to continue .
Fragile market conditions require continued vigilance from public authorities , notably central banks , supervisors and finance ministers , to monitor market developments .
The need for further interventions in the case of systemic crisis cannot be ruled out .
In a broader context , concrete actions to address weaknesses in the framework for financial markets are being addressed .
Further to the Economic and Financial Affairs Council discussion in October 2007 , a road map of regulatory actions has been adopted .
While this road map applies only to the EU , it is consistent with corresponding initiatives at a global level .
The objectives of the road map are to enhance transparency , address valuation issues , strengthen prudential supervision of banks and examine structural market issues by analysing relevant weaknesses in the regulatory framework and formulating appropriate policy responses .
The Commission is currently working to ensure that this road map is delivered on time , including concrete initiatives on enhancing transparency for investors , markets and regulators , revised capital requirements for banks and the regulation of credit-rating agencies .
In this respect the Commission has completed its external consultation on proposed changes to the Capital Requirements Directive and intends to come forward with a proposal during the coming months .
It is also considering legislation on credit-rating agencies .
In this context , a public consultation was launched at the end of July 2008 .
Progress has also been achieved with regard to supervisory cooperation across borders within the EU with the entry into force of a new memorandum of understanding at the beginning of July 2008 .
More generally , one of the aims of the Lamfalussy review is the improvement of the new supervisory arrangement where the Commission plans , for instance , to revise the decisions on the EU committees of supervisors .
In all its efforts , the Commission is well aware of the global dimension of the required response and in this respect we are coordinating our responses with our partners .
Sometimes a question flies away , and this is perhaps a bit obsolete , I must admit , but I thank the Commission for giving such a fair answer .
My appeal , and my worry , is that we are over-reacting , and I hope the Commission could consider that .
I agree that we should act and react , but we should not overdo it , because we need a balanced approach .
Otherwise - and I think that is something we should consider in the long term - we could harm growth in Europe .
So , I think , a balanced approach ; and I rely on the Commission to ensure these measures are implemented in an appropriate way .
Member of the Commission . - I think the Commission is really balanced .
We have had one hour of debate when a lot of Members of Parliament called for very hasty action , but the Commission is really taking a balanced approach .
( LT ) Today we held a discussion on the world financial crisis and its impact on our economy .
One Member mentioned the fact that in her country one bank had already gone bankrupt .
Are you aware of any imminent danger of banks going bankrupt in our countries , the EU countries ?
( DE ) I would be interested to hear about the current situation regarding real purchases as opposed to financial transactions in the energy sector .
Does the Commission propose to indicate clearly , in the statistics , which are the real purchases of energy and what is simply being traded in the financial markets , and does it plan to adopt rules governing short sales ?
Member of the Commission . - My country , Latvia , has plenty of banks , and definitely insolvency could happen .
I believe that we have rather an advanced market .
But it happens under central bank supervision , and at least there was no turmoil whatsoever on the Latvian financial markets .
Therefore , I can assure you that the Latvian financial market is very stable and there has been no perturbation .
But it is very important to emphasise the role bank supervision should play and that all the conditions for this supervision are fulfilled by commercial banks .
Concerning energy purchases , if the honourable Member is agreeable , I will reply in writing because I think it is a very specific question and I would hesitate to give a concrete figure .
Subject : Air safety
The recent Spanair disaster in Madrid in which many people were killed and the forced landing of a Ryanair Boeing 737 in Limoges in France , in which 26 people were injured , once again raise questions about whether the Community 's arsenal of legislation and controls governing air safety is being adequately and effectively implemented .
Regulation ( EC ) No. 1899 / 2006 / specifically lays down the obligation of airlines to carry out accident prevention and flight safety programmes and the requirements applicable to the operation of any civil aeroplane ( certification , supervision , maintenance , instruments and equipment , safety , etc . ) .
Does the Commission consider that these provisions are satisfactory and adequate , or does it believe that a more stringent control framework should be established for airlines ?
How does the Commission judge the implementation to date of Directive 2003 / 42 / EC on occurrence reporting in civil aviation ( adoption of a system of notification of accidents and serious incidents ) ?
Does it consider that the aid provided so far for control mechanisms and early warning systems in respect of airlines with a dubious safety record and for the compliance inspections carried out by the European Aviation Safety Agency in respect of the airline authorities of Member States and the data released for establishing a blacklist is satisfactory ?
Member of the Commission . - With regard to the application of the Community rules regarding aircraft operations , the Commission has no indication of weaknesses or safety-related loopholes in the respective air safety legislation which only recently became applicable in the Community on 16 July 2008 .
The set of technical requirements for aircraft operations is constantly undergoing changes reflecting the state of scientific knowledge .
This is achieved through constant monitoring of the performance of operators ; hence , at this stage , a more stringent control framework is not deemed to be required by the Commission .
With regard to the application of Community rules regarding occurrence reporting , the Commission is satisfied that all Member States have set up a mandatory reporting system and collect the information in national databases .
These rules contain a system of exchange of information and provide for the dissemination of information .
The exchange of information is still not fully operational , because it requires the agreement on individual protocols between each Member State and the Commission for the updating of the central repository in accordance with the Commission Regulation .
The Member States and the Commission are actively working on this matter , but information is already available at national level at this stage .
The dissemination of information is correctly implemented on the basis of the Commission Regulation of 24 September 2007 .
The implementation of the protection of information has been transposed into national legislation , but only time will enable us to judge the efficiency of these provisions , which constitute the cornerstone of good reporting culture by ensuring the necessary trust of the reporters .
With regard to the control of airlines with a dubious safety record , the Commission can reassure the honourable Member that it is applying scrupulously the provisions of the Community rules regarding the imposition of operating bans on air carriers not complying with safety requirements .
Today in Europe 54 % of all aircraft ramp inspections concern European operators .
That means that the Commission pays equal attention to the safety performance not only of European but also of non-European airlines .
Thanks to its constant and close cooperation , the civil aviation authorities in Member States are stepping up the supervision of their carriers .
The results of the ramp inspections have been a particularly successful preventive instrument to avoid air carriers being faced with operating restrictions in the Community .
With regard to the standardisation inspection of national civil aviation authorities by EASA , the Commission should like to reassure the honourable Member that it is thanks to the close cooperation and mutual trust established between the civil authorities in the Member States and EASA that sustainable solutions are being agreed and worked out between the Agency and the inspected authorities .
Evidence of the good cooperation is the fact that the Agency has been able to double the number of inspections since the relevant rules were adopted in 2006 , and the safeguard measures imposed on a Member State at the end of that year were lifted this week .
( EL ) I am very grateful to the Commission for its answer , but I do wonder , Commissioner .
Air accidents happen comparatively infrequently compared with flights , but they are still accidents that cause many deaths , create doubts in public opinion and undermine confidence in our policy and our inspections .
I have not seen you propose any measures or allocate any new responsibilities or missions to the safety organisation .
This concerns not only airlines , but also the civil agencies responsible for inspections in the Member States .
It also concerns the blacklist : on what criteria is it based ?
Will you support it ?
You have not given me an answer to match the consequences of these accidents and the problems created in addition to the tragic effects on human lives .
Member of the Commission . - I can assure you that the safety system in Europe is at the highest level .
It is very clear that it is implemented , and we have all the measures in place .
Unfortunately it does not prevent accidents from happening .
I am very sorry that people have been killed , but it is not because safety levels in the EU have not been satisfactory .
As soon as we know the results , what caused the accident , we will carry out analyses , and if there is a need to strengthen some of the measures , it will be done .
But today I can assure you that Europe 's aviation safety meets the highest standards that exist anywhere in the world .
( DE ) The situation is as follows : the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) is now being given more and more competences in order to guarantee a uniform standard of safety in Europe , and that is most welcome .
Its competences are now being extended for a second time .
What is not happening , however , is any budget increase for the EASA , nor are other sources of financing being identified .
There are two options here .
The first option is not to treat all the agencies equally .
I would not go as far as some colleagues , who say that if some agencies ceased to operate , no one would notice .
The EASA is different : if the EASA has no money , human lives are put at risk .
The second option is third-party financing , which means boosting the EASA 's funding through some sort of ticket-based levy .
My question is this : which of these two options would you favour ?

Madam President , I would also like to make a brief comment outside the agenda , if I may : I fully endorse what our fellow Member from Poland has said regarding the conduct of the sitting .
Member of the Commission . - For any agency , my view is that direct financing through taxpayers ' money is the best way because , with its own income , you can never guarantee that public service , exactly , is delivered .
So , I believe that the best way is for the budget to finance any agency , but if there is the possibility of supplementary funds being raised , it should be evaluated .
In any case , each budget is discussed according to the procedure and tough regulations imposed by European legislation .
Part two
Subject : Safety of nuclear power plant
The European Union is now being faced with the immediate problem of satisfying ever- increasing energy demand .
Given that oil and , natural gas supplies and renewable sources of energies can only meet some of this demand , the major role of nuclear energy in resolving the problem is undeniable .
At the same time , European citizens are becoming particularly anxious about the safety of nuclear power plant and proper nuclear waste management , particularly following recent leaks of radioactive material from nuclear plant in France and Slovenia .
It is therefore only natural that a large number of questions should arise concerning the safety of nuclear power plant in all EU countries and of the nuclear power plants to be constructed in Turkey and other Balkan countries and the guarantees provided concerning their safe operation .
Has the Commission made a survey of the need to build nuclear power stations ?
What are its conclusions ?
Finally , has it calculated the extent of EU dependency on nuclear energy in the near future ?
Member of the Commission . - The EU currently relies on nuclear energy for 30 % of its electricity production , and it accounts for two thirds of the EU 's carbon-free electricity .
By 2030 , energy demand in the EU is expected to grow by 20 % and electricity demand by 38 % .
As a result , the share of electricity in the final energy demand would grow from 20 % to 23 % .
Electricity-generation capacity is forecast to grow by 31 % , but , under the PRIMES baseline assumptions studied by the Commission , the share of nuclear energy will decrease from 30 % to 20 % in electricity generation .
Also , the International Energy Agency in its recently published EU energy policy review concluded that ' EU nuclear generating capacity will decline from now on unless significant investment is forthcoming in the near future for plant lifetime extensions and the replacement of facilities reaching the end of their operational lives . '
It is for each individual Member State to decide whether or not to rely on nuclear power for the generation of electricity and launch new projects or go ahead with a nuclear phase-out policy .
Should the Member States decide to invest in new nuclear power generation , the Commission will exercise its available powers to ensure that the new projects in this field meet the highest standards of safety , security and non-proliferation as required by the Euratom Treaty .
The assurance of the high level of safety , security and safeguards throughout the entire lifecycle of a nuclear installation also represents a priority in the context of EU enlargement , and in relations with third countries through the Instrument on Nuclear Safety Cooperation .
The Commission is following the overall picture of ongoing investments in the nuclear energy sector in the EU .
In 2007 , the Commission adopted the Nuclear Illustrative Programme which provides an overview of the status of the EU nuclear sector .
At present , the Commission is updating this Communication , as part of the Commission 's overall Strategic Energy Review .
It should be available before the end of 2008 .
In addition , the Commission launched two initiatives to further debate the future of nuclear energy and to identify requirements for its development .
The first is the ' High Level Group on Nuclear Safety and Waste Management ' focusing on identifying safety issues for priority handling and recommending actions to be taken at EU level .
The second , the ' European Nuclear Energy Forum ' , intends to provide a platform for a broad and transparent stakeholder discussion on the opportunities and risks of nuclear energy .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I understand that we shall be waiting till the end of the year to see the results of these studies so that we can draw some better conclusions .
I wanted to hear the Commissioner comment on information that has been known since last year : Russia is building a floating nuclear plant to be completed in 2010 and sent to a remote part of Russia .
There are plans to build a further six for distribution to countries that may request them and have already expressed an interest .
What is your comment on this , in terms of safety ?
Member of the Commission . - Russia is also part of the International Atomic Energy Agency , and Russian nuclear technology corresponds to international standards .
So , if any country would like to have Russian nuclear technology , there are some international rules that Russia is following .
For the EU , Russian supply technology could be used , provided that the Commission 's opinion is positive towards it and , from the standard level , Russian technology competes with other technology providers .
So merely because it is Russian does not mean that it is less safe .
Commissioner , I would like to ask you once more about our famous Ignalina atomic plant .
Recently our Prime Minister met the President of the European Commission , Mr Barroso , and in our papers there were some interpretations that there is a gap ; there is a possibility of prolonging the work of this station .
What is your opinion , and what would you recommend to the Lithuanian Government in this situation ?
( SK ) Nuclear power plants and nuclear facilities are among the most closely monitored installations with regard to safety .
The prospects for using nuclear power engineering in Slovakia , activities requiring the construction of the 3rd and 4th reactors at Mochovce , and the Slovak Republic 's undertaking to shut down the reactors at Jaslovské Bohunice in 2006 and 2008 represent difficult tasks for Slovakia .
Why , Mr Commissioner , is there such political caution on the part of the Commission as regards the construction of the nuclear power plant at Mochovce ?
Does the Commission have real reservations about its safety ?
Member of the Commission . - I will start with Ignalina , because I have talked about this issue many times .
During the accession negotiations it was agreed by Lithuania and the negotiating parties - the other Member States - that because of safety concerns it should be closed by the end of 2009 .
This Treaty is primary law and it is ratified by all Member States .
The Commission is not part of this process .
The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and its role is really to see that the law is being observed .
Therefore I cannot give you any positive news about any change of position , because the Commission position is decided by the Treaty .
What could be done ?
I believe that in the Treaty there are also general provisions for support for Lithuania 's transformations in the energy sector - an overall package , if I am not mistaken , of EUR 1.3 billion , and this should address areas that could strengthen the supply of energy resources to Lithuania , by strengthening interconnections , by financing energy efficiency measures , by financing alternative supplies .
So that is the way to go , but , at least in my opinion , there is no way in which the Treaty could be changed , because only an intergovernmental conference and ratification can change a primary law of the European Union .
As for Mochovce , in the Commission 's opinion it is actually the same question as for Ignalina - it is not a different approach .
But , for Mochovce , we analysed the situation , and in today 's world there are particular requirements for new challenges we face .
We have also seen not only safety but security concerns where aircraft could be used to target nuclear installations .
The technology proposed for the new reactors did not sufficiently address this issue .
That is why we asked the operator , together with the Slovak nuclear energy control authorities , to take some supplementary measures that would guarantee that , even if a nuclear power plant was targeted in this way , it would sustain no permanent damage .
Subject : Investment in first generation , priority for second generation
The Turmes draft report ( 2008 / 0016 / COD ) on the proposal for a Directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources , currently making its way through Parliamentary committees , is reconsidering the Council and Commission biofuel and renewable energy mandatory target in transport , because second generation research and development has not attained a breakthrough .
Is it not the case , however , that we should set out a clear regulatory policy for investors in first-generation biofuels ? Why ?
These are the very same investors in second- and third-generation research and development who will build plants which can be easily converted to the needs of second- and third-generation technology . They cannot afford not to invest in R & D for next generation plants , as their plants will become obsolete .

Member of the Commission . - The Commission agrees with the opinion of the honourable Member that clear regulatory policy is needed for investors in first-generation biofuels in order to get to the second-generation biofuels .
The Commission sees the first-generation biofuels as a bridge to the second-generation biofuels using lignocellulosic materials as a feedstock .
Without a good domestic production base for first-generation biofuels , innovative and efficient products will have difficulties finding their way into the market .
Having said this , clear regulatory policy is paramount not only to spur growth in the biofuel industry but also to avoid negative effects on the environment .
The development of biofuels should also not be to the detriment of food security and also should not influence the prices of food .
At the same time , there should be no doubt that the Commission wants to accelerate the development of second-generation biofuels .
The proposed directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources clearly specifies that the contribution made by biofuels produced from waste , residues and non-food cellulosic material shall be considered to be twice that made by other biofuels , when counting towards national biofuels obligations .
Further to this , Member States will also be required to report on how they have structured their support schemes in favour of second-generation biofuels .
The EU is also providing significant support to the ongoing research to develop second-generation production techniques .
The activities under the EU 's seventh Research Framework Programme have an increased focus on second-generation biofuels and ' biomass to liquids ' processes in particular .
Research should include technically and economically based pilot studies to ensure not only an attractive economic benefit-cost ratio but also one that yields net benefits toward the Community 's goals of curtailing climate change and affordable food prices for all citizens of the world .
So Commission policy and the Commission proposal were really tailored to the need to develop second-generation biofuels , the need to use also , if necessary , those of the first generation , but in a sustainable way .
Mr Commissioner , can I ask you why you think the European Union is losing the information battle on the advantage of strong and consistent biofuel targets , particularly in a world of more limited supply ?
I would like to ask this in relation to biodiesel , which has the potential to make a significant contribution to enhancing the European Union 's security of energy supply .
Biodiesel can be produced in accordance with sustainability principles without endangering food supply - which you have referred to - and biodiesel is the only renewable energy where Europe holds a strong , wide leadership .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission proposal does not discourage development of the biodiesel industry and its use in the transport sector , particularly as the refining sector very specifically suffers from a lack of diesel production in the European Union .
So it is not that we are discouraging it , but I believe that if there is no clear sustainability requirement the damage done by one unsuccessful project will be to the detriment of the whole industry , because the focus is so strong now on biofuels that we cannot afford to have any unsuccessful projects , because that would mean the end of the whole industry .



To explain why I feel so strongly about biofuel policy , what we have in transport is : firstly , more efficient cars - and in this House there have been some very tough debates on cars ; secondly , there is modal shift , but people still prefer in a lot of cases to use the car ; and the third is replacement with alternative fuels - one of the alternative fuels is biofuel , but we should take into account that it is produced on the land that could also produce food products , so that is why I believe that although this measure is positive - and it is very clearly positive - all the necessary precautions need to be taken .

( ES ) Commissioner , on the subject of biofuels , fact and fiction are often combined in a way that easily confuses the population , causing damage to research , innovation and industrial investment in this area .
Has the Commission considered launching a Europe-wide information campaign , which must be rigorous and objective , in order to clarify this situation ?
Indeed , the two questions could almost have been taken together , but the subliminal message , I think , in my Irish colleague 's question , if I am doing justice to it , is that he would like to see - or that the legislation might favour - first-generation investment , or at least that we should not apologise for legislation favouring first-generation investment , as that leads on to second- and third-generation .
I would come at it slightly differently , and I would like ask you through the chair , Commissioner : should not all legislation in this area , as a matter of principle , be technology-neutral ?
Member of the Commission . - I will perhaps start with the second point .
I think we need to be aware , from the debate on oil , that we could face a similar situation with an unpredictable growth in demand in other sectors , and food is the one that is a really basic need for people .
So we need technology to give us a broader opportunity .
Broader opportunity definitely comes when you use things that usually just go to waste .
So for this purpose I believe that we clearly need to promote second-generation .
I would say that perhaps even this is not sufficient , because there we do not have the risks .
We need new technologies .
It is not just that we would like to replace oil with biofuels , but that we have technology that really guarantees that we do not have this competition , or limited competition .
That is why - even if in theory all technologies should be equal - I still believe that the second generation is worthy of particular attention .
With regard to education , I believe that this is a broader part of education .
There are educational programmes , because generally this is not education about biofuels but about sustainability , energy efficiency and a quite different attitude towards the environment and knowing that whatever you use is taken from somewhere and is always doing damage .
Sometimes , in the debate on biofuels , we forget that oil is also produced and sometimes it is produced from tar sands .
Recently some pictures have been published about where it is produced .
It is not a farm and it is really also a challenge .
So I believe that each of us , when using energy , should try to use it as efficiently as possible and follow the trend of using greener energy , supporting this even it if it costs a bit more .
Subject : Biofuels
When determining targets for biofuels should priority not be given to biodiesel rather than bioethanol ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission recognises that there is greater demand in the European Union for biodiesel as a replacement for diesel fuel rather than bioethanol , which could reduce petrol consumption .
With this in mind it can be expected that in the years to come biodiesel consumption in the EU will remain higher than that of bioethanol .
Nevertheless , the Commission believes that it is not necessary to have technologically specific targets as both biodiesel and bioethanol can have an important role to play in reducing the oil dependence of the European transport sector .
Having said this , it is second-generation which promotes biodiesel or bioethanol independently , but still demand in the EU market is definitely bigger for diesel .
I do not believe that we should discriminate between ethanol and diesel , but we should encourage second-generation instead of first-generation .
Could you comment please and give your views on the whole issue of the life-cycle sustainability for biofuels , or transport fuels generally , in relation to the Turmes report ?
In other words , on the overall CO2 reductions from start to finish , including the production of the crop , the production method , the transport , refining and use .
Where do you come down in the argument concerning the percentage of CO2 reduction ?
Are you in the 40-45 % or 35 % camp ?
Member of the Commission . - I would be in the 35 % camp , because it is important that , if we put requirements that completely ban biofuels from the market and there is too high a risk of leverage , we will move to oil - and deeper - and perhaps to coal and liquid technology .
In my opinion this is worse than really keeping 35 % as the threshold , and a 35 % threshold is clearly saving CO2 .
So I will stay with 35 % .
It is now up to negotiations with Parliament and Council : if it comes to be a different figure , well , I will live with this figure , but I think 35 % is rather tough , because in the college , when the figure was discussed , we were also in different camps , and this is already compromised from the two camps : one that believes in biofuels and one that is afraid of biofuels .
So 35 % was actually the compromise .
( SK ) Madam President , today we are looking for ways forward in the field of alternative sources of energy .
Together with my fellow Member Mr Rack , I went to New Zealand in July : I was attracted by the use of geothermal energy .
My region , Stará Ľubovňa in Slovakia , has similar geothermal sources but developing them requires large financial resources .
What is the Commission 's stance on the use of geothermal sources for energy production ?
( DE ) I would like to raise an issue which has not yet featured in the debate to any great extent .
Biofuels , biodiesel and bioethanol all have different efficiency values and different classifications , also in terms of their CO2 emissions .
One issue which has not really been addressed is actual energy input in the production of these various fuels .
Could the Commissioner comment on that ?
Member of the Commission . - We are very positive about the development of geothermal , and I believe that the draft directive now being discussed , and the climate-energy package , will facilitate the use of renewable power , including geothermal .
Why is it not being used now ?
Well , partly because it is not sufficient to focus on the renewables .
It is much easier to pass the costs of fossil fuels to the consumers , because to use renewable energy , like geothermal , you need capital investment , and for this you need a specific environment for , and focus on , renewables .
So I believe that a renewable energy source , like geothermal , will have much better developments in the EU , not only for power production but , for example , in Copenhagen it is used for district heating .
So there are different applications of this technology , and it will grow in the European Union .
Concerning energy content : it is true that biofuels have a low energy content and you need bigger volumes , and I think we should not be mistaken that we will replace oil with biofuels .
But at least here I drive a car that is powered by biofuel , and its only disadvantage is that I need to go to a service station much more often , but I do not mind this .
That is why I would say that it is different , but not so different as to make me change my behaviour .
That will be a problem with the electric car .
At the moment it is very much slower , at least at this stage - city-run cars .
Perhaps there is a need for some kind of hybrid , because if you travel a longer distance , electric vehicles might not be satisfactory - but for biofuel-driven vehicles there is no problem .
Question No 41 was ruled inadmissible and Questions Nos 42 to 45 will be answered in writing .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions 46 , 47 , 48 and 49 will be taken together :
Subject : Price fixing in the telecommunications sector
Following the regulatory action taken by the Commission seeking to rationalise roaming charges , the Commissioner responsible for the information society announced plans to cut charges for mobile data roaming services from the summer of 2009 , targeting principally the disparities between SMS messaging service charges .
What is the Commissioner 's response to the telecommunications sector which is levelling charges of populism and attempted market manipulation through ' price fixing ' in place of measures to create a healthy competitive environment in the telecommunications sector ?
How will she respond to the open hostility of the telecommunications sector to the above plans ?
Does she consider that price fixing policies should have been adopted in other sectors of the EU internal market also ?
Subject : Lowering the price of SMSs sent or received in a different Member State ( roaming )
The European Regulators ' Group ( ERG ) , which comprises the 27 European regulators , has been calling on the Commission for a year to cap prices for SMSs sent or received in a different Member State other than the user 's state of origin .
The Commission gave operators until July 2008 to lower the price of SMSs and the internet in the case of messages sent or received when roaming in the European Union .
The operators have not responded , and are penalising consumers heavily .
Can the Commission state what measures it intends to take to force operators to lower the exorbitant prices charged to consumers for SMSs and the internet when roaming within the EU and whether it plans to extend beyond 2010 the cap on mobile communications prices introduced in 2007 ?
Subject : EU Roaming Regulation
What has been the exact progress to date vis-à-vis the EU Roaming Regulation , and has there been success for the voluntary reduction of roaming prices for text messages and mobile data services in the mobile industry ?
Subject : Roaming charges
In light of the Commission 's commitment to set regulatory caps on cross-border text and data roaming fees , what steps has the Commission taken to ensure that inadvertent roaming charges do not occur for people living in and travelling to border areas of a particular country ?
Member of the Commission . - You know that the Commission yesterday decided on a proposal for the second roaming package - this time on SMS and data roaming .
Parliament will remember very well that this analysis of the market was done at the request of Parliament which , during the voice roaming package in June last year , put in Article 11 of the Regulation that the Commission should come back to SMS and data roaming in due course in 2008 .
That is what the Commission did , and you know that we have proposed price caps .
That brings me to the question of price fixing .
No , we do not fix prices .
We fix ceilings under which operators have the flexibility to compete and to innovate , either with roaming offers below the maximum oral tariff ceilings or with other packages which customers might then chose .
So , flexibility is given .
As regards SMS , the evidence suggests that prices have been more or less static over the last year and remain at levels that cannot be justified by reference to the underlying cost , and the SMS market presents roughly the same problems as the market in voice roaming .
In February this year , I went to the GSM Association World Congress in Barcelona and warned the industry .
I spoke personally with industry leaders to tell them that they had time to bring down prices by themselves and that the deadline was 1 July .
What we saw is that the prices between last year and this year for SMS roaming did not move at all .
Our proposal therefore is to cap the retail charge at a maximum of 11 cents and the wholesale charge at a maximum of 4 cents .
Turning to data roaming , we have included actions to deal with the very famous cases of bill shocks where customers have to pay several thousand euros when they come back from one or two weeks abroad , because they used their mobile phone for data downloading in the same way as at home where a data download per megabyte could cost between 5 and 15 cents .
Abroad , it can go up to 16 euros per megabyte so you can imagine what kind of bills you can receive if you are now aware of what is happening .
That is why we have proposed several measures .
The first is a transparency measure to inform citizens crossing a border what data roaming will cost .
The second is a measure where the consumer can fix , together with his operator , a ceiling over which he does not want to pay any more so that communications are then cut ; and the third is because we have seen that the whole problem here comes from highly overpriced wholesale costs which one operator imposes on another .
That is why we propose a wholesale cap at one euro per megabyte , hoping that normal price structures can then be developed and offered to consumers .
( EL ) Madam President , before submitting my supplementary question , let me congratulate Commissioner Reding on today 's vote in the European Parliament in favour of the electronic communications package .
This is yet another initiative that bears your stamp , Commissioner , like the policy you have decisively promoted on roaming charges .
Perhaps , however , this policy on roaming risks prompting European mobile phone companies to implement a practice followed in non-European , third countries , where consumers pay not only when they make calls , but also when they receive them ?
Firstly I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on the roaming package .
I think it will be positive news for many EU phone users .
My particular question referred to inadvertent roaming charges , when people are travelling close to a border - and indeed I have plenty of experience of that myself .
I heard what you said about the transparency initiative , namely that , when crossing borders , users would be informed as to what the cost would be .
That was not in reference to telephone calls , but I just want to ask if you have any initiatives in that area and , if you have not , would you consider the transparency initiative that you mentioned a few moments ago in your reply ?

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first I would like to thank the honourable Member of Parliament for his congratulations , but I would like to pass his congratulations on to Parliament , because Parliament , in a very difficult situation with five directives on the table on very complicated matters , has done a wonderful job .
I might not agree 100 % on everything Parliament has voted , but what Parliament has done today is put the single market for telecoms on the agenda .
Now the Council has to look at what Parliament has proposed and try to find a common way in order to make this telecom package become a reality for industry and consumers .
With regard to the question on roaming , is there not a risk that , because we bring down prices on roaming , the operators try to raise prices in another way ? We already heard last year , when we introduced the voice roaming package , that the operators would be forced to raise the national cost for voice mobiles , but what we saw was just the contrary .
So what happened ? Firstly , citizens , instead of switching off their phones when they are abroad , are now using them .
So the volume on voice has gone up tremendously , by 34 % in one year only .
Secondly , because there is competition at national level , national prices have not risen but have gone down by 10-12 % .
The honourable Member recalls the polemics which were going on at a certain time about ' bill and keep ' .
It is up to the operators what kind of billing system they want to adopt .
Our European way of doing it is not to use ' bill and keep ' .
That is the American way of doing it .
I have just seen that prices in the United States are lower than prices here , and I told the operator very clearly that they should choose their business model .
It is not for the Commissioner to do that , but they have to be on terms with their customers .
The only thing that concerns me is that there is transparency , that prices do not go above price limits which are unacceptable , and that all European consumers can feel at home when they are travelling in Europe and when they are communicating in Europe .
Regarding the question on inadvertent roaming : yes , we are aware of this .
Coming from Luxembourg , you can imagine how many complaints I receive from consumers on this question , because some Luxembourgers living in a border area have one operator in the living room , another one in the kitchen and a third in the bedroom , so I am fully aware of this question .
That is why we have raised this question with the national regulators , and we are monitoring this problem with the European Regulators Group .
We will also continue to do so with the national regulators .
We have also increased the transparency initiatives for data and SMS on the package which is now on the table in the European Parliament .
There have already been some positive developments concerning this inadvertent roaming , for instance in Ireland , with good work done on both sides of the border .
I think that is a positive way to see it , and I think that the operators also should be very conscious of the fact of inadvertent roaming .
Even if it is only a very small percentage of the population which suffers as a result of this question , it is the responsibility of the operators to try to solve the problem .
( DE ) I would also like to express my congratulations on the outcome of today 's vote .
I would be interested to hear whether you have any plans to draft a work programme for BERT with agreed objectives and an agreed timetable so that we can make clear progress as regards inter-state cooperation as well .
After all , we recently read in New Europe , the news source for Europe , that roaming has allegedly cost European consumers 30 billion euro .
I would like to thank you for addressing the roaming issue pro-actively .
In your view , is it also necessary to draw up an action programme for the Member States to deal with some of the tasks identified by the European Parliament ?
Is a new institution required here ?

( DE ) Madam Commissioner , as you have heard , you have rightly been praised , and citizens applaud you , for the fact that telecoms in Europe have become cheaper , with prices likely to fall even further in future .
In this context , I would like , if I may , to pass on a question which is often put to me .
I am not certain whether you are responsible for this area , so I would ask you to pass it on if necessary .
In the telecoms sphere , the Commission and the Commissioner can ensure that competition operates effectively , and that services become cheaper through caps and other measures .
That being the case , why is this not possible when it comes to oil and related products ?
Why do we have a situation in which prices generally only move in one direction , namely upwards ?
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Piebalgs should really answer that question , but I will pass it on to him .
A roaming system for oil products : that would be quite something !
As regards the timetable which Mr Rübig asked about : we now have what I believe is the second roaming package on the table .
I can imagine that Parliament will act very fast to produce its opinion on this roaming package so that it can be concluded swiftly before the end of the French Presidency .
I have also spoken to the French Presidency of the Council this afternoon ; the Council Presidency will address the issue and ensure that the Council produces an analysis of the Commission 's proposals as quickly as possible so that the new provisions can enter into force on schedule on 1 July 2009 .
That is what the citizens - the consumers - expect from both Parliament and the Council .
Madam President , I just want to apologise for not being here when the Commissioner was answering my question .
I was stuck at another meeting . I am very sorry .
Thank you Mr Crowley , and thanks too for not insisting on a supplementary .
Subject : Break in transmission of the Chinese TV channel NTDTV
On 16 June transmission of New Tang Dynasty Television ( NTDTV ) to mainland China was suddenly halted by the operating firm Eutelsat .
The reason given was ' an irregularity in the power supply ' to the satellite .
Since then Eutelsat has given no satisfactory explanation of the causes .
NTDTV has not been informed whether efforts are being made to remedy the technical faults .
NTDTV is the largest independent TV broadcaster in Chinese and , before 16 June , the only one which could be received in uncensored form in China .
NTDTV broadcasts programmes in Chinese and English .
Eutelsat did not want to renew the contract with NTDTV for transmission to Asia in 2005 , but the cancellation of the contract was prevented by international intervention .
What measures will the Commission be taking to ensure the continued transmission of independent TV channels in China ?

Member of the Commission . - I am at the disposal of the honourable Mr Crowley if he would like to speak with me later on and has a supplementary question .
As for the question concerning the break in transmission of the Chinese TV Channel NTDTV , The Commission was very much aware of this problem , and therefore asked Eutelsat to clarify the situation .
We received a letter from Eutelsat which answered that the irreversible loss of one of the V5 's two solar panels has been confirmed both by Eutelsat and by the satellite manufacturer , Thales Space .
To safeguard the satellite 's operation , Eutelsat switched off the four transponders providing direct-to-home television services while keeping the 20 remaining transponders used for telecommunication services .
As Eutelsat does not operate any other satellite with coverage of Asia , they have provided their customers , including the service provider of NTDTV , with a list of competitor satellites with appropriate coverage and availability capacity .
Eutelsat also pointed out that their satellites carried channels representing all channels , cultures and political viewpoints .
They refrain from indulging in the slightest judgement as to the ideological and political positioning of the channels .
Eutelsat reaffirmed to the Commission that they had not taken any action against NTDTV at the behest of the Government of China or anyone else .
NTDTV is actually still carried by one of their European satellites .
Eutelsat also supplied technical information showing that , in order to receive NTDTV , rather large satellite dishes were necessary , which made it unlikely that a significant part of the population of the People 's Republic of China could receive it .
( DE ) Can you give an estimate as to when the service provision and the broadcasting capacity will be restored ?
My second question is related to that : do you think we will be able to create a ' Europe without borders ' for television as well , with all the national broadcasting services being received throughout Europe ?
Member of the Commission . - Concerning the first question , Eutelsat has told us that the breakdown is irreversible and that the transmission of TV services cannot be resumed .
So it is a purely technical question .
Unfortunately , the capacity is only 50 % , so the energy which can be taken up is only 50 % .
It is a technical question which , unfortunately , cannot be solved .
Now to the more fundamental question from the honourable Member as to whether we should , some day , have a ' Europe without borders ' for television .
We are not yet there .
We have our Television without Frontiers Directive , which is now implemented in an Audiovisual Services without Frontiers Directive , where I hope very much that the video-on-demand services can become Europe-wide services .
The dream , of course , is that one day there will no longer be any borders and that citizens , wherever they are , can receive whatever TV channels they want .
We are not yet there because the selling of rights is still done under a national system .
One day , Europe will arrive at a situation where the selling of rights can also be done at a European level .
I favour this .
I cannot impose it , but I favour it , and I believe that slowly but surely we will move beyond the national selling of rights to the European selling of rights .
I apologise to the remaining two questioners for Commissioner Reding , but Questions Nos 51 and 52 will be answered in writing .
Subject : Irish as an official working language of the European Union
How does the Commission intend to implement its new strategy for multilingualism , particularly with regard to the strengthening of the Irish language as an official working language of the European Union ?
Commission Member . - ( RO ) The European Commission 's new strategy on multilingualism , entitled ” Multilingualism - An asset for Europe - A shared commitment ” , was adopted on 18 September 2008 .
The main topic of the strategy is linguistic diversity and the best way of using and developing it in order to foster intercultural dialogue , to stimulate the competitiveness of European companies , and to improve the skills and work-finding abilities of European citizens .
The strategy focuses on encouraging the learning and use of foreign languages in the Member States , not on the in-house linguistic state of affairs of European institutions .
We reassert our commitment to developing the citizens ' ability of communicating in two languages other than their native languages ; at the same time , we stress the need of making available a wider range of languages for citizens to choose from according to their interest .
The Commission will rely on existing community programs , particularly on the Lifelong Learning Programme , to support Member States in promoting foreign languages by enforcing this strategy .

Through Regulation 1 of the Council of 15 April 1958 , amended by article 1 of Regulation 920 / 2005 ( EC ) of the Council of 13 June 2005 , Irish became an official working language of European Union institutions as of 1 January 2007 .
However , articles 2 and 3 of the Regulation provide for a partial derogation , renewable every 5 years , concerning the use of Irish by European Union institutions .
Basically , this derogation implies that for the time being only proposals for regulations within the codecision procedure and certain related documents , as well as direct communication with the public , are translated from or into Irish .
Therefore , according to the above-mentioned provisions , the Commission performed all the Irish translations required for the legislative process , and succeeded in transmitting them on time .
Moreover , answers were given in Irish to the questions addressed to the Commission by citizens or by legal entities .
The Commission also started to make available Irish versions of its most important web pages , with priority to content of particular interest to Irish speakers .
As far as interpretation is concerned , DG Interpretation is capable of meeting all interpretation demands , from and into Irish , coming from the Council , the Commission or the Committees , and will endeavour to do so in the future , making sure it has the necessary resources .
( GA ) Madam President , I am very grateful to the Commission for its support , and for the progress the Commission has made , in relation to the Irish language .
There is a saying in Irish that " its lack of use is to its detriment ” .
I only have thirty seconds left so I cannot waste any time .
One minute is the maximum amount of time I am normally allowed in Parliament to express myself in my own language .
I would like to inquire of the Commissioner , if the Commission would be happy to see the Irish language develop and if it would be possible to use it to a greater extent here in Parliament and in the other Institutions , especially , at committee level where the language could be spoken for longer periods .
A language will not survive on a few seconds alone .
Commission Member . - ( RO ) Looking at the demands faced by the European Commission , we are pleased to say that they were not only met , but also exceeded .
The European Commission went above and beyond .
On the other hand , further joint effort is needed in order to promote the Irish language on a wider scale .
These efforts should come both from community institutions and from Irish authorities and the Irish society at large .
For instance , we need more Irish interpreters , more translators , and this objective is hard to achieve unless significant resources are allocated at country level , that is , in Ireland .
This is why I am working closely with the Irish authorities to encourage and stimulate those who want to train and acquire the necessary skills that would enable them to do linguistic work for community institutions .
I would also like to stress that we are working closely with the Irish authorities with respect to the various developments of the Irish language , not only its institutional aspects .
We want to do our best to help Irish terminology and , as I said , we have a close cooperation with all the stakeholders .
Question No 54 from Mr Higgins has been withdrawn .
Subject : Multilingualism in the EU institutions
The Commission organises traineeship programmes which it publicises only in English , French and German .
Equally , it publishes EIDHR announcements only in English , French and Spanish , stating that only in those languages will it accept projects from European organisations , whatever their national origin .
Indeed , the website of the Commission 's own anti-discrimination campaign is , like many others , registered only in English , and its homepage displays logos in that language only .
What policies does the Commission intend to introduce in order to ensure that the multilingualism which is always defended in public and is officially promoted in all its own documents is implemented in reality in its day-to-day activities ?
Commission Member . - ( RO ) The European Commission 's internship program is aimed at any university graduate who has not been through such a European internship before and who is proficient in at least one of the working languages of the European Commission : German , English , or French .
This is a practical necessity which enables an intern to take part in the activities carried out by our services , taking full advantage of his / her internship .
All the practical information and explanations to the applicants are available only in these three languages .
On the other hand , the rules governing the internship program are available in all the official languages of the Union in force on the day of adoption of the Commission 's decision .
In order to fulfil the mission described in Article 177 of the Treaty , the number of admissible languages for the proposals of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights must be limited to those languages which are currently used and understood in the respective third countries .
Nonetheless , the documents sent by non-governmental organisations in support of their applications for external aid are now accepted in all of the official languages of the European Union , via PADOR , the online system for NGOs .
Concerning awareness-raising or coordination actions taking place within the EU only , which are aimed at European citizens only , we will assess the applications submitted in the language ( s ) of the respective Member State ( s ) .
Indeed , the front page of the online campaign against discrimination does use a logo written in English , but this provides access to webpages in almost all of the official languages of the EU .
According to the action plan for improved communication with the citizens , in 2006 the Commission set up a web translation service within DG Translation , thus increasing its capacity for multilingual communication .
However , given the rapid evolution of the internet , as well as the necessity of ensuring legal translations first and foremost , according to Regulation 1 , the Commission must always be on the lookout for the right balance between providing relevant and up-to-date information to the stakeholders within the EU , and ensuring the fully multilingual character of all of the Commission 's websites .
The general principle governing the use of languages on the webpages is to adapt the language of each site to the target audience .
Therefore , the Commission ensures the translation in as many languages as possible of those websites or website sections which are of interest to all citizens , whereas more technical subjects , which are of interest to specialists , are available either in a limited number of languages or in their original language only .
Likewise , the information expected to be valid for longer is available in more languages than ephemeral content .
The Commission 's obligations according to Regulation 1 include the translation of all regulations , directives , legislative proposals and officially approved communications sent by the Commission to the institutions into all of the official languages ; on the other hand , the answers to letters from the citizens are given in the language of the addressee ( s ) .
Apart from discharging these duties , and in accordance with the principle of multilinguism and multiculturalism , the Commission undertakes to make every effort in order to ensure the equal treatment of citizens , cultures and languages .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say first of all that the distinction you have suggested drawing between documents of a technical nature and - if I have correctly understood the interpretation - documents of public interest strikes me as a particularly dangerous and slippery distinction , since documents of a technical nature may in actual fact be of considerable public interest .
The problem is quite straightforward : texts which are purely working documents are subject to linguistic constraints , but all documents which might potentially be addressed to the public , even if of a technical nature , must be handled on a fully multilingual basis : they must be translated into all languages .
In particular , I find it absolutely incomprehensible that calls for tender relating to projects to promote democracy and human rights should be accessible only in English , French and Spanish .
The websites must be not only multilingual but registered in all languages .
Finally , I fail to understand why even the internal newsletter Commission en direct should appear almost exclusively in English .

Commission Member . - ( RO ) As I said , the European Commission is bound , on the one hand , by legal obligations under Regulation 1 of 1958 , and there is no hesitation whatsoever in the fulfillment of these obligations ; on the other hand , there are certain matters , such as the ones you mentioned , related to the translations available on European Commission websites , in which case the Commission and the other community institutions are facing a major dilemma .
One the one hand , the fully multilingual content of these websites cannot be provided ; it is simply impossible to ensure full multilinguism for all the documents found on the Commission websites , due to the Commission 's limitations in terms of financial and human resources .
On the other hand , what we are doing right now is to increase the number of documents that can be translated in as many official EU languages as possible , without prejudice to our legal obligations , and within the resource limitations that I 've mentioned .
We have proved ourselves to be flexible when various requests to to the Commission were made , and , to the extent that we can physically meet these demands , we are ready to show the same flexibility again .
I am sorry to have to disappoint further questioners , but in view of the time I am afraid we are going to have to leave it there .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
It is a point of order in a roundabout sort of way .
Mr Orban and I go back a long time , so I hope he will take this in the spirit that it is intended , because one of his answers did actually take six minutes , and I think , as we are trying to get many questions up in future , I wonder if he could perhaps try and make his answers a little bit more focused or succinct in future for the benefit of all Members .
Mr Evans , we have discussed the matter with Vice-President Wallström .
On the one hand , we know the Commission is trying to give us answers that are as full as we would like them to be , but then that obviously curtails the number of Members able to participate .
Thank you all , and I am sure that you will receive full answers in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.15 and resumed at 21.00 . )

White Paper on Nutrition , Overweight and Obesity-related health issues ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr A. Foglietta , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the White Paper on ' A Strategy for Europe on Nutrition , Overweight and Obesity related health issues ' .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before opening the debate about the report on which we will be voting tomorrow , I should like to take this opportunity to say some words of thanks . I would begin by thanking my colleague Adriana Poli Bortone , now a senator of the Italian Republic , from whom I inherited the draft report and an already detailed , meticulous study of the topic ; next my staff , who have supported me enthusiastically and conscientiously in furthering my exploration and analysis of the phenomenon ; and finally the shadow rapporteurs , whose commitment undoubtedly contributed to the adoption of the text in the Committee on the Environment , with a virtually unanimous cross-party consensus .
Ladies and gentlemen , when this draft text was entrusted to me , I asked myself what my aim should be as rapporteur in carrying forward a study of this kind .
I found an answer in the strategic nature of the document , which showed me the two pillars on which I came to base my work : firstly completeness , so as not to leave any gaps or underestimate the importance of any of the numerous aspects of the subject in hand ; and practicality , so as to be able to draw up a genuinely future-oriented document identifying effective instruments and solutions .


In adopting this approach I relied on the data , statistics and percentages already widely available on the topic .
The percentages are discomfiting once we look into them since , according to the World Health Organisation , more than 1 billion people are overweight and over 300 million are obese .
Child obesity is growing rapidly , and we should bear in mind that diseases related to obesity and overweight absorb up to 6 % of national health expenditure in certain Member States .
In seeking possible solutions we took care not to demonise certain types of food as being solely responsible for the problem of obesity .
The problem will not be solved by eliminating such foods from our diet , but rather by educating consumers , and especially young people and children , to eat sensibly .
Fats are an essential part of a correct nutritional intake , but in the right quantities and at the right times of the day .
Lessons on diet , on which I lay great emphasis , are not about the ability to distinguish good foods from bad ; nothing is harmful in absolute terms , and nothing needs to be excluded from the diet of healthy people not suffering from an eating disorder .
Another issue to which I would draw your attention is that obesity certainly does constitute a disease .
It is a disease whose causes are not only physical but often social or psychological , but it nevertheless remains a disease which costs our national health systems huge sums of money every year . It is a disease which , as such , must be tackled by means of practical , multi-layered solutions .
During these months of study , however , I have realised that all too often this aspect is underestimated by public opinion , which indulges in wholly justified alarmism and awareness-raising campaigns about anorexia but also takes an equally unjustified consolatory approach towards overweight , with slogans such as ' big is beautiful ' , and so on .
This is misguided ; it sends out the wrong message .
We are not discussing aesthetics or appearance ; we are talking about health .
Therefore , just as the scourge of anorexia needs to be fought energetically , we wish to try and combat obesity in the same manner , working on the various fronts set out in this report , which calls for parallel and consistent efforts .
Efforts are required from educators , health professionals , the food industry and the media , especially television .
All of them must exercise the strong sense of responsibility deriving from their potential to guide public opinion .
Public authorities , especially local ones , must play their part too .
I wish to close , ladies and gentlemen , with a news item which has made waves in the past few days : namely , one of the two candidates in the race for the White House has stated that it would be useful , right and proper to tax obese citizens as well as alcoholics and smokers .
This , in my opinion , is absurd as a principle , but I do believe that this serious problem must be addressed in an appropriate manner , because only by tackling it head-on will positive results be achieved .
I am going to ask all speakers to pay close attention to the time as we cannot overrun on this debate , given that it is an evening debate and we have very limited time , particularly in terms of logistics , for example the interpreting service .
Please ensure that I do not have to cut you off because I regard this as very awkward for the Presidency and I would prefer that you all took individual responsibility .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I very much welcome Parliament 's report in response to the Commission White Paper on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues .
In particular , allow me to congratulate Mr Alessandro Foglietta on his excellent work .
I am happy to note that Parliament shares the Commission 's view that the obesity epidemic can only be halted by means of an integrated approach and that Parliament welcomes the Commission 's White Paper as an important step towards stemming the rise in obesity and overweight across Europe .
I also take note of Parliament 's request for a number of further actions - including more regulatory measures - beyond those currently envisaged by the Commission .
The Commission will , in 2010 , hold a first review of achievements against the objectives set out in the White Paper of 2007 .
If monitoring shows that progress is not adequate , further actions , including a possible regulatory approach , will of course need to be considered .
With regard to the monitoring process , I wish to draw your attention to the important role being played by the World Health Organisation .
We are working together in line with the conclusions of the WHO Ministerial Conference in Istanbul , with a focus on monitoring actions in Member States to implement both the Commission 's White Paper and the WHO strategy .
Finally , I wish to share with you today some of the most recent developments in the implementation of the strategy for Europe on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues , which respond to some of the actions called for in your report .
As you know , to strengthen actions at the European level the Commission has to set up a high-level group focused on nutrition and physical-activity-related health issues .
The group is ensuring the rapid exchange of ideas and practices between Member States , with an overview of all government policies .
Looking at the engagement of the stakeholders to date , the pan-European organisations , members of the European Platform on Diet , Physical Activity and Health , are currently implementing more than 200 commitments in key areas such as product reformulation , labelling and responsible advertising .
Monitoring is ongoing and annual reports are publicly available on the Commission 's website .
Complementary to the EU Platform , to date Public-Private Partnerships between governments and the private sector are reported in 17 EU Member States and I consider that this is going in the right direction .
In July , the high-level group met with the European Platform on Diet , Physical Activity and Health in order to discuss potential for synergies and partnerships , focusing in particular on salt reduction - the agreed initial priority for joint action with Member States .
This joint meeting was positive and I am certain that such gatherings involving both high-level officials from Member States and Platform members will increase the impact of actions taken both by government authorities and by Platform members in the future .
Let me also draw your attention to the Commission 's proposal last July to reserve EUR 90 million every year for the purchase and distribution of free fruit and vegetables to schools .
Turning the tide on obesity is one of the most important public health challenges we are faced with in Europe today .
I am grateful for your continued support and look forward to continuing dialogue with Parliament on how best to proceed so that the European Union can play its role to the full in addressing this issue .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( PL ) Mr President , obesity and overweight represent challenges for contemporary society .
They lead to many chronic conditions such as circulatory diseases , hypertension , Type 2 diabetes , strokes and certain types of cancer .
Combating obesity and overweight should be a priority for the Union 's health policy .
The greatest possible number of partners should be involved .
I am thinking of local authorities , the Member States , the European Commission as well as representatives of industry .
We should not , however , overlook consumers , who make their own choices about food .
Educational campaigns and promotion of physical activity seem to constitute the best approach .
The consumers would then have clear and comprehensible information on the basis of which they could make wise food choices .
I do not believe , however , that imposing restrictions on the food producers alone will result in a reduction in the number of overweight individuals .
I am thinking of advertising , for example .
I should also like to draw attention to another somewhat neglected aspect of this debate : appropriate training for health service professionals , notably as regards caring for diabetics and the treatment of diabetes .
Such training has been somewhat neglected , especially in the new Member States .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( PL ) Mr President , I could almost have drafted this document myself .
I support the measures contained in the White Paper .
It refers to the adoption of a healthier lifestyle and to physical activity of all kinds as being the most effective methods of treatment .
The White Paper also contains preventive measures in the form of far-reaching recommendations for food producers , consumers , restaurant owners , food outlet chains and the advertising industry .
Information campaigns are also mentioned .
Coordination between the various policy areas and levels of management along with the involvement of the private sector are crucial for the effective implementation of these measures .
We need to face this problem together .
Particular emphasis must be placed on implementing those actions intended to prevent obesity in children .
Adults are responsible for drumming sensible eating habits into children .
It is often the case , however , that we adults ourselves are not fully aware of what is and is not advisable .
That is why it is so important to organise information campaigns aimed at parents , so that they can ensure that their offspring enjoy a balanced diet .
Programmes promoting the principles of healthy eating and physical activity should also be directed at children and young people .
It is certainly the case that widespread obesity exists .
It is also true , however , that there is a strong obsession , insistence and indeed a requirement to be thin .
Eighty per cent of teenage girls under the age of 18 have tried to lose weight at least once in their life .
Trying to lose weight in the wrong way can be dangerous .
It follows that just as it is important to impart knowledge about the world wisely to young people , so too must young people be taught about sensible nutrition that results in a hunger for knowledge .
That type of hunger is highly desirable .
Every effort should be made to implement the pan-European programme known as the School Fruit Scheme .
The European Commission proposed allocating a mere EUR 90 million to this programme .
I believe that this amount should be increased several times over so that the ubiquitous school vending machines filled with crisps , chocolate bars and fizzy drinks can be replaced with others selling fresh fruit , vegetables and dairy products .
We should always remember that our children 's diet will determine their health in later life .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( SK ) Thank you , Mr President , I do not have much time so I just want to mention a few points .
As always , I am in favour of prevention and prevention from childhood .
Prevention is closely linked to the promotion of parental responsibility .
The best way of preventing childhood obesity is not to use the television , video games and the Internet as babysitting services .
Without creative activities , children and adults do not get enough exercise .
Children must get to grips with proper eating habits in terms of the quality and quantity of food and laying the table .
It is essential to promote family meals , with parents and children eating together .
There is nothing better than when a family can eat at least one meal together .
In order to make this possible , it is essential to facilitate a work-life balance .
Teaching children to cook is another good way of preventing obesity .
Children like to help with cooking and it would be a good idea to encourage this .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , obesity is one of Europe 's greatest health challenges , but some may say what has it got to do with us here in the European Parliament ?
Or indeed within the EU ?
There are at least two reasons .
One is , as the rapporteur has already said , obesity-related diseases account for more than 6 % of taxpayer-funded national health budgets in the EU .
We all have to pay for it .
Secondly , different EU countries are tackling the issue differently , and all have much to learn from each other .
So may I congratulate the Commission for their White Paper in triggering this debate , and I would just highlight a few key points .
We generally welcome the Commission 's proposal on food labelling , but felt it would be inappropriate for this report to pre-empt the detailed discussions which will be necessary on this specific issue .
On obesity , evidence shows that the problem is much more about how much exercise people take rather than just how much food they eat .
It is about calorie output , not just about calorie input .
So it would be totally wrong to blame the food and drink industry for causing the problem , or indeed for failing to provide a sufficient solution .
The reality is in fact much more complicated .
We need more activity-friendly communities offering more bicycle routes , better town planning , more promotion of public transport , more parks and sports facilities , more school playing fields and yes , better education .
We need many aspects of our lives to change .
So may I congratulate the rapporteur on his wide-ranging report and his very difficult task , picking up from his predecessor , and dealing with so many shadows with so many ideas of their own .
I particularly thank him for accepting some of my amendments including those concerning the problem of malnourishment , particularly in hospitals and care homes for the elderly .
It is most important that we look after the more vulnerable in our society .
Some people make themselves vulnerable , and , if I may conclude with a sweeping generalisation , one of the problems of society today is a lack of personal responsibility , a belief that every failing is someone else 's problem , that someone else will solve it .
More regulation simply feeds this perception ; more self-regulation and self-discipline is the answer .
We need to encourage greater personal responsibility , and that way we will all make greater progress as a society .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , this is a long report .
There were 400 amendments , and I would like to thank the rapporteur because he has tried to make some sense of it .
I hope the key messages will not be lost because it is so long .
For us in the Socialist Group the key messages - and there are some very positive points here - are that we need good food-labelling regulation and we want to see front-of-pack labelling , if possible using colour coding , included in the forthcoming discussions .
We know the Commission is looking at this and that is what we want to see .
We are pleased that there is now support across the Parliament for a ban on artificial trans-fatty acids .
When I first raised this two years ago there was no support in the Parliament - in fact the Commission was taking Denmark to court and there was nothing happening .
We have now had a written declaration and we have a consensus , so I hope the Commission will do something like this .
Commissioner , you spoke about product reformulation .
I think this is crucial .
It is true what Philip Bushill-Matthews says that obviously people have to take some responsibility , but manufacturers have a responsibility in terms of how they make products .
Many of them are now making great efforts to cut salt , fat and sugar .
Often these things are hidden in foods .
It is not obvious to consumers when they buy ketchup or yoghurt that they contain lots of sugar .
In fact the labelling system often disguises what is in the product , such as yoghurts which are labelled ' low fat ' when they have very high levels of sugar .
We do not believe that self-regulation is the answer to everything .
We think there has to be a degree of regulation , in particular in relation to children .
Yes , adults can make choices but children need to be protected by the law and that is why we want to see independent monitoring of any voluntary agreements by industry .
We know that you are taking the first steps in this direction .
Finally , this is a huge issue for Europe .
It is going to cost the public purse a lot of money if we do not tackle it and we now need some concrete proposals to come from the Commission - not on issues which are to do with national responsibility , but in those areas where the EU has responsibility we need clear policies which help national governments to reduce obesity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , a sedentary lifestyle ailment and now increasingly a young person 's disease , it has been said that the problem of obesity is central to the work of this House and has been since the start of the current legislative term .
Every year more than 400 000 young people are added to the long list of those who are destined to know all about the yo-yo effect of dieting .
Europe has therefore done well to tackle this problem head-on .
It also adopted a clear strategy in this area in March 2005 when it launched the European platform that was to unite all those involved , including the agro-food industry , the retail and distribution sector , medical professionals and consumer associations .
It has to be recognised - and people have said as much here today - that it is not easy to convince people that Europe should have more than a say in this fight against obesity .
To do this we have to start by clarifying the levels of authority , which does not prevent us - and indeed we are doing this - from reminding the Member States just what their powers and responsibilities are .


I am thinking here of two hard-hitting proposals that we have made in the report : the first is to prevent discrimination and the stigmatisation of obese people by officially recognising obesity as a chronic disease , as has been done for example by the WHO and Portugal ; the second is to ensure that all schoolchildren have access to physical exercise and sport - two hours a week would be the minimum requirement in my opinion - along with better funding of school canteens so that fresh products are put on the children 's menu , and here I welcome the Commission 's initiative for the free distribution of fruit at school , as referred to by the Commissioner .
I would also add that it is through simple , tangible and sensible actions such as this that people will learn to like Europe again .
I now come to Mr Foglietta 's report , and I wish to thank him for all the effort that he has put in .
I would like to highlight two proposals that have been made here .
The first concerns opting for a political incentive - such as lower prices and tax concessions - rather than a system that is based on increasing the tax on high-calorie products , namely the famous ' fat tax ' , which at the end of the day will penalise low-income households the most .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which I represent here today , is therefore opposed to Amendment 6 by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and prefers to stand by the proposal for a substantial cut in VAT on fruit and vegetables , as laid down in paragraph 28 .
My Group also supports the banning of artificial trans-fatty acids , which are recognised as being linked to a significant increase in cardiovascular problems .
We are therefore opposed to the amendments proposed by Mr Blokland , which are aimed at softening the impact of paragraphs 32 , 34 and 35 and at clearing the way for , if not to say whitewashing , these hydrogenated fats .
Our message to manufacturers is quite clear : show goodwill and make innovations for the sake of consumers ' health and also in your own best interest .
As time is short I would like to conclude by mentioning the first parliamentary meetings on nutrition and health issues that I set up in this Chamber a year ago .
This was the start of a major debate for all the parties involved and one that was centred on four key priorities : getting through to people from a very early age , eating a varied and balanced diet , treating obesity as a chronic disease and legislating if necessary .
This is more than just a slogan , it is the moral duty of this European Union of ours and we need to commit ourselves fully to the fight against obesity and the sedentary lifestyle .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , over 50 % of Europe 's citizens are either obese or overweight .
Three million children are obese and 22 million overweight .
Obesity places a great strain on the bone structure with all the negative consequences that entails .
It also causes metabolic disorders and a consequent propensity to diabetes , circulatory diseases , hypertension and high cholesterol levels .
The problem is partly due to inappropriate nutrition and partly to a sedentary lifestyle that does not involve any physical effort .
Certain features of our civilisation , notably stress , play their part too .
The social dimension of the problem calls for determined action , in particular as regards protecting children .
Children are eating too many sweet things instead of well-balanced meals , and spending whole days in front of the television or computer .
This is because adults are failing to guide children 's lifestyle appropriately and provide good models of behaviour .
The White Paper on nutrition is a useful document in terms of action to control obesity , especially amongst children .
The selection of healthy products should be facilitated by a promotion and information policy focused on children but above all on their parents .
In particular , we support the School Fruit Scheme .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , today we are discussing overweight and obesity and I think it is important - as several people have already said - not to talk too much about diet and waste , but to talk mainly about the need to eat healthily .
A couple of months ago I was very shocked when my daughter , an extremely slim daughter , came home and did not want to eat her second slice of bread because she would get fat .
She had heard a lot at school about how above all you must not be fat , but she was not sufficiently aware of how you should eat healthily and what a normal helping is .
A child of eight does not really understand when you are too fat .
Thus it is very important to talk mainly about healthy eating and not about whether a person is too fat .
In fact , it is mainly the responsibility of parents to show children what is healthy and what it means to eat a balanced helping , and the responsibility of schools to pass this on and set an example .
Parents themselves must learn more about food values and the fat content of products and so I agree with what was said earlier about labelling .
We should therefore review that point in the legislation on labelling .
I also think that it is a good idea to talk a lot about sport and about the fact that children must be able to play happily outside .
Therefore , we must in any case make a recommendation that in town and country planning more attention is paid to the wishes of children to have plenty of freedom .
As far as eating is concerned , the European Commission has a very good EU MiniChefs website .
The website has already been improved . It now has vegetarian dishes as well , which it did not have many of before , but nearly all the recipes contain meat .
Let us be honest about that , animal proteins are a major contributor to overweight .
Apart from animal welfare , the European Commission should not be explicitly promoting meat consumption .
I just want to say a final word on VAT .
Mrs Ries has just said that she is against our Amendment 6 because she wants to reward people , not penalise them .
Therefore , she wants not a fat tax or higher taxes on unhealthy products and imports , but , in particular , lower taxes on healthy products .
I certainly agree with that , but now it appears that , in the Netherlands too for example , all foodstuffs now fall into the low category .
Crisps , lollies and the like all have a low VAT rating at the moment , but surely it cannot be the intention that you make that special exception for unhealthy products .
Thus it is not a question of penalising ; you should not reward products that are not healthy by giving them a lower VAT rating .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) A third of Europeans suffer from overweight and obesity .
A substantial share of the Member States ' health budgets has to be allocated to combating the problems raised by overweight .
Furthermore , the overweight problem reflects socio-economic inequity .
People on low incomes are worst affected since they consume more sugar and saturated fats .
Quite simply , they have a poorer diet .
It is clearly the task of policy to create the best possible conditions for people to eat more healthily .
That is exactly what Mr Foglietta sets out to do in this report .
He therefore has the support of the Group of the European United Left .
The report calls for the EU to be more flexible in allowing the Member States to apply lower VAT rates for healthy food and higher rates for what we should eat less of .
It is an important demand which I hope EU leaders will listen to .
What does the Commission have to say about this ?
Can the Commission come back with a review of the EU VAT Directive allowing more flexibility in the Member States , so that we can get to pay less VAT on healthy food , for example ?
Another question to the Commission concerns trans-fats .
We know that trans-fats are bad for us .
That has been established by authorities in the Member States , as well as by EFSA , the EU 's own Food Safety Authority .
At a hearing in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on 1 April this year , Commissioner Androulla Vassiliou said that trans-fat is definitely not good for health , there is no doubt about it .
In this report we call for a ban on trans-fats , but the Commission refuses to propose it .
Mrs Vassiliou will not even allow individual Member States to go further and introduce national bans .
Now the Commission has a chance to withdraw from this unhealthy position .
When shall we get a ban on trans-fats ?
Can the Commission at least guarantee Member States freedom to ban trans-fats if they wish to ?
Meat is another dimension of the public health problem , as the previous speaker , Mrs Buitenweg , pointed out .
Meat consumption is soaring across the world .
If nothing is done , the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) warns that the already high consumption of meat will double by 2050 .
Meat contains saturated fats and contributes to obesity .
Furthermore , the meat industry is seriously helping to hasten climate change .
The EU should phase out subsidies to the meat industry ; yet , in the budget for 2007 alone , over 45 million euros were appropriated just for the marketing costs of the meat industry .
It is counter-productive and , besides , a bizarre waste of taxpayers ' money .
The phasing out of these meat subsidies and a strategy for reduced meat consumption should be self-evident measures for better health in the EU .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , trans-fatty acids are not the healthiest fatty acids .
These fatty acids exist in natural and industrial form and are found in many food products .
Although the results of scientific research vary , most research shows that the trans- fatty acids naturally found in foodstuffs and artificially added industrial trans-fatty acids present an equal risk .
Both types of trans-fatty acid are in fact equally harmful if too much is consumed .
It therefore does not seem to me appropriate to maintain that distinction in the present proposal ; hence my amendment .
Furthermore , it is very difficult to ban all trans-fatty acids completely without creating other risks to public health .
According to the UK Food Standards Agency for instance , a ban on trans-fatty acids in fact leads to a concentration of saturated fatty acids .
Saturated fatty acids are at least as harmful as trans-fatty acids .
On average the total intake of saturated fatty acids is considerably higher than the World Health Organisation recommends .
I have therefore tabled amendments to limit the quantity of saturated fatty acids as well and at the same time I suggest that we do not call for a ban on trans-fatty acids , as indicated now in paragraph 32 of the report .
What might be a possibility is for us to set a limit of , for example , a 2 % proportion of trans-fatty acids in total energy intake .
That appears to be technically very feasible and to some extent it is already being done .
We have to ensure that we do not have a trade-off between trans-fatty acids and saturated fatty acids , with consumer health not being improved at all as a result .
( SK ) The deteriorating trend towards unhealthy eating and insufficient physical exercise in Europe is alarming .
I am therefore very pleased that we are looking at this problem here in the European Parliament .
We know that obesity is one of the factors responsible for ' civilisation diseases ' , such as high blood pressure , heart disease , diabetes and consequent diseases of the musculoskeletal system .
On 17 September I organised a working lunch here in the European Parliament devoted to the problem of the relationship between obesity and diabetes in pregnancy .
The Members and assistants present were able to listen to the top experts in Europe , such as Dr Rosa Corcoy Pla , chair of the working group for diabetes in pregnancy , and Professor F. Andre Van Assche , former President of the European Association of Gynaecologists and Obstetricians and Professor Dr Pera Ovesena .

Obesity and maternal diabetes represent an increased risk of maternal and also neonatal morbidity and mortality .
We must realise that this involves not just disease in the mother , someone who often may not follow a proper diet , but also responsibility for the healthy development of the future population .
An obese diabetic mother will have obese children , and so it goes on from generation to generation .
I should therefore like to draw your attention to the written declaration I and my colleagues have prepared on this problem , the relationship between diabetes and obesity in pregnancy .
The EU Member States should devote more attention to preventing and screening for diabetes in pregnancy and make the population more aware of the risk and consequences of obesity .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the White Paper , the Commission intends to present an integrated strategy for the EU which aims to reduce diseases related to poor nutrition and the overweight and obesity-related health issues with which it is associated .
That is right and proper , for the increase in diseases related to poor nutrition and lack of exercise forces us to act .
The Commission 's aim of adopting an integrated approach across government policy areas is the right one .
This is the only way to tackle the causes of obesity-related diseases .
A balanced diet is important , as are nutritional education and promoting sports in schools , and it is important that we provide guidance and support so that people in the European Union can move in this direction .
Various positive initiatives have already been launched .
The EU Platform for Action on Diet , Physical Activity and Health is one of them , and supports this objective .
It is a Europe-wide initiative which attempts to encourage citizens to make the necessary changes .
The Commission 's school fruit programme is another example .
However , if we resort to populist demands again , as advocated in the proposal , we will simply distract attention from the real problem .
What is the point of demanding , yet again , a restriction on advertising ?
We have only just adopted the Television without Frontiers Directive .
It contains very clear rules , and yet here we are coming up with new ideas and demands again .
I lived for 40 years in an area of Europe where advertising was banned .
The result was not that we all slimmed down in the communist part of Europe .
What are the Greens doing , calling for taxes on foods with a particular type of nutritional content ?
Do we want the poor in the European Union to be unable to eat certain types of food because they can no longer afford them ?
Which strategy , then , do we want to adopt ?
The strategy that we should be adopting starts with education and training .
That is where we should be investing .
We should not be restricting our citizens ' freedom of choice with punitive measures or restricting their access to food .
( PT ) Mr President , this debate is very important .
I therefore want to start by welcoming the Commission 's initiative and Mr Foglietta 's report .
More has been said about anorexia than obesity , despite obesity having become a truly global epidemic .
More than 50 % of Europeans are overweight and around 6 % of health expenditure is spent on obesity , as already mentioned here today .
Child obesity is continuing to grow , with 22 million European children now being overweight .
The fight against obesity must be a political priority of the European Union .
I therefore agree with most of the measures proposed : consumer information , restriction on television advertising , nutritional and health information on food labelling .
People must realise that obesity is one of the main causes of death and is associated with many chronic diseases such as diabetes , high blood pressure , cardiovascular disorders , bone and joint problems , respiratory diseases and cancer .
We must act , and we must act quickly .
There is no secret to the solution : more physical exercise and greater care with food , which is totally the opposite to what most people are doing .
Sandwiches and soft drinks , sweets and snacks should not be consumed every day and a sedentary lifestyle does nothing for your health .
Physical exercise can simply involve walking for at least half an hour a day .
It does not take much effort or cost a lot , but it works .
It is important for adults and vital for children .
Many parents do not even realise the harm they are doing to their children by allowing them to spend their free time in front of the television or computer , eating what they should not be eating , without any kind of monitoring or control .
We need to join forces to combat obesity which is why the actions must be concerted and involve schools , families and operators in the productive , health and social sectors .
Everyone has a responsibility .
The role of the family in changing habits is decisive .
Schools should be responsible for the qualitative and nutritional control of school meals , prohibiting the sale of high-fat , high-salt or high-sugar products in bars and vending machines .
At the same time they should facilitate and promote physical activity for students .
( DE ) Mr President , I very much welcome the strategy set out in the White Paper , which will enable us to tackle the causes of poor nutrition and obesity and the diseases with which they are associated .
Unfortunately , in Europe 's food policy , whether we are talking about nutrient profiles or food labelling , or indeed in some aspects of the White Paper , we tend to resort to a very one-sided approach .
We generally try to resolve Europe 's problems through product policy .
In my view , assuming that there are good and bad foods is fundamentally the wrong approach .
As many of the amendments show , this is not the case .
There are only good and bad , or balanced and unbalanced , types of diet .
That should be our approach .
There are many reasons why people eat the wrong type of diet .
Addressing this problem by attempting to steer consumers in a particular direction with product labelling or even by introducing advertising bans or regulations or applying different VAT rates , will not bring us closer to our desired objective .
I do not want to pre-empt the debate on the Food Labelling Directive , but I do believe that whatever action we take here should be guided by the principle that we should be motivating consumers to think about their eating habits .
Traffic-light labelling - which is supposed to make the consumer stop and think whether he or she is about to choose a good or a bad product - is an approach which patronises consumers rather educating them and raising awareness .
I would like to see a more balanced approach , along with the recognition that pursuing a solely product policy-oriented approach will not take us very far .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur on her excellent work .
I am obviously about to repeat many of the remarks already made by my colleagues , but I do not think that we should mince our words : obesity affects approximately 25 % of European children and is therefore a serious threat to their future health .
The causes include inadequate information , poor eating habits , a lack of physical activity and even a shortage of sports facilities .
Nor should we underestimate the social and psychological problems involved , partly because overweight children are often victims of bullying .
I believe , for this reason , that the proposed increase in funding for the school fruit programme , whereby fruit and vegetables are made available free of charge in the classroom , is a good idea .
Indeed , 2009 should see a revival of the Mediterranean diet and the production of fruit and vegetables , especially in view of the latest WHO data indicating that the consumption of these foods is falling even in Mediterranean countries .
Under this initiative , rather than being destroyed to keep prices high , fruit will be used to ensure a healthier diet , especially for our children , and therefore a healthier future for Europe 's citizens .
( PT ) Mr President , it is vital to have a comprehensive and integrated approach to nutrition , overweight and obesity given that there are many factors involved , with the issues of food poverty , malnutrition and lack of information on healthy diets being of particular importance .
The issue of guaranteeing healthy food is therefore of key significance .
We must guarantee , through public policies , that everyone has access to healthy food .
This means implementing a range of measures to ensure local and high-quality agricultural production of high-quality foodstuffs , including milk , fruit and vegetables , and their distribution to people on low incomes .
Furthermore , another common agricultural policy , which involves protecting family-based agriculture and creating local markets with fruit , vegetables and other essential foodstuffs , with production being duly supported , can guarantee healthy food , at accessible prices , for the general population .
As there are proposals to provide support for the distribution of fruit and vegetables in schools , it is vital to increase the amount that the European Commission is proposing for this programme in order to guarantee their free and daily distribution to all school-age children , and not just once a week as is currently happening .
However , it is equally important to implement a whole series of public health policies and programmes which have nutrition as one of their priorities , including campaigns on health education and information and on the promotion of healthy lifestyles and diets .
These must include physical education and sport with guaranteed access for the general population , particularly children and youngsters , and specifically in schools .
( PL ) Mr President , the text on the health issues related to nutrition , obesity and overweight contains many important observations .
There are alarming indicators showing how common being overweight has become .
Accordingly , it is essential to combat this by paying particular attention to the promotion of organic food , sport and physical exercise from an early age .
It is also important to raise awareness of harmful adverts that deliberately encourage overeating .
Other positive features of the document are the promotion of breastfeeding , measures to improve the quality of school meals , the provision of fruit , and the ban on the sale of food and drink containing high levels of fat , salt and sugar on school premises .
There are further causes of obesity and overweight , however .
These include trauma and psychological conditions , which play an important role .
A range of psychological disorders lead to irrational eating disorders .
Anorexia and bulimia are obvious examples of this .
Biological responses created by the general availability of fast food can be much stronger than usual when there is inadequate personal development , a lack of respect for values , widespread depression and nervous conditions .
Contempt for ethical and moral principles and disregard of the meaning of fasting can even stunt personal development by making a person dependent on his or her blood sugar level and on visual and taste sensations .
It is surprising that there has been no mention of the significance of saturated fatty acids in the e-mail discussions and in the amendments tabled .
Consumption of these substances is increasing .
The problem of the different effect of artificial trans-fatty acids compared to that of the rest seems , however , to have been settled .
In their natural form trans-fatty acids only occur in a few products , in particular in milk , which contains a small percentage of these acids .
Mr President , more than half of the European population is overweight , and the World Health Organisation tells us that a billion people worldwide are overweight , 300 million of them obese .
As many as 50 % of Europeans take no exercise at all .
Cardio-metabolic diseases such as diabetes , hypertension and heart disease are growing at an alarming rate , and those with high levels of obesity are extremely prone to develop type-two diabetes with all the consequent morbidity issues , as witness the alarming increases in this type of diabetes among very young teenagers .
Doctors are now also telling us there is a serious connection between obesity and dementia / Alzheimer 's disease .
Critically this is a huge challenge for policymakers , especially when it comes to our children , 22 million of whom are overweight in Europe .
We have reached a stage in this strange world of ours today where there are more people overweight than there are hungry .
On top of all of this , particularly in wealthier countries , we have an increasingly problematic relationship with food , with increasing anorexia and bulimia , diseases of countries where there is plenty to eat .
Although health matters largely fall within the Member States ' area of competence , there are many ways in which issues around obesity can be tackled at EU level : exchange of best practice , promoting healthier lifestyles in relevant EU policies and cross-border epidemiological cooperation .
Last week I hosted a breakfast week here in Parliament , where we underlined the fact that 61 % of Europeans skip breakfast regularly during the week .
This fact can be directly linked to excess weight gain by our doctors .
The Harvard Medical School recently conducted a study which found that people who ate breakfast every day were 35 % less likely to be obese .
Research has also found that these people who skip breakfast are likely to be more tired , irritable and restless in the morning .
Starting the day with a proper blood-sugar level is the best antidote to snacking and sugar cravings .
So while citizens are ultimately personally responsible for their own diets , the ongoing promotion of healthier lifestyles is a must .
I support this report strongly , except for paragraph 28 , with which I cannot agree : I do not believe tax measures should be raised in a health-based report .
( SV ) Mr President , as many have said , the matter we are discussing here today is an important one .
It is an immensely important subject on which we can learn from one another , the Member States together , but it is also immensely important for us to respect the subsidiarity principle when we discuss this issue .
There is much the EU can do to reduce the problem of obesity and on which we should focus attention here in Parliament .
Advertising and consumer information are areas on which we take decisions here in Parliament and which should be our focus .
I think we have failed to some extent in this respect .
We have , for example , failed to ban advertising directed at children , a group which cannot differentiate between advertising and facts , and any information presented to them in this way is therefore by definition misleading for precisely those consumers .
A great deal of the advertising directed at children does in fact relate to food which contains a lot of fat , salt or sugar .
A ban on advertising directed at children would be an effective way of reducing the obesity problem in Europe .
The second point I wanted to take up was that of trans-fats .
I am extremely glad that we shall perhaps be able to call on the Commission tomorrow to propose a ban on trans-fats .
The usual argument against such a ban is that it is actually saturated fats that are the biggest problem for public health in Europe .
Strictly speaking , that is so , but why not reason as they do in Denmark ?
While we do have a huge problem with saturated fats , why do we have to put up with the additional problem of trans-fats as well ?
I cannot understand why .
We cannot remove all saturated fats , but we can effectively remove the industrialised production of trans-fats , which is just a cheap and bad way to produce food .
I am also extremely glad that we addressed the question of glutamates in the report .
Finally , I want to reiterate the importance of subsidiarity .
We could have had a lot less to say about what schools should do and what food they should serve .
I actually think that there are better political levels on which to take such decisions than here in the European Parliament .
( RO ) We have all heard the statistics concerning obese children and adults , so there would be no point in repeating them .
What is worrying is that the prospects after 2010 are even gloomier .
This is why excess weight and obesity should concern us ; therefore , I welcome the Commission 's White Paper , as well as Mr. Foglietta 's report .
Unfortunately , obesity affects mainly people from disadvantaged categories , all the more so as the price of staple foods has risen considerably ; however , promoting a healthy lifestyle and healthy eating could prevent obesity and lead to a decrease in the number of obese persons , at the same time cutting costs in the health system by eliminating the need to treat all the complications related to obesity .
I , too , believe that coercive measures are not a solution .
European citizens have the freedom of choice .
The solution is better nutritional information , with appropriate labels specifying the contents , as well as information campaigns funded by the European Commission and the governments of Member States .
We should not forget campaigns targeted at parents , who have a very important role , and at children .
Moreover , Member States should supervise the content of vending machines placed in schools , they should monitor the food provided by schools and kindergartens , and they should encourage the consumption of fruit and vegetables .
Physical education classes are also very important .
Not last , the Commission should pay particular attention to industry initiatives concerning responsible advertising and the reduction of salt , sugar and fats .
( PL ) Mr President , according to WHO statistics , over 1 billion people are overweight , and over 300 million are obese .
The situation in Europe is even more dramatic .
Obesity is no longer just a problem ; it has become an epidemic involving diabetes , hypertension , heart attacks and certain types of cancer .
Combating overweight and obesity calls for a complex range of actions .
These include the production of healthy food , sensible nutrition , improving the financial situation of the poorest people , raising awareness in society , developing research , monitoring children 's diet , leading a healthy lifestyle and promoting active leisure time .
Unfortunately , in addition to the generally recognised causes of obesity and overweight there are contributory factors linked to irresponsibility and the desire to make a profit .
A good example of this is the spread of genetically modified organisms .
Planting and cultivating the latter is detrimental to biodiversity and takes the place of healthy food .
In the interests of human welfare , development and health , we should take concerted action to make Europe GMO-free .
Doing so will also protect the natural environment .
We must remember that healthy natural food is the best way to combat diseases , including obesity and overweight .
( DE ) Mr President , overweight and obesity are a major problem for our society .
We know that we cannot change consumer behaviour with legislation .
Rather , changed behaviour throughout society has an impact on the individual : after all , who wants to be an outsider ?
Our health behaviour and diet are influenced by our social environment .
There have been complaints that meat consumption is on the increase .
However , it is on the increase because more people in society can afford to eat meat , not because per capita meat consumption itself is rising .
A healthy relationship with food and drink is particularly important .
An obsession with being thin is as bad for health as compulsive eating .
Eating habits cannot be regulated by law .
People 's dietary needs vary , and there is no ' one size fits all ' requirement in terms of people 's calorific or fat intake .
People are different , and their individual energy needs differ too , depending on age , gender , occupation , and activity levels .
Bans are a poor substitute for common sense .
We do not need new legislation : what we need are information campaigns to impart knowledge .
We need freedom , not nannying .
Freedom also implies responsibility .
Our citizens are intelligent adults who can think for themselves .
Traffic-light labelling is not representative as it only shows certain aspects in isolation , so it confuses consumers .
What should I choose if a product label shows that a specific food has red , yellow and green nutritional elements ?
The food industry will pass the costs of the new labelling on to the consumer , driving up prices even further .
I am against a ' nannying ' approach and mandatory front-of-pack nutritional labelling using colour coding , and I would therefore ask my fellow Members to vote against paragraph 37 of the report .
If necessary , we can deal with this later in a different context , when we look at the issue of labelling .
Let us take the White Paper on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues as an opinion-forming tool which provides food for thought for society , not as an opportunity to impose even more conditions and create new legislation !
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for successfully tackling such an oversized topic .
Firstly , I should stress the importance of providing free lunches for schoolchildren , which is the practice in my home country of Lithuania but is far from that of all Member States .
Of course there are objections relating to insufficient funding and generally about the quality of food which is actually on the plate , but it helps children - especially from the poorest families - to have proper and decent-quality meals .
I also welcome an initiative to distribute fruit and vegetables free in schools .
It should be considered as an example of best practice .
I believe EU funding could be helpful in assisting Member States with the financial burden .
The importance of this is that such projects take the EU directly to citizens .
Last but certainly not least , the report fails to mention consumption in the sense of over-consumption .
These days , changing consumption patterns equal a change in our lifestyles .
It is perhaps hard to imagine a parallel between obesity and climate change but , indeed , such dependency exists .
If we started to think about both topics at the same time , perhaps we would fly fewer of our apples and strawberries from abroad and grow more of them at home , selling them at local food markets instead of supermarkets - which is exactly one of the points that the current report proposes .
( ET ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the number of people who are overweight and obese has been discussed here several times already but , according to the experts , a further 1.3 million people will join their ranks next year .
This is the equivalent of the entire population of my homeland , Estonia , a terrifying thought .
There are many factors behind poor diet and obesity , although doubtless we must take the cost , availability and awareness of food into account in our assessment .
Sixteen European Union countries have kept VAT on food below the standard rate , a laudable decision .
The proposal included in the report to reduce VAT on fruit and vegetables to below five per cent is welcome .
The WHO health report refers to a low intake of fruit and vegetables as one of seven health risks .
In that context it would be commendable to start providing fruit in schools , and European Union support would be necessary if we are to introduce the measure in all 27 Member States .
One cannot say much in one minute but I would like to add a couple of words on advertising and the media .
Their help and ideas are needed to advertise carrots , not Pepsi-Cola , and on the kinds of stereotypes and body images to advertise , as these play a very important role in raising people 's awareness .
Allow me , as I finish , to thank the Committee and the rapporteur for their efforts .
( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating the growing number of obese people .
At the same time , the Committee on Agriculture is debating the future agricultural policy .
In a sense , both these debates concern the same issue , namely the health of our society and of young people in particular .
It sometimes seems to me that in certain documents we lament health problems whilst in others we promote GMOs , cloning and importing food from regions where it is produced using methods far removed from natural ones .
In the framework of the WTO , our negotiators want further opening to markets outside Europe .
We should ask ourselves whether we really care about our society or whether we are simply paying lip service .
Most of the direct payments to agriculture go to large agri-business concerns that produce food with a high chemical content rather than to family farms producing healthy food .
Clearly , this report is sorely needed , but the main findings it contains must be implemented .
In the light of the Commission 's current priorities , I seriously doubt that this will be the case .
( FR ) Mr President , 27 % of men , 38 % of women and one child in four are now considered to be either overweight or obese in Europe , and there are some 400 000 new cases a year .
This is a blight that is taking hold on European society .
Information campaigns and preventive measures are certainly an effective response because , unfortunately , we are now confronted with a public health issue that is also developing into a social problem .
Regrettably , obesity is also frequently associated with poverty and exclusion .
Much has been talked about information campaigns and prevention .
I do not wish to go back over what has been said about food labelling , the role of the public authorities , school canteens , sports facilities , proper information , a healthy diet and the need for daily physical exercise .
However , I would draw attention to the important role played by health professionals , who are there to identify chronic health risks linked to obesity , including diabetes and cardiovascular disease and of course the consequences that such ailments have for overweight people .
Prevention is achieved by exchanging best practices while at the same time respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Studies have shown , for example , that a waist measurement greater than 88 cm for women , apart from during pregnancy , and above 102 cm for men is the definition of abdominal obesity and constitutes a health risk , and this applies irrespective of the person 's height .
This very simple benchmark is still not being sufficiently recognised by GPs .
Waistline measurement should therefore be made a simple point of reference for all patients and should trigger an immediate investigation of the associated risk factors , including glucose intolerance , which is a sign of pre-diabetes , excess cholesterol , triglycerides and arterial hypertension , and we also know , unfortunately , that all these symptoms point to the development of Alzheimer 's disease .
This is why we really need to accentuate the role that health professionals have to play in this area .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur : this report is very timely and deserves the full attention of policymakers .
The facts on obesity are startling and have already been quoted .
Yesterday at a major conference in Dublin a nutrition expert claimed that Ireland was on the cusp of an obesity crisis , and , indeed , a similar situation pertains across Europe .
I want to briefly mention just one issue : self-regulation versus legislation .
We have a voluntary code for the advertising of food of poor nutritional value to children , but there is a large question mark over whether this is working or not .
According to the Irish Heart Alliance , this voluntary code is not effective .
I believe we need to monitor it very carefully and take immediate action if necessary .
Mr Bushill-Matthews mentioned personal responsibility .
That is fine at one level , but we need clear , understandable food labelling - colour coding is a positive step .
We live in a world where we consume greater and greater amounts of processed foods .
Indeed , certain EU policies promote this - the Lisbon Agenda : more people at work , less time for food preparation .
I fully support the Lisbon Agenda , but , alongside that , we as EU policymakers have a duty to ensure that food manufacturers make it very clear what is contained in the processed foods they manufacture .
( PL ) Mr President , the subject of the health issues related to nutrition , overweight and obesity is a matter of current concern and it is right that we should be dealing with it now .
The whole world , not just Europe , is currently facing a tremendous challenge involving obesity and the diseases directly and indirectly related to it .
Expenditure on their treatment is increasing at an alarming rate .
Sixty per cent of the population of the United States is overweight , and one third now suffers from obesity .
The most recent data from that country indicates that expenditure on the aforementioned conditions is in excess of USD 100 billion .
This is more than 10 % of the healthcare budget .
Europe is slowly catching up with its neighbours as regards these infamous statistics .
More and more children and young people are suffering from hypertension and diabetes .
These conditions are often due to poor nutrition and lack of exercise .
In the interests of the future of Europe and of its inhabitants , we must pay more attention to the problems raised in the report by Mr Foglietta .
The health disaster threatening Europe and the entire globalised world can only be avoided by swift , determined and joint action .
The European Parliament is currently dealing with many issues relating to economic and social matters .
If we are to carry them through successfully , though , we must not forget that only healthy societies are able to derive full benefit from the advantages made available to them .
Action to promote a healthy lifestyle must be taken .
At the same time , however , it is necessary to introduce legal measures which make every Member State responsible for making more determined efforts to improve the physical condition of its citizens through healthy eating and sport .
It should of course be borne in mind that the specific actions and policies to combat this phenomenon fall within the competence of the Member States .
( LT ) The White Paper suggests considering three factors when determining a strategy for Europe on nutrition- , overweight- and obesity-related health issues .
First of all , every individual is responsible for their way of life .
Secondly , only a well-informed individual is able to make right decisions .
Thirdly , the Paper suggests coordination between a number of fields - food , consumers , sports activities , education , transport , etc .
However , all these factors are influenced by advertising .
What are we eating ?
Where are we seeing these products ?
How do we get to know about them ?
Unhealthy products account for 89 % of the food products advertised on television .
More than 70 % of children ask their parents to buy them the foods they have seen advertised on television .
In discussions on health issues I think one more participant is missing - representatives of the food production industry .
We would like them to realise the harm caused by unhealthy food products and the resulting costs that society has to bear .
We would like them not only to stop advertising unhealthy foods , but also to produce more healthy food products .
( SK ) More than half of the population of Europe is overweight .
According to the statistics , almost 27 % of men and 38 % of women are considered overweight and more than 5 million children are obese .
A total of 5-7 % of expenditure on healthcare is directly associated with obesity and this represents billions .
It is this worrying fact that makes it essential to adopt resolute initiatives at all levels to curtail this phenomenon .
I welcome the Commission 's steps to adopt the White Paper , clearly shifting the field of diet , excessive weight and obesity to the level of a political priority for the European Union , and I am of the opinion that we can achieve progress in the fight against obesity by coordinating the different sectoral policies at European level .
I should like to draw attention to the problem of overweight children and young people : this age group should be one of the priorities .
Correct diet and physical exercise are prerequisites for normal growth and healthy development in children .
Education in healthy eating is mainly the responsibility of parents , but schools can also play a part in this regard .
They should constitute another centre of activities in the fight against obesity .
I agree with the rapporteur 's view that schools should have a doctor , a nutrition specialist , on the premises .
I also favour a ban on the sale of excessively fatty , salty and sugary products in schools , where they are available in particular in vending machines .
According to the statistics , young people today spend more than five hours a day in sedentary activities , mainly watching television and playing on computers .
Exercise , on the other hand , increases the deposition of calcium in the bones , develops children 's social skills and is an important factor in the fight against stress .
It is important to create school conditions whereby sufficient time can be set aside every day for physical education and to encourage children to take part in sport , for example through the construction of playing fields and sports halls .
These steps are essential if we wish to prepare a healthy future for our young generations .
I shall conclude by saying that the prevention of obesity requires at least one peaceful healthy meal in the family circle cultivating , above all , healthy habits .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , obesity and being overweight are not only fed by health reasons , but by social reasons in the broadest sense .
I was delighted to see that the White Paper and report point out that the question of obesity and being overweight must not be examined at the stage when it has already grown into a real health problem , but we must reach back to the root causes .
I consider it important to emphasise that the White Paper and the Parliament 's opinion must not address the health sector but citizens and communities ; society , in other words .
This extremely important question must be handled in harmony with the European Union 's other documents , since the causes of the problem are multi-faceted so the solution must come from many different directions , and yet be coordinated , in order to succeed .
Making a healthy lifestyle more popular must be supported in every possible way , at European Union , Member State , regional and local level .
We must place particularly great emphasis on the programmes and actions that aim to bring school-age children and young people up with a healthy lifestyle .
Here I must stress the role of local governments , since it is mainly they that run schools .
Programmes that work well must be publicised widely .
We all know that the role of the media in formulating knowledge is gaining ever more ground : the power of advertising can conjure healthy eating , sport , regular exercise , basically a healthy lifestyle , into a fashionable model to follow .
In preventing obesity , the importance of exercise and sport must be closely linked to the requirements of healthy eating , but it is not at all sufficient to focus on only these two aspects : encouraging people to lead a healthy lifestyle must become top priority in all relevant policy areas .
The aim is for people to understand that healthy , balanced eating does not mean that we can never consume certain foods .
Regular exercise does not mean that we have to take exercise in every free minute .
The emphasis is on moderation , and in this way our diets and lives will become more balanced .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work , and you for listening . Thank you very much .
( PL ) Mr President , we are today dealing with two food-related disorders .
One of these is anorexia , which generally has a psychological basis linked to the fact that thin bodies tend to be presented as more attractive .
We are all aware of extreme cases in which this disorder has resulted in death .
Fortunately , however , fashion is changing and the disorder is now less widespread .
The other disorder is obesity , which can also have a psychological basis .
Food can be perceived as a way of coping with stress and as an escape from life 's problems .
Against this background , I believe that the key issue is nutrition .
Food producers and distributors bear a much greater share of the blame in this respect .
The report before us is very welcome and should serve as a warning .
The so-called fast food provided for school pupils on outings and trips is a danger .
After all , it amounts to a lesson on eating .
Appropriate education and food control are needed .
In my view , our efforts represent a step in the right direction and I therefore support this report .
( RO ) I believe we should focus our attention on overweight children and that we should try to create new programs for fighting obesity in early life , when we acquire our feeding habits .
We should promote feeding education both in primary school and after .
All the Member States should include in their school curricula the basics of a balanced diet and exercise .
According to certain statistics , in ten years ' time there will be over 30 million overweight children in Europe .
I am deeply worried about this major problem .
Consequently , I started a series of written statements proposing the creation of special programs in schools , including free regular health check-ups and counselling .
I endorse the proposals in the White Paper , such as the appropriate labelling of foods , restrictions on advertising in the case of products that are harmful to children , decreased VAT on fruit and vegetables , and foods for children only .
In conclusion , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for this accomplishment .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am really pleased that the Members of Parliament who took the floor basically agreed with the Commission White Paper .
They not only shared its views , but also expressed support for the Commission 's initiatives .
I appreciate the complex approach of the speakers .
This is fully in compliance with the complex nature of the problem of obesity .
Many of the speakers urge raising public awareness and cooperation with the food industry , which is also fully in line with the text of the White Paper both in spirit and letter .
The Commission 's commitment is reflected in the proposal on food information to consumers which we will soon be discussing with the Parliament and also with the Council .
I want to stress that there are various programmes and projects in the European Union which mutually reinforce the White Paper on nutrition , overweight and obesity - such as the Green Paper on urban mobility or the White Paper on sport , both aimed at a healthier lifestyle and a healthier environment .
Others include the common agricultural policy health check - which would , for example , decrease consumption aid for butter - or the schemes for school milk and fruit , the Community legislation on advertising and marketing to promote responsible advertising , or the Directive on Unfair Commercial Practices .
These are very important initiatives in full harmony with the Commission 's position .
The Commission will continue to work with the EU Platform for Action on Diet , Physical Activity and Health and with the high-level group of Member State experts .
I also want to stress that the Commission is encouraging initiatives that help prevent the development of cardiovascular disease in Europe , for which trans-fatty-acid consumption is a risk factor in addition to overall fat intake and the intake of saturated-fat acids .
Voluntary reformulation can deliver results .
Commitments have been made within the European Platform for Action on Diet , Physical Activity and Health to reformulate products and reduce the amount of trans-fats and saturated fats in them .
There is just one more issue which I want to mention because it touches my portfolio - taxation .
There was a proposal to examine the possibility of applying reduced VAT rates for vegetables and fruits .
I do feel sympathy with this proposal because it shows exactly how tax policy can promote the attainment of other important policy purposes .
To conclude , I want to underline that Parliament is one of the founding members of the Platform , and the European Commission is prepared to regularly update Parliament on the activities of the Platform .
Parliament is expected to discuss the monitoring report in 2010 .
We will end this debate with a speech by the rapporteur , Mr Foglietta , who I urge to keep within his allotted two minutes .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to emphasise one aspect of the Commissioner 's statement which I consider very important .
Close attention should be paid to an issue that deserves serious consideration while we endeavour at the same time to create new opportunities .
This subject is , I believe , one that concerns many of us , since several well-focused speeches have explored it and sought to spur the Commission into action .
Above all , however , the report itself aims to make clear that we are dealing with a highly critical condition : obesity .
As far as health problems are concerned , obesity is now becoming an extremely complex problem that has to be solved .
Help must be provided and we must produce a report which helps us to achieve our objectives .
Commissioner , the Commission has indeed underscored the role of the World Health Organisation , but let us not forget that the WHO itself is calling for the trend of rising child obesity to be reversed by 2015 .
Another important date will be 2010 , which is when we will be in a position to judge the outcome of this strategy .
I should therefore like to thank all those who have spoken in the debate and the shadow rapporteurs .
I am grateful for all the suggestions made and believe that we must be very alert and careful to draw up a significant report which will really enable us to think in terms of prevention and well-balanced healthy eating , for the sake not only of the body but also the mind and soul .
I believe that we certainly can attain this goal thanks to everyone 's cooperation .
Once again , my thanks go to all those who have spoken in favour of this report . Thank you , Commissioner .
Thank you for your work , Mr Foglietta , which everyone here has recognised .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Overweight and obesity are something of a contemporary epidemic with dangerous consequences for the health and even the life of human beings .
Diabetes , circulatory disorders , hypertension , heart attacks and certain types of cancer are just some of the dangerous outcomes of obesity and overweight .
It is therefore entirely appropriate for the European Parliament to have become involved in combating overweight and obesity .
It is also right that Parliament should be encouraging the bodies responsible for the health of EU citizens to become involved in this battle .
I am referring to the bodies at every level of national and European administration .
Childhood obesity is a particular concern .
There are already 22 million overweight children in Europe and their number is steadily increasing .
If we do not reverse this trend , our society will soon be even more obese , less healthy and markedly less productive .
That is why I fully support this report .
I believe that the time has come for us to pool our efforts and launch a determined and sustained attack on overweight and obesity .
We must focus on the most sensitive sectors of society , such as children and the elderly , especially women and people living on their own .
If we succeed in convincing society that it is worth controlling our body weight and combating overweight , and if we manage to set up mechanisms to promote a healthy lifestyle , we shall be able to avoid a great many problems .
Preventing obesity is therefore not just a health and beauty issue ; it also has social and cultural implications .
in writing . - The problem of obesity and diet-related diseases has taken dramatic proportions worldwide .
In my view , sophisticated and aggressive marketing techniques have prevented consumers from making informed choices in regards to their diet .
In this respect children are particularly vulnerable .
The AVMS Directive foresees that media service providers would adopt voluntarily a code of conduct regarding commercial communication on food and beverages .
While I appreciate the self-regulation aspirations of industry and media , I would have preferred to see concrete restrictions on the volume and type of advertising aimed at children .
The destructive effects of low quality food on society are comparable to that of alcohol and tobacco , whose advertising is heavily regulated .
A similar approach can be applied to foods that have been established as harmful to human health .
Consumers need clear and objective information , which can be provided by requiring higher standards on food labelling and placing more restrictions on advertising .
The current financial crisis has exposed one more time the results from mixing greed and lack of regulation .
Whether you stand to loose your house or your health , I think the stakes are too high for an indifferent marketing approach .
As regulators we need to step in and do our job .
in writing . - ( PL ) I welcome the report on nutrition , overweight and obesity related health issues , presented by Mr Foglietta .
It is quite right for Parliament to take up the important issue of the promotion of healthy eating once again .
We would do well to remember that sound nutrition is one of the 12 factors contributing to good health highlighted by the World Health Organisation .
A healthy individual is a sine qua non for a healthy society .
Food safety is crucial in this context .
The latest cases involving contaminated Chinese baby formula milk prove just how important this is .
Poor nutrition is the cause of many afflictions , including overweight and obesity .
Obesity is understood to mean excessive deposits of fat in the body .
It increases the risk of heart disease , hypertension , atherosclerosis , diabetes , gallstones , kidney and urinary tract stones , bone and joint degeneration , and certain types of cancer .
In Poland , 65 % of people aged between 35 and 65 are overweight or obese .
The incidence of obesity amongst our youngest citizens has reached epidemic proportions .
Twenty-two million European children are affected .
The negative impact of advertisements for foodstuffs with a high fat , sugar or salt content is very serious .
It is important to make schools and families aware of the efforts to promote properly prepared , good quality food .
Schools and families should encourage young people to adopt a healthy lifestyle , which includes sport and other recreational activities .
in writing . - ( PL ) Overweight and obesity are problems which have reached epidemic proportions in recent times due to their negative impact on human health .
World Health Organisation data reveals that 50 % of Europe 's population is overweight or obese .
The fact that over 5 million children are obese and 22 million children are overweight is cause for particular concern .
The numbers are increasing at an alarming rate .
Obesity is one of the main causes of mortality and chronic disease such as Type 2 diabetes , circulatory disorders , hypertension , heart attacks and certain types of cancer .
The treatment of obesity is very costly indeed .
It represents some 7 % of national healthcare budgets in the Union and up to 6 % of government expenditure on healthcare .
In order to combat this problem , European consumers should have better access to information on the best food sources so that they can choose an appropriate diet .
Food should be clearly labelled .
Certain ingredients such as artificial trans-fatty acids and trans isomers should be taken out of use .
It is also important to bear in mind that television advertising affects the so-called short-term consumption habits of children between 2 and 11 years of age .
It has a negative impact on the development of eating habits .
Combating overweight , particularly amongst children , should be a priority at international , European , national and local level .
in writing . - ( RO ) Obesity and weight gain due to inappropriate eating habits and to the lack of exercise are increasing everywhere in the EU , with major economic and social consequences .
In order to promote a healthier society , the Commission should get involved in an active manner , by supporting Member States to reduce the harmful effects of nutritional imbalance and sedentarism .
However , it does not suffice to promote a healthy lifestyle among EU citizens ; we must also provide the motivation and infrastructure they need .
There should be local measures for decreasing the use of cars and promoting walking ; there should be parks and cycling lanes .
Policies for fighting obesity should be correlated with urban development and transport policies , such as the Green Card on Urban Mobility , and these policies should all complement those policies encouraging exercise .
We should pay more attention to socially and economically disadvantaged groups which are affected by the increase in the price of raw materials and foods , as well as to vulnerable groups , such as children and pregnant women .
Promoting health education in schools and prohibiting the sale of foods with a high content of fats , sugar and salt in schools and kindergartens will ensure the health of the future generation .
in writing . - ( DE ) In view of the alarming health trend among Europe 's children - more than five million children are obese and 22 million are overweight - the development of a Strategy for Europe on Nutrition is a very welcome step .
Conscientious labelling of foods with nutritional information is a sound tool which enables consumers to make informed choices to improve their diets .
Comprehensive awareness-raising from early childhood will also undoubtedly help to reverse the trend in the coming years .
In the medium term , interim campaigns such as the provision of fresh fruit in schools are essential .
Europe 's schools must also face up to their responsibility for sports in schools and daily exercise to a greater extent , given that children and young people spend much of their day at school .
Nonetheless , regulations at European level can only create an environment for healthy eating and should not make the mistake of denying citizens ' fundamental responsibility .
If a healthier Europe is to be achieved in the long term , the European Union must seek partnerships at all levels : in the political arena , the business sector and in civil society .
VAT on insurance and financial services ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr J. Muscat , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC on the common system of value added tax , as regards the treatment of insurance and financial services - C6-0473 / 2007 - .
I should like to take this opportunity to welcome my friend , Mr Muscat , and to congratulate him on the recent and very important success in his political life .
This will perhaps at some point cause him to leave this House but , for the time being , it is a cause for celebration , both for himself and certainly for many of us .
We are discussing new and more transparent rules in the financial services sector at a time when we are going through one of the biggest crises in this sector .
The current situation shows that we cannot let things run their own course and there is a need for regulation .
' Regulation ' does not mean bureaucracy - certainly not excessive bureaucracy - but assurance that things are being done in the best possible way , and not by means of formulas and papers that lead nowhere .
When my fellow Members and I prepared this report we had two priorities .
Firstly , to ensure that any changes that take place do not have negative repercussions for the consumer .
In other words , there should be no additional burdens on the consumer , and that is why we are saying that the possibility of introducing VAT on financial services should apply only to transactions between one business and another and should therefore be recoverable .
At no stage should our text propose that VAT on a financial service that is not taxable be passed on to an individual - that is , the consumer .
This is stated clearly and directly in the proposed text , despite possible reservations on the part of other institutions .
Some people criticise the fact that the industry will save on expenses and that Member States ' income may be reduced - an interesting argument which , however , quite frankly I think comes most of the time from those with a restricted view of the economy and fiscal policy .
Firstly , in a competitive sector like that of financial services and in a system where you have safeguards against agreements between companies , any expenses not incurred by companies should either be passed on as benefits to the consumer or else be used to compensate for other existent expenses .
Secondly , as Europe we should understand once and for all that we are not competing alone on the market ; we have to ensure that the systems used by other Member States - and by the European Union as a whole - are attractive to serious companies wishing to enter the market and establish themselves as true European operators .
Facilitating the systems is a way of offering an incentive in this sector , generating market potential and creating work , productive work .
Through this report we are helping to create a European market by removing obstacles .
We are doing what has been talked about for many years ; we are fulfilling one of the aims of the action plan in this sector .
We are proving that we can be proactive , solve problems and act on new ideas .
Perhaps we may disagree on technicalities , perhaps some may say that we can use one system and not another , but I believe that this Parliament must give an indication that this is our ultimate aim .
Obviously there are certain points on which we are not all agreed , myself included : for example , broadening the definitions .
I believe that it would have been better if the committee had followed my recommendations on this , which were always either to keep to the Commission 's text , or else to further restrict the definitions .
In spite of this , we should also note that the committee chose to proceed strategically , and so this report was approved with just one vote against .
I await the reactions of my friends as well as those of the Commission .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Muscat for his work and the support he has given to the Commission 's proposal , and I wish him success in his future role in Malta .
The Commission proposal addresses three major issues .
First , the existing provisions are increasingly subject to legal challenge in the European Court of Justice .
Something needs to be done about this .
Second , we need more consistent application of the VAT rules on financial services and a more level playing field in the internal market .
Third , we must take steps to improve competitiveness in the sector .
There are concerns that the financial services and insurance industries in the European Union are less efficient than they should be , and consequently EU industry faces higher costs for financial services and insurance than its competitors in third countries .
This is not solely a result of the EU 's VAT rules , but they do have a role in contributing to this situation .
I have to add that VAT exemption is not applied uniformly in the different Member States , and this causes competitive distortions within the European Union .
For example , the possibility of recovering tax paid to specialist third-party service providers ( outsourcers ) varies depending on national interpretation of the VAT rules .
For the Commission , improving the competitiveness of our European financial and insurance companies was therefore a factor in making this proposal , but the reality is that this must be balanced against the need of the Member States to ensure stable tax revenues .
The proposal has three elements .
First , to increase legal certainty for all concerned , we propose a modernised definition of the exempt services .
Second , to avoid their business customers incurring non-deductible ' hidden ' VAT , the proposal aims at allowing all banking and insurance companies to opt to tax their services .
Third , the proposal contains an exemption from VAT on cost-sharing arrangements , including those which operate across borders .
These proposals could result in some limited initial VAT revenue reductions for the Member States , but these can be justified if , as we expect , the proposed changes lead to increased competitiveness .
I therefore welcome the observation in the report on the problems of non-recoverable VAT and its relevance to business efficiency and the Lisbon strategy .
I also welcome the fact that the rapporteur recognises that change may result in a reduction in VAT receipts .
For consumers , I agree that the implications are not always clear-cut , but I believe they will eventually benefit from cost savings achieved within the industry .
I also welcome the positive remarks about the scope of the proposal and the creation of legal certainty .
The new definitions proposed by the Commission are necessary to bring the legislation into line with economic realities .
I sympathise with the remarks on the need for prudence and the absence of reliable figures which would allow the impact of change to be fully assessed .
This latter lacuna should not , however , be laid at the feet of the Commission , as neither the industries concerned nor national administrations could provide the necessary data .
Like Mr Muscat , I am conscious that cross-border consolidation in the finance industry increasingly results in VAT revenue accruing to the Member State where the service is created , rather than where the consumer of the service is established .
A move from exemption to taxation , which would result from greater access to the option to tax as we have advocated in this proposal , would correct this trend .
I think this is the best way to deal with the concerns which have been raised .
Finally , I would like to inform you that detailed discussions on this proposal already started in the Council under the recent Slovenian presidency .
The current French Presidency is also committed to making progress on this particular dossier , and I therefore welcome the positive engagement by Parliament which can further encourage the Council to make progress .
The report we have before us is particularly significant , especially when you consider that in the last few years the economy has taken a slightly different turn from previous years .
Without doubt , this report aims to better reflect the current situation .
That is why it is important to guarantee the legal basis so that the companies concerned can operate with less bureaucracy , as the rapporteur rightly pointed out .
This could be achieved by removing the anomalies in the current law regulating VAT on financial services : a law that has been in existence for the last 30 years and is not clear enough .
This is a report that will help as much as possible to provide more stability and we must ensure as far as possible that all the countries are harmonised with regard to the applicable rates to reduce discrepancies as much as possible .
It has long been felt that there is a need for change in this situation and I think that the rapporteur was right when , while keeping in mind the need to simplify the work for financial companies , he also took care - and I think that this is the most important thing - to ensure that consumers would benefit from this proposed change .
Today is the last day that my fellow Member from Malta will attend this plenary and I think that I too would like to wish him well in his work in the coming years .
He has gained four years ' experience in this Parliament , and this experience has , I believe , transformed his character from that of a politician who did not really believe in the European Union and the benefits it could offer Malta , to that of one who , through this report , has shown us that he truly believes that from here we can change politics not only in our own country , but also in the European Union .
Today we have a transformation that I would like him to take back to my country because I believe that the experience he has gained in this Parliament can be taken back to my country and the way we do politics there can resemble the way we work in this Parliament : that is , the national interest remains important , as well as the interest of the European Union , because today we form part of it .
I wish him well in his work , I wish him success in his role as leader of the opposition ; I am not going to say I hope he has a long career as leader of the opposition , because I do not think that that is the way I should talk about my fellow Member , but I hope that he transfers the positive experience gained in this Parliament firstly to his party , and lastly to our country .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Since 1977 , most financial services , including insurance and investment fund management , have been exempt from VAT .
During this period , two problems have essentially arisen : the definition of the scope of the exemption and the impossibility of recovering VAT incurred in order to provide exempt services , giving rise to the phenomenon of hidden VAT .
Globalisation , European financial integration and market consolidation , which have affected the organisation and outsourcing of operations to provide these services , have further added to the complexities .
This report is the first attempt to update a directive which , in addition to being confusing - leading to the intervention of the European Court of Justice - is obsolete .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Muscat , on his excellent work in producing this report on an issue which is so economically sensitive and technically complex .
His proposals to modernise the definition of insurance and financial services , which are consistent with the Financial Services Action Plan and strict in dealing with exemptions , have merited general acceptance .
His commitment to preventing price rises for consumers as a result of taxable persons opting for taxation has also merited general approval .
The final result , encompassing a specific exemption from VAT for businesses involved in cost-sharing arrangements , will increase certainty for the industry and budgetary security for the Member States , prevent competition distortions and improve competitiveness for the banks and insurers without increasing the costs to consumers .
I want to express my satisfaction at the incorporation of two aspects contained in these amendments : the reference to co-insurance , and the improved definition of the concept of intermediation , which is restricted to professional activities rendered as a distinct , direct or indirect act of mediation and which specifies that intermediaries are not counterparties to the subsequent transactions .
I want to end by wishing Mr Muscat great success .
I am confident that he will soon be enjoying this success through his participation in European integration from the Council .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , as I take the floor on behalf of the UEN Group in this debate , I should like to draw attention to three issues .
Firstly , the European Commission 's proposals on changes to VAT on financial and insurance services improve legal certainty not only for economic entities providing these services but also for fiscal entities in the individual Member States .
Secondly , the solution whereby Member States commit to allowing taxpayers a choice regarding VAT on financial and insurance services , whilst leaving many detailed arrangements applicable in this area within the scope of activity of the Member States is a good one .
It amounts to decentralisation of taxation powers , and therefore to implementation of the principle of subsidiarity .
Thirdly , ongoing analysis of the financial implications of the proposed changes is essential .
In particular this should concern reduced VAT income in the individual Member States as a result of increased levels of deductions by entrepreneurs .
The impact of these changes on the cost of financial and insurance services for consumers should also be studied .
( MT ) The rapporteur has upheld the framework of the Commission 's proposal so that we are confronted with the problem that we have been putting off for more than 30 years .
This sector is very important for an ever increasing number of countries , Malta being one of them .
In the report we find regulations that facilitate the work of important companies and facilitate a true free market without borders , leading to the creation of wealth , jobs and more choice .
One of the priorities is that there are provisions in place so that consumers are protected and by no means have to pay additional taxes .
In fact , consumers should benefit from every reduction in expenses and from every increase in the efficiency of the system .
If the need arises , further analysis should be made in the future to include other safeguards .
Mr Muscat 's report leads to more clarity and legal certainty in the area of taxation in the field of financial services , especially at this time , when we are going through a major change in the financial markets .
To conclude , I would like to thank Mr Muscat , who has made a significant contribution in the last four and a half years .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank you for your comments and the valuable views you expressed during the debate .
As I said in my opening remarks , obtaining a positive opinion by Parliament on the Commission 's proposal for VAT on insurance and financial services is very important .
We have taken note of the concerns raised in the report , in particular the lack of neutrality in recovery rates , the difficulties with statistics and the risk of diversion of tax revenue from non-recoverable VAT on inputs .
While the Commission could in principle look favourably at some of the amendments , such as those on derivatives , we will not formally amend our proposal .
We will , however , endeavour to take the amendments suggested by Parliament into consideration as much as possible during deliberations in the Council .
I would like to express my gratitude for your positive endorsement of our proposal .
A positive opinion from Parliament will be a good signal serving to raise awareness on the part of the Member States of the need to act .
Firstly , I would like to thank Parliament 's services and the Commission for all their help with this delicate dossier , even though the work is not yet finished .
However , as far as Parliament is concerned , like the Commissioner , I too hope that our message is very clear .
I think what we have to agree upon - and there is unanimous agreement in Parliament - is that , yes , let us make regulations , let us make changes where changes are needed , let us ensure that the system is simpler , but let us be careful that the consumer does not have to foot the entire bill .
I believe that this is the main message for the Commission , and even for the Council , from us in Parliament .
I wish everyone well with the work until this dossier is finished .
I thank my friends for their good wishes , especially Mr Casa , who has given us a fine acknowledgement of a new political season for the Labour Party and for the nation .
Thank you very much , Mr Muscat .
I too hope that your work will be successful and will make Europe stronger and stronger .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 September 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Firstly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Joseph Muscat , for a very comprehensive report allowing for the issue of a common system of value added tax for insurance and financial services from the point of view of businesses , tax administrations and consumers .
I believe that , although it is difficult - on the basis of this proposal - to clearly assess what will be the extent of the benefits for consumers in terms of efficiency and cost reduction , we ought to ensure the legal certainty and consistency of insurance and financial service- VAT related issues .
As a matter of fact , it is essential to ensure that VAT facilitation measures for businesses would not be implemented at the cost of the consumers .
However , it is worth noticing , together with the rapporteur , that much flexibility is given to the Member States , which might lead to uneven implementation results from one Member State to the other .
Finally , I would like to put the emphasis on the fact that , given the uncertainty of the impact of the implementation of these measures , we ought to remain vigilant and therefore support the obligation for the Commission to report on the issue to both the Council and Parliament .
Collective management of copyrights on-line ( debate )
The next item is the oral question by Giuseppe Gargani on the collective management of copyrights on-line - B6-0459 / 2008 ) .
Madam President , this question is central to the future cultural economy of Europe .
Despite the existence of the Directive on copyright in the information society the situation in terms of the collective management of copyright and related rights for online services is extremely complex , particularly because of the territorial nature of copyright law and the absence of a pan-European licensing system .
This situation has been made even more complicated by the lack of a coherent policy on the part of the European Commission , with the Directorate-General responsible for the single market and copyright , on the one hand , and the DG for competition policy , on the other , often acting for their own account and without any overall view of the sector concerned , especially as regards the interests of the creative talents of Europe .
In fact , by refusing to legislate and also by ignoring the different resolutions adopted by Parliament and opting instead to attempt to regulate this sector by way of recommendations and administrative decisions the Internal Market and Services Directorate-General has created a climate of legal uncertainty .
Against this background we now have the Directorate-General for Competition starting legal proceedings against a player in this sector that was only trying to act in compliance with the Commission recommendation of 2005 .
Thus the Commission took this decision against CISAC in July .
It did not impose financial penalties but rather sought to change the way that CISAC and its member associations operated .
This situation reflects the fact that the European Commission chose to ignore the warnings that had been expressed by Parliament , particularly in its resolution of 13 March 2007 , which also contained concrete proposals for controlled competition as well as for the protection and encouragement of minority cultures within the European Union .
Moreover , since then we have seen a whole series of initiatives , only one of which has been legislative in nature : a far-fetched appraisal of the recommendation on collecting societies , an assessment report and Green Paper on the 2001 Directive , questions about home copying , free access by way of a decision of the Directorate-General for Research to 20 % of the calls for tender under the Seventh Framework Programme , a time extension to the rights of performing artists , for which a directive is to be considered , and so on .
This is why the Committee on Legal Affairs has posed the following question : does the Commission not think that it would be preferable to make sure that any changes imposed , for example on CISAC members , should be subject to a broad consultation of all the interested parties so as to put an end to the incongruity of the present legal situation that has resulted from the divergent positions adopted by the Commission ?
Does the European Commission intend to reconsider its policy in this sector in the light of Parliament 's resolution of 13 March 2007 so that a global approach may be found that takes into account not only the interests of the users but also the interests of the licence holders and of the creative community ?
We are convinced that the CISAC case demonstrates that the approach the Commission has taken by adopting non-mandatory provisions , or ' soft law ' as it is called , or by way of purely administrative decisions , is inconsistent and contrary to the principle of legal certainty because the parties affected by it have no means of appeal or discussion .
Tomorrow the Commission intends to continue with this ' soft law ' approach by adopting another recommendation , this time on creative content online , which will also deal with the issue of multi-territory licensing .
This will not be a recommendation under the codecision procedure .
Does the Commission plan to involve Parliament in drawing up this recommendation in an effective manner ?
Or , in this sector that is so crucial for the future economy and culture of Europe , is the Commission once again going to ignore those who represent the Member States and their citizens ?
For this reason I have two suggestions to make .
Firstly , as it has done for home copying , the Commission should put in place a platform for all the stakeholders so that this dossier can be opened and examined by all those who have a need to know .
Parliament , for its part , will give its opinion either way .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has now set up an ad hoc working group on copyright issues with a remit to present all the stakeholders with a clear long-term global vision of intellectual and artistic property and of its role in the knowledge and cultural economy .
This group is to hold its first meeting tomorrow morning .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I believe that these questions should be placed in a wider context , as the debate on how to license music on the internet is gaining momentum .
There is more music available to consumers on the internet than ever before , yet hardly any of it is properly licensed .
Almost none of it , therefore , produces any revenue for artists or music producers .
In 2006 , the ratio of illegal to legal song downloads was 40 to 1 , and over 20 billion recordings are illegally downloaded every single year .
So something is wrong here .
Online operators say that licensing of music in Europe is too complicated , which is why there is still no legal online service available in any of the new Member States .
This is the background to the series of questions we have received from Mr Gargani .
Everybody agrees that we need to simplify the licensing of music for internet downloads and mobile phones .
But nobody wants to lose out in the process .
Is there a simple way to achieve licences that cover all rights all over Europe ?
In answering this question , we must bear in mind that most authors , composers and performers live off the revenue they generate with copyright .
This is how they make ends meet every month .
How , then , do we balance efficiency and fairness ?
The Commission made its recommendations in 2005 .
As the 2008 evaluation report on these recommendations shows , some owners of copyright , such as the music publishers , have followed our advice and set up Europe-wide licences .
While small collecting societies fear that these platforms leave no room for niche repertoire , we now have to make sure that they do .
The signs are encouraging .
There are already EU licences for small music publishers .
While these efforts are ongoing , we should not legislate prematurely .
The ongoing restructuring should be given a chance . But we should remain vigilant so that small repertoire does not lose out .
Let me now say a word on the antitrust decision that the Commission recently adopted in the CISAC case .
The decision prohibits anti-competitive practices by European collecting societies which limit their ability to offer their services to authors and online operators .
The removal of the restrictions will allow authors to choose which collecting society manages their copyright .
It will also make it easier for online operators to obtain licences for exploitation in several countries from a single collecting society of their choice .
The 2005 Recommendation and the CISAC Decision are governed by the same principles : they both encourage the removal of restrictions which prevent authors and composers from freely choosing their collecting societies , and rights managers from delivering multi-territorial licences .
Concerning the preparation of the recommendation on creative content online , the Commission plans to adopt this recommendation during the first quarter of 2009 .
The 2008 public consultation on creative content online has shown that the topic of multi-territory licensing for audiovisual works is not ripe to be dealt with in the planned recommendation .
The Commission has published a call for tender for an independent study on multi-territory licensing of audiovisual works , with the aim of analysing both the economic and cultural aspects of such practices .
The Commission is currently analysing the tenders and the results of the study should become available by the end of 2009 .
We are working closely with both the European Parliament and the Member States on developments concerning creative content online , in particular by participating in the various hearings organised by the European Parliament and the discussions in the audiovisual working group of the Council of Ministers .
Since the developments concerning creative content online take place at a rapid pace , there are no consolidated practices on which to base compulsory legislation at this stage .
At this point in time , such legislation at a European level would possibly jeopardise the development of new business models and the cooperation processes among stakeholders .
For this reason , a recommendation seems the most appropriate means to facilitate the shift of the creative content sector to the online environment .
Mr Toubon made the interesting suggestion that maybe there should be a working group on small collecting societies , and I think that this is a very excellent idea .
The Commission would be prepared to be a facilitator and try to find a role for small societies in the online world so we will take up his suggestion .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr Toubon has given a magnificent exposé on the problem in legal terms .
This saves me from having to tackle this aspect .
I should therefore like to look at this issue on a much more practical level .
On the matter of copyright , the Directorate-General for Competition starts from the basis that authors have the same weight as the large multinational companies that manage the world of media .
This is not true .
Authors and performers are in fact workers .
There may indeed be some stars - such as those who appear in magazines - who have some choice .
However , the vast majority of authors , performers and creators do not have this choice .
Their position is virtually the same as that of workers organised through their copyright societies .
To claim that these thousands , tens of thousands , even hundreds of thousands of authors , who work in Europe on a daily basis and who obtain their income through their societies of authors , operate as if they were multinational companies is a fiction that has nothing to do with reality .
If we fail to start from the basis that the current European societies of authors each represent the specific interests of thousands of members and that they act as such , we will never grasp the reality .
I believe that the Commission is probably just doing its job , but when it talks about studies , I start to feel rather concerned , because who is carrying out these studies , who is paying for these studies and what pressure groups are having an influence on them ?
That is why , in the European Union , we have a democratic system between the Member States and within the Member States .
It is the responsibility of the Members of the European Parliament to humbly assume the role of expressing , in this House , the social reality which is perhaps not found in offices or in major economic studies .
We find ourselves in a situation whereby , if we are not careful , if we try to deregulate this sector as has been done in others , we will end up killing creation , which is one of our unique assets .
Despite all its problems , Europe is characterised by great creation .
We will end up with an audiovisual industry that is absolutely devoid of content ; you can already see this in other countries .
I therefore believe that , at this moment in time , some of our efforts must be devoted to providing these creators with an institutional system that allows them to take action .
I believe that acting in the abstract , thinking that the little musician , the little composer can defend himself is absurd .
If Beethoven were alive today and creating symphonies and if he were obliged to enter the international market in order to compete with the major music multinationals , he would die of hunger .
His financial situation would be much worse than it was in the 18th and 19th centuries .
I believe that this is a vital point that must be conveyed .
Mr Toubon referred to our committee 's decision to set up a working group on the protection of intellectual property .
We hope that the Commission , and in particular Mr McCreevy , who has always been a great friend of this Committee on Legal Affairs , will be ready to cooperate with us , to convey their concerns , but also to listen .
This working group will also listen to the viewpoints of the thousands of people who , at this moment in time , are humbly engaged in great intellectual work and who are allowing these audiovisual media that we are creating to be filled with content .
If not , there is a real danger , as I have said , that we will create a great audiovisual system that is absolutely empty , that can only be occupied by advertisements and that has no specific content .
As a result , Madam President , I believe that the proposal , the oral question and the motion for a resolution that we plan to table are aimed at reinforcing this independence and this unique identity of European culture , which cannot be replaced by any abstraction based on free competition .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in 2004 the Committee on Legal Affairs held a hearing which focused , among other things , on the role of collecting societies .
Some artistes presented a very impressive case to demonstrate the problems facing them under the current system which operates via collecting societies .
You then opted for the ' soft law ' legislative - or rather non-legislative - approach , which has simply created more legal uncertainty in the interim , with the result that we face increasing complaints and irritations due to the lack of clarity in the situation .
This is a real problem , Commissioner .
The system which you have proposed will result in market concentration , benefiting the strong and ignoring , for example , the Convention on cultural diversity when it comes to Europe 's art and culture .
In this system , minority cultures , those that are not part of the mainstream or those that use minority languages will inevitably be damaged because the system simply does not take account of them .
When we asked you , in the Committee on Legal Affairs , why you had not presented proposals such as those as outlined in the Lévai report in Parliament , you said that the market would move in this direction anyway and you therefore saw no need for any change here .
Commissioner , the conflicting judgments that we have recently witnessed demonstrates that this was not the right approach .
What we need now , if we want to protect creative potential , is a future-oriented solution .
I think that we will also have to give more thought to the binding of rights generally .
Is this still sustainable in the long term in its old form , in this hardware-oriented form ?
Will we still achieve the necessary goals , or will this not work ?
Commissioner , I do not believe that further studies and hearings are the way forward .
Unfortunately , we have seen that it is always the same people who are invited , and that they represent the giants in the market , not the small players whose opinion is consequently ignored .
We need a different approach and a clear legislative proposal as to how the collecting societies can and should protect these rights and assets .
( PL ) Madam President , last year the European Parliament responded by way of a resolution to the Commission 's 2005 recommendation concerning cross-border collective management of copyright .
In its resolution Parliament called for it to be made quite clear that this recommendation only applies to the sale of music recordings on the Internet .
We also called for immediate appropriate consultation with the interested parties .
In addition , we asked for a draft flexible framework text to be submitted to Parliament and to the Council concerning collective management of copyright and associated rights in relation to cross-border on-line music services .
The management of copyright and associated rights in relation to online music services remains a complicated and problematic issue , in spite of the binding directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright in the information society .
The difficulties are mainly due to the lack of European licences .
The unclear drafting of the recommendation is a particular concern .
This means that the recommendation could perhaps also be applied to other online services containing recordings , such as broadcasting services .
The consequent lack of clarity regarding the use of different licensing systems creates legal uncertainty and leads to undesirable consequences , notably for online broadcasting services .
I am also sorry to note that the Commission has not taken account of Parliament 's recommendations .
The Commission has limited itself exclusively to monitoring and implementing the 2005 recommendations .
In no way does this deal with the ongoing problems in the sector .
Among other aspects , the Commission 's policy reflects the decision taken in respect of the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers .
The Commission has excluded the possibility of any type of joint action by the societies , for instance regarding the proposal to create a transparent copyright system in Europe .
This equates to leaving power in the hands of the oligarchy composed of the major companies that have entered into bilateral agreements with leading performers .
It is to be expected that the result of this decision will be further restriction of choice and the disappearance of small firms from the market , to the detriment of cultural diversity .
( CS ) The current state of the digital content market is unsustainable , fragmented and rigid owing to monopolies .
I am therefore pleased how in July the Commission at least shed some light on collective management .
I am concerned about the unfair contractual terms and conditions not only for authors , but also for users .
I should like to believe now that Czechs and other citizens of smaller countries will be able to purchase their favourite songs , digital books or television series over the Internet , for example from iTunes and other virtual trading houses , across borders , which is actually impossible today .
I should like to believe that authors will be able freely to choose collective management from any Member State and compel the management to improve the quality of services and reduce operating costs .
I hope that the collective management will be able in return to offer licenses unrestricted by the borders of the home state , including European licenses , but it is not so easy .
I do not believe that the Commission 's July foray into the wasps ' nest will really produce systemic changes in the digital content market .
I would now like to ask the Commission to request an independent study of collective management as a whole and to submit a legislative text to Parliament containing an overhaul of the entire system on the basis of a proper analysis of all the specific aspects of this problem .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have shown that you are ready to listen and to pay attention to these issues .
However , I would just like to put one question to you and to make a request .
The question concerns the manner in which Parliament is to be involved with the work you are proposing to undertake .
The request is that if a platform is put in place it seems essential to me that the findings , its findings , should not be decided in advance but should be the product of a true debate and I also think that the members of this platform should be representative of our economic and cultural diversity .
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank the honourable Members for the range of their discussions .
The regulators should not take all the decisions .
The Commission actively encourages the development of the online licensing market for music , but premature legislative intervention , without full analysis of market needs and trends , would not appear the best way of developing a healthy online retail market in Europe .
However , if it becomes apparent that the Commission 's current interventions cannot deliver an online licensing model fit for the 21st century , then we will consider a different approach .
It is now essential that all stakeholders , authors , performers , publishers , collecting societies and the record companies , get together and find a licensing structure that will enable the emergence of more legal online services while preserving a decent outcome for authors .
Mr Medina Ortega has alluded to the fact that it is in everybody 's interest that we have a healthy cultural industry throughout Europe .
I think I speak for everybody in the Commission when I say that is our goal .
I think it is also proper to try to introduce a system whereby everybody benefits from creativity and culture - including the artists - and everybody can enjoy it at a reasonable cost .
So that is what we are all trying to achieve .
We can have differences of opinion as to how we go about it .
Over the last number of years I have heard expressions of different viewpoints , both inside this House and from groups outside Parliament .
We do not always agree on how we could achieve those objectives , but I think we all know what we want to try and do .
When I suggested the platform - and it was referred to by Mr Gauzès and others - it was the need to bring together the small and big players in a particular forum , and particularly the smaller collecting societies who , I understand , feel left out in this particular debate .
So that is what I was proposing there .
I think our goals are the same .
We certainly want to take all interests into account and arrive at a proper licensing system that is a model which is fit for the world of today , not the world of maybe 40 or 50 years ago .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 September 2008 .
' IASCF : Review of the constitution - Public Accountability and the Composition of the IASB Proposals for Change ' ( debate )
The next item is the oral question by Pervenche Berès on IASCF : ' Review of the constitution - Public Accountability and the Composition of the IASB Proposals for Change ' ( B6-0463 / 2008 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , when it comes to financial reporting standards this Parliament now knows that you have a certain capacity for creativity , for setting up ' do nothing ' committees .
When at the start of this legislative term we questioned you about the statutes and role of EFRAG you invented the Roundtable and everybody now knows that it has not fulfilled its remit .
Faced with proposals from the IASCF trustees about establishing a monitoring group , and as soon as some of the members failed to agree with your plans , you put forward the idea of setting up an international accounting advisory group .
Parliament has now got used to your practices .
When we informed you of this , by taking the initiative for a report on questions relating to IASCF governance , you rushed off to officiate , with your Japanese and American colleagues and with IOSCO , by preparing a press release on 7 November 2007 in which you claimed to be arbitrating in all the problems of governance , rather than awaiting the opportunity to be able to act on the legitimacy and authority of a position taken by the democratic representation of the European Union , or to spell it out the European Parliament .
When Parliament drew up this position on the initiative of our rapporteur , Mr Radwan , you preferred in March to put the debate back to April for reasons that concern you and for which you take sole responsibility .
When , on the strength of the April proposals , you had the momentum and the opportunity to officiate on what could have been the European Union 's position on the international stage , and to do so on the basis of paragraph 9 of this resolution , which I now read : ' notes that in the abovementioned combined statement of 7 November 2007 the Commission seeks - as it did when it concluded a roadmap with the US authorities in April 2006 - to preempt solutions where it would be preferable , in the interests of effectiveness and legitimacy , to have an open consultation process and debate , to which this resolution could be a contribution ' , you preferred , in the secrecy of your private cabinets and departmental offices , to devise a solution without consulting either the Council or this Parliament .
Commissioner , what have you been doing since 24 April , when we voted on this resolution ?
Back then we asked you about the role of the IMF and the World Bank .
Other Members since have questioned you about the activities of the Basel Committee , the European supervisors , in the monitoring-group structures for the IASCF .
Faced with such a problem you have yet again come up with a ' do nothing ' committee , namely the international accounting advisory group .
You tell us that this monitoring group should not be increased in size because that would dilute its authority and we would no longer have the power to guide the trustees .
The proposal from the trustees rests on a line-up of seven members .
Your proposal is based on a team of five , plus one observer and two members whom you would put on this consultative body , this international committee of auditors .
Our proposal is to consolidate the group of seven being suggested by the trustees by including what is necessary .
The argument as to the number is irrelevant since , at the same time , there is a further proposal to increase the number of members on the International Accounting Standards Board itself , thereby taking it from 14 to 16 .
We therefore have two things to say to you today , Commissioner .
Firstly , if you really want to reform the governance of the IASB then we are in agreement , for we were the ones that asked you to do it , but please consult us , involve us , and do it from the start , not at the last moment .
Do not tell us that you had urgent work to do in August , when we have been asking you for this since last autumn and you have been aware of Parliament 's position since April .
What is more , we are telling you that the IASB and IASCF work programmes include a second phase in which the entire instrument has to be reviewed , including the conditions under which the IASCF is to be set up , and we would suggest that you make the most of this moment to lay down clear conditions for the stability and governance of this entire mechanism so that we will finally have a system of governance that is equal to the issues that we are faced with today .
Or to put it in clearer terms , what accounting standards do we need in order to establish a financial market where the interpretation of the financial reporting standards is on the same wavelength as the economic reality of the situation that is facing us here and elsewhere ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the need to improve the governance of the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) is something that has long been recognised by the Commission , Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
I have highlighted the importance of this on numerous occasions .
I have been critical of the IASB 's lack of adequate consultation and feedback procedures , as well as the lack of impact assessments for new standards .
Given the IASB 's de facto role as a global standards setter , it is imperative its governance procedures are up to the highest standards .
I want to get to the situation where we can adopt IFRS standards in the EU with full confidence that the process and content of these standards are exemplary .
That is why , when I learnt that a revision of the constitution of the IASCF was envisaged , I set as a priority the improvement of governance .
You will recall last November , with my counterparts in the US Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , the Financial Services Agency of Japan and the International Organisation for Securities Commissions , I proposed the creation of a monitoring board to ensure the public accountability of the IASCF .
We have made some good progress on this .
The IASCF has recently proposed modifying its constitution in order to enter into a formal relationship with the proposed monitoring board .
It accepts that this Board must have the power to participate in the nomination process of the IASCF Trustees and have the ultimate power to approve their appointment .
It also accepts that the monitoring board will be able to address any area of work of either the Trustees or the IASB and refer them for consideration by the IASCF Board of Trustees or by the IASB .
The IASCF intends to reach a conclusion about these matters in early October , with changes to the IASCF constitution entering into force from 1 January 2009 .
This will , in particular , allow the monitoring board to become operational early in 2009 .
That is why I consider the time is now ripe to firm up on these proposals .
If we leave it too late , we will not be able to reopen the governance issues .
The ongoing financial turmoil emphasises the need to ensure that accounting standards reflect the objectives of prudential supervision and financial stability .
It has not proven possible to get agreement to have bodies such as the ECB in the monitoring board .
As a compromise , we could envisage , in these new arrangements , that there would be an international accounting advisory group to advise the monitoring group on prudential and financial stability matters .
This group should include both the European Central Bank and the Committee of European Securities Regulators and , no doubt , other relevant international bodies .
Again , I am grateful to this House for having emphasised the importance of prudential supervision and financial stability in its resolution of 24 April .
In exercising its eventual role in the monitoring board , the Commission must also represent the other European institutions , in particular this House .
To do so effectively , I would propose to draw up consultation procedures with the European Parliament .
These procedures could , if necessary , be formalised in an appropriate form .
I have endeavoured to ensure that key MEPs were kept informed by my services about the evolution of this debate .
It was , however , brought to my attention today that there was a lapse in this communication .
Apparently , in preparing our position , events that took place towards the end of July were not communicated by my services in the usual manner , because of the holiday period .
I know that there is widespread dissatisfaction in this House about the fact that you were not properly consulted during the elaboration of our proposals .
I am also dissatisfied by this fact and have given clear and firm instructions to my services not to repeat such a mistake again .
I believe my Director-General has been in contact with Mrs Berès to try and explain this omission .
I hope that this oversight will not jeopardise the common goal we have both been striving for , namely , a better governance regime for the IASB .
With some further improvements , I am confident that these enhancements to the IASCF 's governance will improve the quality of accounting standards and ensure that they meet the needs of all stakeholders - including the European Union , which to this date remains the largest user of IFRS .
The reform of the IASCF governance currently being contemplated represents a step change in the accountability of this body to public authorities , something this House has repeatedly called for .
I appeal to the European Parliament to support our proposals as the best way to ensure that this reform achieves real influence .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have just heard the Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs express the real views of those Members who are interested in this issue .
As has been underlined , everyone is aware of the importance of financial accounting standards and of the reforms that have been announced .
The time has now come , Commissioner , to clarify and put into action the comments that you have made .
I have a suggestion to make : this resolution is a rigorous one and it needs to be , but there is no need to kill the sinner .
What we could in fact do is to take a few days respite in order to establish a protocol between the Commission and Parliament that would clearly define the extent to which Parliament has to be kept informed , its level of involvement in this matter and the positions that it takes up , and to this end we need to postpone the vote for a few days .
This is the proposal that the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats will put forward tomorrow , namely that the vote on the resolution be postponed in order that Parliament and the Commission might be able to cooperate properly on this important subject .
Obviously if nothing is forthcoming during this interval , and in order to make up for lost time and the possible lack of information , we shall be obliged to vote on the resolution that is being tabled today , with all the tough decisions that this will entail .
In the midst of the difficult circumstances that are now being imposed on us by the current financial crisis , which is not something totally unfamiliar as far as accounting standards are concerned , I hope that everyone of us will understand that we have to find a quick and practical solution that will help steer developments in the required direction .
Madam President , I have to admit to the Commissioner that I am really quite confused by what has been going on with this case .
I had heard nothing about it until literally this week and suddenly I get deluged with approaches , both from the IASCF and from the Commission , trying to persuade me one way or the other as to whether the IMF should be included in the monitoring group .
I think this is a rather unsatisfactory way to proceed with what is essentially almost a piece of legislation , so I would ask the Commissioner if we could not delay this a little , get it sorted out and come back to it perhaps at the October mini-plenary .
I would like to suggest that I do not see that adding the IMF and the World Bank to this monitoring group would make it that unwieldy .
It seems to me they would cover the rest of the world in a rather satisfactory manner .
I do not really see that there is a need then to have yet another accounting advisory group that advises the monitors that monitor things .
It is like the house that Jack built .
I wonder whether they could not in any case consult quite readily , unofficially , if they ever need to do so .
I wonder if we could have some discussions over the next couple of weeks and end up with a vote , possibly in a more satisfactory manner , at the mini-plenary in October .
( CS ) Commissioner , today 's world financial crisis reveals how important fair value , the real value of a company , is for the healthy functioning of financial markets .
This is vital information for shareholders and creditors .
A monitoring committee could make a contribution to better transparency and comparability of financial reporting and thus to the personal responsibility of shareholders for correct economic decisions .
International standardisation clearly leads to the development of cross-border capital markets and , therefore , in the interests of stability , the monitoring group should also implement preventive measures against cyclical trends and help to prevent systemic risk .
Of course , the proposal to establish the group has not been subject to questioning .
Its powers have not been explained , for example whether it will also have a supervisory function .
I also consider it important that every country should have a delegate in the proposed monitoring group , which must also include representatives of important institutions so as to reflect the size of the most important world monetary areas , cultural diversity and the interests of the developed and developing economies and international institutions that are answerable to public bodies .
It is a pity that Parliament was not consulted in advance as a matter of course .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , what have you done since 24 April about taking account of Parliament 's position ?
What have you done since 24 April about debating with Parliament on finding effective solutions for handling the governance of the trustees ?
We know full well that the IASB is a drunken boat at the hands of auditors who have produced these so-called ' fair values ' , and no one knows how they have been elected when there is no longer a market to supervise .
As a result , today we are being asked to discuss the subject of IASCF governance .
You are proposing to us in haste - and at a time when we are putting to you quite reasonable solutions whereby the governance of these structures might be incorporated into a global and accountable system of governance - that advisory committees should be set up .
Is this reasonable ?
I do not believe that this question will be solved simply by involving Parliament in this or that stage of the process .
The proposal that you are putting to us for the governance of the IASCF is not satisfactory .
We look forward to receiving another proposal from you and possibly will have to await the second phase of the consultation exercise and , if necessary , the review of this governance process .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , at my stage in life , I do not get very surprised too often , so I am not the least bit surprised at what goes on here in the European Parliament and the views of some people .
Can I just say in all of this particular debate , let us just remember one small thing . The IASCF and its underlying constituent body , the IASB , is an independent organisation .
( Inaudible interruption from the floor )
I just want to put the facts on the table .
They are totally independent but they have de facto become the accounts-standard-setting body for the globe because IFRS , which came out of the IASB , has now become the de facto worldwide accountancy standard .
I have to point out that this is an independent body ; since we in Europe have adopted IFRS - a decision made before my time by the Commission and to the satisfaction of the European Parliament - we are the largest constituency that has IFRS today .
This position may change as the world moves over more to IFRS .
We might not then be the largest any more , but we certainly are the largest current user of IFRS .
For some time , with the support of the European Parliament , we have been endeavouring to improve the governance arrangements of the IASCF trustees , noting that they are an independent organisation .
We have made some progress in the past , and the IAS recently announced that they were going to have a review of their own constitution .
So we are availing ourselves of that opportunity to make our submission .
We have no right to impose our view on the IASCF - this is up to the independent trustees - but we are making it our submission to improve the governance arrangements .
I would just point out this basic fact before everybody , as we might say in Ireland , ' loses the run of themselves ' in this particular area .
That is the de facto and de jure situation .
The IAS trustees are intending to bring in their new governance arrangements , having considered all the submissions , in early October .
The closing date for making our submission has actually passed by a few days . It was to be 20 September , and the date today is 24 September .
We waited to submit our final result .
We have been in informal consultations with them for some time , so they know , really , what we are going to propose , but we waited for Parliament 's resolution for the courtesy of doing that .
So we will have to submit our formal proposals in the next few days .
It is entirely a matter for Parliament as to what you want to do with this particular recommendation .
Mr Gauzès has put forward a reasonable approach about taking a few extra days perhaps to work out a protocol about Parliament 's participation in the process which I am endeavouring to set up .
As regards the monitoring board idea , which we announced last November , it is not possible for everybody to be represented on the monitoring board .
It will not be acceptable to the trustees of the IASCF , and , if they say absolutely no , then that is that .
So we proposed a kind of a way around this by having relevant people , relevant bodies , in this advisory group .
I am not hung up on any particular strong views as to how it should be organised or who should be on it .
I do not have any views about that .
I only learned today that my services have not been in constant contact with relevant Members here in the European Parliament in the past month or so .
This was news to me , because I thought my officials would have been keeping contact the whole time with the people here who take an interest in this particular subject , but I find out today that did not occur .
In my former remarks , I said that I regretted this , and that I had given directions that it should not happen again ; we want to cooperate .
No more can I do .
Mr Purvis , it is not as though Parliament can delay until any time it likes - mid-October or beyond - but if I want the European Commission to have a say , I have to submit our formal proposals regarding our ideas about governance to the IASF board forthwith .
They will not agree with some of them .
As Mr John Purvis says , he has been lobbied for the last two days by various actors in this particular scene as to what they want to achieve .
From reading the resolution as it is drafted , there is one definite peculiarity about this , which I think should not go unnoticed , particularly by Mrs Berès who has long been an advocate of greater governance and accountability of this particular IASB body .
The peculiarity of the resolution is that it would do exactly what the trustees actually want and reverse what we are trying to do in getting more governance .
That is the peculiarity , but the matter of the resolution is entirely a matter for the European Parliament , not a matter for me .
I would just make that particular comment in passing , because there are people among the IASB trustees who are not too anxious to accommodate some of the more far-reaching governance arrangements that we are proposing for them .
There will be a fair degree of resistance .
We are reliant on the existing trustees to take account of our concerns and to improve these governance arrangements as we think fit .
We are not in the position , because we only submit these things , to make demands and say it has to be like this , but we have had contacts and they know what we are going to propose .
They are not happy with some of what we are going to propose .
I am aware of that , but we are trying to get this improved governance .

Not that I am ever surprised by what happens in the political arena , as I have been well over 30 years in this field , but it will be ironic if , after we have got this far over the years in getting our way on two things - namely that the IFRS has become an international standard and that , now , as people here know , the United States is proposing that IFRS be available to US companies ( something I predicted would happen about two years ago to the relevant members of the relevant Parliament committee and was more or less laughed at that this would ever occur , and it has ) - this body that has been demanding with us and pressing us to get increased governance and accountability from this particular body is , at this particular stage and according to some people , actually going to do quite the opposite .
I just think it is a little bit ironic , but I hope I have explained this as best I can .
I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 25 September 2008 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Area of Freedom , Security and Justice ( AFSJ ) 2007 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Social package ( Second part : Cross-border healthcare ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements of the Council and of the Commission concerning the Social Package ( Second part : Cross-border healthcare ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner Vassiliou , Mr Bowis , co-rapporteurs , draftsmen of the opinion , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the European Parliament for agreeing to defer our working meeting originally scheduled for the beginning of this month .
As you know , the French Presidency attaches great importance to consultation and dialogue on legislation .
I felt it was essential to hold an initial exchange of views with my ministerial colleagues at the informal Angers Council on 8 and 9 September before coming before you to set out not , of course , the French position , but the position of the Council of 27 health ministers .
That first exchange of views , like the initial work done in the Council 's working group on health , will not enable me to answer all your questions on this highly complex and varied subject but I am certain our sitting today will give the Commissioner responsible for health a chance to explain the European Commission 's major decisions and allow me to share the Council 's first impressions with you .
The Council supports the adoption of a directive on cross-border healthcare and patients ' rights .
It would be inconceivable to leave the decisions in this area solely in the hands of the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
In my view , which I share with my colleagues , that should not be taken as a criticism of the Court or even of the content of its judgments , which often bring about major advances for patients .
Nonetheless , it would be advisable for health policy in Europe to be developed by the two co-legislators , i.e. you and us , as the outcome of a political dialogue and a democratic process .
It must be our common objective to build up a legislative framework that can contribute toward legal certainty .
Second point : in Angers , the delegations from the 27 countries all praised the quality of the work done over these past months and agreed that they had been listened to during the recent consultations .
Commissioner Vassiliou was warmly thanked for that at the informal Council meeting .
Indeed , the Slovenian Presidency will no doubt have informed you that the Council was very hesitant about the initial version of the text , the broad lines of which had been presented to the EPSCO Council of 19 December 2007 .
Only a small minority of states had supported that version .
In fact , there was similarly great opposition to it in your Parliament , as MEPs confirmed to me during my preparatory consultations with the French Presidency in Strasbourg , Brussels and Paris .
There is no doubt that the political dialogue Commissioner Vassiliou started as soon as she took office helped establish a sound basis for negotiation and the Council welcomes that .
Third point : with regard to the timetable , this proposal that the college of Commissioners adopted on 2 July came too late for us to be able to envisage a first reading during our Presidency , but we will press on with negotiations in the Council as far as we can , while entering into a political dialogue with the European Parliament .
In that vein , the public health working group has already considered the directive on several occasions .
It will be meeting again tomorrow to continue examining the text article by article .
In this area as with our other political priorities , France will play its part in the presidential trio by working closely with the Czech Republic and Sweden .
For the record , let me remind you that the subject of European health in the service of the patients has been a priority of our common 18-month programme .
Fourth point : regarding the scope of the draft directive , I know from talking to MEPs on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection when they were in Paris last May that many of you regret the decision to confine this text solely to patient mobility and not to address the question of the mobility of health professionals .
Given that I myself was an MEP at the time of the vote on the report by Evelyne Gebhardt and left Parliament just a few days before the debate on Bernadette Vergnaud 's report , I well understand the reasons for that regret .
Excluding health services from the directive on services in the internal market leaves a grey area that is not entirely covered by the current proposal for a directive , which only addresses patient mobility .
One could even say that the proposal for a directive has more to do with the wish to incorporate and adapt Court of Justice case law than with excluding health services from the services directive and therefore with the demands by some MEPs for a specific sectoral instrument covering health services .
There was no debate on that subject by the health ministers .
Yet , in that regard , it is all a question of timetables and the European Commission 's decision can be explained by the need to respond as rapidly as possible to the challenges that exist in the area of patient mobility , which already covers a very wide field .
It is certain that a more broadly-based directive that included the mobility of health professionals would have had no chance of being adopted before the elections next June .
Fifth point : regarding the content of the text , we have not yet addressed all the proposed provisions .
Nevertheless , the Presidency can say at this stage that in the Council 's view prior authorisation for hospital care is a key question for EU Member States .
It could even be described as the fundamental concern of health ministers .
During the working lunch on the subject organised in Angers on 9 September , ministers who spoke were in favour of moving towards a better balance between the individual rights of patients to mobility and maintaining national regulatory and planning powers for the benefit of all .
The text reflects that improved balance , in particular by restoring the need for prior authorisation for hospital care .
It is not a question of calling into question the case law of the Court of Justice , which specified how the principles of free movement set out in the Treaty applied to the health field , but of the need to incorporate in positive legislation the balance that the Court has already established in its case law between the principle of free movement and Member States ' regulatory capacity .
In fact , it distinguished between outpatient care , where the affiliation system cannot require prior authorisation , and hospital treatment , where the requirement of prior authorisation appears to be a necessary and reasonable measure .
At a time of serious budgetary constraints - ageing , technical progress - Member States must be able to be fully in charge of the care they provide in this respect , in particular hospital planning .
As the Court itself recognised , one purpose of that planning is to ensure adequate and permanent access to a balanced range of quality hospital treatment throughout a national territory .
It also forms part of the effort to control costs and to avoid , where possible , any waste of human , financial or technical resources .
I also want to point out that the requirement of prior authorisation ensures that cross-border care can be provided as soon as it is medically justified .
In fact , the regulation on the coordination of social security systems already recognises this : authorisation may not be refused in the event that the same treatment is not available within a reasonable time .
Nor must we forget that prior authorisation is also a protective measure for patients , since it ensures that any care provided in another Member State will be reimbursed .
Lastly , even if we keep to what we regard as the correct interpretation of the Court 's case law , the directive would still offer great added value by clarifying the rights of patients , providing them with the necessary information and ensuring that this case law is interpreted in a uniform manner and is therefore applied universally and consistently in all the Member States of the European Union .
Thank you for your attention . I will be taking the floor again at the end of the debate to answer your questions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have already had the opportunity to discuss this proposal at length with various stakeholders and players in the decision-making process .
You may recall that I presented the proposal to the Committee on the Environment and Public Health upon its adoption by the college and had a fruitful exchange of views .
And I have also had the chance to exchange views with various national parliaments and , of course , the Member States in the context of the recent informal Health Council in Angers .
It now gives me great pleasure to have this discussion , and I am looking forward to it with you , the honourable Members , in plenary .
I take this opportunity to thank Mrs Bachelot-Narquin for the support and the chance she gave me to discuss this issue at length with the ministers .
I would like to put the proposal on patients ' rights into context .
Following the numerous discussions of the European Court of Justice on the question of the inherent right of European citizens under the Treaty to seek health care in the Member State of their choice and following the specific request by the European Council and the European Parliament alike to present a proposal to regulate the right after the health-care-related provisions had been taken out - and quite rightly so - of the Services Directive proposal , the Commission adopted the proposal on patients ' rights in cross-border health care on 2 July .
It is without doubt the most important initiative on health of this present Commission .
Its aim is to provide patients with better opportunities and access to health care , regardless of their place of residence while fully respecting national responsibilities over health-care organisation .
It has three main objectives : first , to clarify the conditions under which patients will be entitled to seek cross-border health care and be reimbursed and to make it effective , if this is the best solution for their particular situation ; second , to ensure high-quality and safe cross-border health care throughout Europe ; and , third , to foster European cooperation between health-care systems .
It is based , as I said , on the Court of Justice jurisprudence .
It is fully in line with the Treaty , on the one hand , and , on the other hand , with the competences of the Member States for the organisation and delivery of health services and medical care .
The proposal is structured around three main areas .
First , it clarifies and reaffirms the common principles of all EU health systems : universality , equity , access to good-quality health care , and solidarity .
It recalls the overarching principle underlined by the Treaty and the Court that the Member State on whose territory the health care is provided is fully responsible for setting the rules and ensuring compliance with these common principles .
To help the Member States translate this principle in more transparent terms , we have proposed to better clarify the objectives in terms of quality and safety standards for health care provided on their territory to patients from other Member States .
We also introduced a provision so as to ensure that patients from other Member States shall enjoy equal treatment with the nationals of the Member State of treatment .
Second , the directive clarifies the entitlements of patients and related conditions to receive health care in another Member State .
For instance , for people in border regions , it may be easier to seek health care abroad rather than travelling long distances to the nearest relevant domestic health facility .
The added value of cross-border health care is also evident for people seeking highly specialised treatment , which only a very limited number of practitioners in Europe can provide .
This might be the case , for example , for rare diseases .
The reality , however , is that most patients are simply unaware that they have the right to seek health care in another EU country , and that they are entitled to reimbursement for such treatment .
And , even if they are aware of this right , the rules and procedures are often far from clear .
This is what we aim to clarify with this new directive : patients will all get the same clear information and guarantees on cross-border health care .
In practice , as long as the treatment is covered under their national health-care system , patients will be allowed to receive that treatment abroad and be reimbursed up to the cost of the same or similar treatment at home .
We are also clarifying that , under specified circumstances , Member States are entitled to introduce limits on the reimbursement or payment of hospital health care obtained abroad through prior authorisation , if there is a clear risk - even potential - of undermining the national health system .
In addition to this , the Directive clarifies the definitions of hospital and non-hospital care and in that way simplifies the procedures and conditions to access cross-border health care .
In such a context , I would like to stress that we have maintained the possibility to expand the concept of ' hospital care ' to some health care which does not necessarily require hospitalisation , but which is by nature costly or needs a heavy infrastructure to be properly delivered .
Third , the directive establishes a new framework for European cooperation in areas that we have identified as key areas for the future and where we must act together at EU level to better meet the challenges ahead of us .
This is done in line with the principles I mentioned earlier through streamlined and improved cooperation , through common technical guidance and through a systematic search for best practices .
This framework will provide for developing enhanced future collaboration at European level in areas such as European reference networks , with a view to pooling together expertise , knowledge and medical skills , both for applied medical research and for diagnosis and treatment .
In particular , this will be very important in the field of rare diseases , the provision of new therapies , as well as the rapid spread of new health technologies .
The second area is health-technology assessment , whereby the most efficient therapies will be identified at EU level by the best experts from the Member States , and spread in order to promote their use .
Indeed , as regards new therapies and their high costs , the resources available being limited , we must ensure that they will be chosen and used in the most efficient possible way .
The third area is e-Health , where it is time to promote technical requirements to ensure interoperability at all levels and help to establish - at least - e-Health as an integral part of health-care services of tomorrow .
Fourthly , there is a need for a wider approach at EU level on the collection of health data related to cross-border health care in order to better monitor the effects of the proposed measures and enhance our epidemiological surveillance .
Finally , there is the facilitation of the recognition of medical prescriptions in all Member States .
However , we must note that prescriptions issued in another Member State will be reimbursed by the patient 's country of origin , only if the medicine is approved and eligible for reimbursement in his country of origin .
Let us also be clear that this initiative is not about harmonising health-care systems .
It is not about changing roles in the management of health care .
Member States are responsible for deciding how to organise their respective systems , what benefits they provide to their citizens and what treatments and medicines they will pay for .
This will remain the case .
For now and for the future , what we want with this draft legislation is to grant patients the opportunities and information to access the safest , best-quality and most suitable treatment wherever that treatment is available in Europe .
More cooperation between health systems will also create more solidarity and more health-care availability .
The aim of the proposed legislation is , indeed , to pave the way for better health care across Europe .
The directive is already being discussed , as was said by Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , in the Council , and I hope that the discussions will proceed swiftly in Parliament as well and that ultimately they will bear fruit .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , we all know that question on the doorstep : what does Europe do for me ?
Here is an answer : Europe is providing a new opportunity for patients .
That is good news ; we just have to make sure it works , and we will work together - the three institutions , and certainly within this Parliament - to make it work .
But we are talking about court judgments .
We are not talking about a blank sheet of paper , so we are not starting from afresh .
We have to take into account those judgments .
Those judgments , in laymen 's terms , are that , if you are facing undue delay for treatment , you have the right to go to another Member State , to have that treatment and have the bill sent back home , so long as the cost is comparable and so long as the treatment is normally available .
That is straightforward .
When I produced my patient mobility report in this Parliament , it was overwhelmingly accepted .
Above all , we said , this must be a decision of politicians , and not of lawyers .
Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , to quote Jean Giraudoux , ' No poet has ever interpreted nature as freely as a lawyer interprets the truth . '
That is why we want politicians and not lawyers interpreting this .
That is why we want legal certainty , so that everyone knows where they stand : governments , health services , patients , doctors .
And it is why we must make it work for patients and for health services .
It must be an opportunity and not a nightmare back home for health-service managers .
So we have questions .
We have questions that the patient has the right to have answers to .
Do I qualify ?
If I do , how do I proceed ?
What are the checks that I can carry out on where I might be going and who the doctor might be ?
What is the choice ?
What is the confidentiality requirement ?
And what happens if something goes wrong ?
Those are all questions for which we must find the answer .
And then there are issues we have to discuss among ourselves ; some of them have been raised already .
Firstly , prior authorisation .
My instinct is that , for in-patient hospital care , it is fair to have prior authorisation .
The Court did not say that this was wrong in itself ; it said it is wrong to refuse it under certain circumstances , so we need to look at that very carefully .
We also need to look at the issue of prescriptions .
Yes , I understand that the home state must have the decision on what is prescribed , but if you are prescribed a course of drugs as part of your treatment in another Member State and you go back home and they say you cannot have the rest of that course , where does that leave the patient ?
That is the sort of question we have to answer .
Another issue is reimbursement .
The patient does not want to have to go with a pocketful of cash .
There must be a way of having the bill sent back home , I believe through a central clearing house .
But this is a measure for patients - not for services , that is for another day .
It is patients who are at the centre of this - patients , not lawyers - and it is for all patients , not just for a few .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are speaking today about a proposal that truly does focus on people in the European Union , namely patients .
I am very grateful to the Commissioner for her introduction , but I also wish to express my gratitude to Mr Kyprianou for all the groundwork he has done at a difficult time .
Why do I call it a difficult time ?
Because in many instances the Member States are still the last fossils left in this European Union , cast in stone , failing to understand that people are the focal point and believing that the world revolves around them and their systems .
That is not the case .
The focus is on patients , and they are the weakest links in our society , because they are ill and infirm .
If we talk about patient mobility today , knowing that it is actually a right in the internal market , which means that it ought to have applied for more than twenty years , we should consider whether this is a timely debate and whether the Member States are abreast of the times .
I tell you they are not !
If the Eurobarometer is showing us today that 30 % of all people in the European Union are unaware of their right to obtain treatment outside their own country , this means that all the Member States have been getting it wrong .
They have not informed people of their rights ; they have not been telling them what they are entitled to do and which options are open to patients .
Yes , I share the view of Mr Bowis and others here , and the Commissioner too , that the Member States should certainly retain their autonomous health systems .
We have no wish to interfere with that , but we also want to ensure that patients have freedom of movement .
In connection with Member States ' autonomy , I also recognise the need to be able to plan ahead , particularly when it comes to in-patient treatment .
For this reason , authorisation will have to be one of the main topics of our discussions .
Mr Bowis has already made that point .
Networks and information points must ensure that patients know what they are allowed to do , but they must also know where the best treatment is available - whether it be in Germany or in Cyprus - so that patients also have the opportunity to be cured .
If we succeed in improving the quality of health care and people 's access to health care close to home , that will surely be a marvellous achievement , and no one need shop around anymore .
That is what we really want .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Vassiliou , Minister Bachelot-Narquin , last week I attended a presentation of a new website on patient rights in all the EU languages , organised by my Danish colleague in the ALDE Group , Karen Riis-Jørgensen .
There was a lady there from Denmark who very nearly might not have been .
She had breast cancer and was not getting anywhere under the Danish system because she had the wrong number of tumours .
If she had had five tumours she would have been treated , but she had seven and did not qualify under the criteria .
So somehow or other she needed to get rid of two tumours before she could be helped .
In short , an unending struggle .
In the end she found help in Germany .
She did it - she borrowed money from friends and family and went to Germany where she was helped .
Her secondaries have now disappeared .
She is cured , to the extent that you can ever say you are cured of cancer .
It is inhuman to make someone like that , an individual , battle against a system at a time when they are sick , at a time when they are as weak as they could possibly be .
That is putting the system before the patient .
I find it totally unacceptable !
The Danes did in the end pay for much of the treatment , and all was well in the end .
But what that woman had to go through was not exceptional ; it happens all too often .
So the European Commission 's proposal is a huge step forward to help these patients and my group is very keen to support it .
We also need to ensure that this debate does not turn into an ideological debate .
This is not just another directive about health services .
This is not about how to reform health in the European Union .
It is not about whether or not there should be a free market in healthcare .
To my mind it is not really a matter of subsidiarity either .
The question is not whether the Member States prevail or the Union .
No , the question is whether or not the patient wins out .
That is all that matters really .
We shall definitely have to talk about all these other things , perhaps argue about them robustly during the election campaign , but in my view and that of my group they are not our concern today .
We are not trying to harmonise health , now is not the right time for that and maybe it cannot be done anyway .
But we must learn to make use of the opportunities which the European Union offers us , the economies of scale we can benefit from , so that real specialist help can be provided to people with rare medical conditions .
That possibility has of course existed for years , but now we really can make use of it and we must .
To conclude : last week Parliament also held a meeting hosted by Dagmar Roth-Behrendt at which the European Patient Forum outlined its manifesto .
I am glad to see patients banging the drum , because it is patient input that we need .
We are poised now to take a democratic decision , following the lead given by the lawyers .
But the decision will now be taken by the right people , namely the elected representatives of the people .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is a shame that we did not have the opportunity to discuss this particular issue during the previous session , when we were discussing the two previous legislative proposals .
But , as the saying goes , better late than never .
We are pleased to see that the Commission 's proposals really do go in the direction requested by the European Parliament , in the direction in which the European Parliament encouraged the Commission to go in this regard .
If Europe is really to be a Europe without borders then this has , first of all , to be in the area of healthcare .
Guaranteeing healthcare to the inhabitants of our Member States will show that we have really done something for European taxpayers and voters .
After all , what the average Pole , as well as the average Hungarian , Cypriot , Englishman and Italian are interested in , much more than the Lisbon Treaty , is whether they will be able to access healthcare abroad during their holidays , or even if they can make a special trip to take advantage of a highly specialised hospital .
Finally , I believe that the measures that we are discussing today could really improve healthcare for foreigners and at the same time increase the authority of the EU , an authority that has recently been shaken by ideological debates and by trying to impose unwanted institutional solutions onto EU citizens .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I welcome very much the statement that has been made , certainly , by Council on this particular directive and the limits and context of it .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the update of the coordination of social security , and indeed its rapporteur on the implementing regulation , I have a very specific interest in this because questions about reimbursement - how it is provided , what information is given , the speed and method of it etc . - come within the scope of that particular regulation .
I think that when we are talking about issues such as health care for people who are on holiday elsewhere in the European Union , we should remember that comes under the European Health Card and under the coordination of social security .
That is clear .
What this directive is aiming to do is to pick up some of the issues which are not necessarily dealt with in that particular regulation , and I think we need to be careful where the dividing line is on that .
The question of prior authorisation has of course been an extremely important one .
I think we need to be clear that we are not talking necessarily about an absolute right of patients to move and be treated within the European Union under their national systems , in terms of their national systems reimbursing them .
It is a qualified right and I think we need to be clear on that .
I think we also need to be clear that what this directive is proposing , as I understand it , is that what will be paid for is care that will be available under the national system , not new or different treatments , so that again qualifies the right that we are talking about in terms of this particular directive .
There is no question that prior authorisation needs to be managed better , and that not only the patients but also the administrations involved need to understand what that is and how it should operate speedily in terms of medical need .
That is the criterion set down by the Court : medical need .
Administrations therefore need to reflect that , not necessarily their own cost basis .
There is a lot to be welcomed in this directive , and issues around best practice , issues about quality , legal certainty , who is responsible , are also important .
As John Bowis has mentioned , we also need to take steps forward on questions , for example , about continuing care or prescriptions which may not be valid in one Member State because of their own systems .
But we also need to be careful - and this applies to the implementing regulation on 883 , as it does to this - that we should not be in the business of helping patients make a profit by playing different systems off against each other .
I do not think that health-care systems benefit from that whatsoever .
I want to make clear on behalf of my group that increasing the amount of cross-border care is not of itself a goal .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt said that most patients wish to be treated at home and have the quality and speed of treatment there , so increasing the amount in itself , as I say , is not a goal .
A lot of claims are being made about the effects of trying to increase the amount of cross-border care which I think we need to be wary of , and I am glad the debate has reflected that .
There are people who are arguing that this introduces competition , that this drives up national standards , and that we even need to open the market as a reason for actually increasing and encouraging cross-border health care .
However , this Parliament has made its position very clear : health is not a service like car insurance .
It has a very particular role and its users are not simply consumers , but people in need and potentially vulnerable .
Many of those who tell us that increasing cross-border health care is a good thing will also reassure us that it only covers 2-3 % .
I want to know what the estimates are for the future and what the effect of this will be on the 98 % of people who do not move and currently do not want to .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry that I cannot share the optimism of fellows Members , since I am convinced that this directive may well do more for business than for health : a kind of Bolkestein directive , but on health .
The crucial point for Europe has to be that every citizen must have the right to the best possible treatment in his or her own country ; the sacrosanct right to be treated anywhere will otherwise mask the fact that treatment is not available at home - something that cannot be put down to questions of subsidiarity .
It also masks the interests of those keen to speculate on health , providing big business for insurance companies and increasing costs for citizens as well as European health spending .
A directive which is , in my view , mistaken , because it pays no attention to harmonisation , to the universal nature of the service that Europe must ensure , and is not based on the notion that health is a right which has to be guaranteed by the public sector and not left to people 's ability to take out private insurance .
The unions are rightly very concerned and we are concerned with them .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the central feature of this package - travelling for non-hospital treatment outside the home country - is funding by the home country , but limited to the amount it would have cost there .
So there are benefits in going to a country where treatment is cheaper , as long as it is better .
Health tourists will have to find the difference between the costs where treated and the home country 's base of provision .
Yes , travel costs are paid , ultimately by the home country , but at the home country 's own level , leaving the health tourist to find the treatment top-up and probably travel cost excess .
The poorest cannot afford to do this and they are left with the lowest standard of treatment .
The rich can do it , but they will probably go for private care anyway .
Regarding waiting lists , if a country 's health care is poor and expensive they will not be troubled by health tourists , but where it is cheap and good they could soon be overburdened .
This , therefore , produces a two-tier health care system .
Is that what they call an unintended consequence ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , four out of every hundred citizens in Europe go abroad for treatment ; in my view , however , health tourism is symptomatic of local shortcomings and a lack of services .
The Italian health service spends some EUR 40 million a year on Italians who go for treatment in other countries , and that obviously does not include private insurance .
What are the reasons for this ?
Without a doubt the very long waiting lists for services .
In Italy , for instance , people have to wait 300 days for a prostate operation and very often a month or more for a CAT scan .
Secondly , services such as dental treatment and cosmetic surgery have to be paid for in Italy and not in other countries .
Thirdly - and I draw everyone 's attention to this - people go abroad to take advantage of techniques such as artificial fertilisation which are prohibited or partly prohibited in their own countries , or which are absolutely illegal as in the case of purchase of live organs - while India is a sad example , there may well have been equally sad examples in other countries before their accession to the Union .
All in all , people decide to embark on health tourism because high-quality and less expensive services are on offer ; in many cases , however , I feel that supervision by the Union needs to be tightened up both as a guarantee for consumers and to ensure that competition is on an equal footing .
The social context in which services are provided is often a mixture of public and private , in those countries which have recently acceded as well , and , Mrs Vassiliou , I would therefore recommend , over and above the principles on which you have focused , strict supervision of compliance with existing regulations which make the use of raw materials , the CE mark and conformity documents compulsory , because the salubriousness of medical devices and treatments has to be guaranteed .
Let us not forget that there is always someone ...
The President cut off the speaker
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , now we European parliamentarians have a chance to show that we are just that , European parliamentarians .
That we are standing up for the Treaty and the rights it gives us .
That we are legislating with the patients ' best interests at heart , not to protect and support the protectionism which sometimes informs the debate .
That we are committed to finding added value in cooperating to give our patients the best possible care , wherever that may be .
The proposal that Commissioner Vassiliou has presented is a good starting point and to be applauded .
We must complete what she has begun and ensure that no unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles are introduced .
To spell it out , that means that the Member States have no right to prevent free movement without reason .
Requirements for prior authorisation may be imposed only in exceptional cases - if they are specified on the Commission 's list or if there is a risk of a mass exodus of patients which would undermine the health system .
The idea that it might be imposed because so few patients have chosen to seek care abroad is highly unlikely .
Thus the starting point is : no prior authorisation .
Anything else would be contrary to the Treaty .
The next stage in this work on creating the conditions for optimum care is to implement the directive correctly .
Sick people should not have to go to court in order to validate their rights and to get unjustified requirements for prior authorisation overruled .
The Court of Justice will rule in favour of freedom of movement , but at what cost in terms of money and the health of patients who have to seek enforcement of their rights every time !
I really hope that we can escape that experience , and I call on my fellow Members and the President-in-Office to help us ; I am quite convinced that our Commissioner will help us .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Bachelot-Narquin , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following my own-initiative report on health services that Parliament adopted on 23 May 2007 , the Commission is now proposing , as part of the social package , a directive addressed solely at patients ' rights in regard to cross-border health care .
I am , therefore , very sorry this text shows so little ambition and does not take account of the many internal challenges that need to be resolved in order to combat the growing inequalities in the health sector , such as the ageing population , social inequalities , geographical segregation and medical demography problems .
On an issue that is so vital to the citizens of Europe , the Council and Parliament cannot , therefore , simply codify the Court of Justice 's rulings .
We need to find a certain balance , which will safeguard both the rights of patients - who are not merely consumers - to cross-frontier care , and equal access for all to quality care , with solidarity-based responsibility ; to ensure social and territorial cohesion and respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
There is still a worrying grey area in relation to definitions , such as prior authorisation and the concept of hospital care .
We need clarification here , so as not to open the door to discrimination that might give rise to a two-speed health system within Europe instead of creating added value in Europe .
Health has no price but does have a cost ; the directive , on the other hand - and that is a good thing - reaffirms both the principle of subsidiarity and the need for closer cooperation to bring the medical research networks and patient information centres closer together .

The debate will begin ; it must be an in-depth and fruitful debate , rather than a precipitate one , and must be shared by all the players involved , with the object of constructing a genuine European social model .
Mr President , why should a patient have to lose their sight waiting for a cataract operation in the UK , for instance , when it could be done in another Member State ?
And why should a person waiting in agony for a hip operation not be able to take advantage of the lack of waiting lists in some Member States , sometimes at a lesser cost to the country of origin ?
And why do some heart patients have to wait months to have surgery to unblock arteries when there really is no need ?
If a clinician advises treatment , and this cannot be provided at home , then we need a legal framework to ensure that we can seek it elsewhere .
All too often it is the poorest people that face discrimination and inequality in access to health care .
That is why we must ensure that Member States can authorise treatment in another country prior to that treatment .
We must not restrict cross-border health care just to those who can afford it .
Equally , this new directive must not compromise standards of care for those people who do chose to stay at home .
We must also ensure that there are safeguards in place that put the rights and safety of the patients first .
That is why it is vital that a mechanism is developed to share patients ' records between the patients ' home country and the country where they receive treatment .
Apart from that , we need to develop a system of compensation for patients who suffer avoidable harm when being treated in another country EU country .
And , with regards to the sharing of best practice , I welcome Article 15 in the draft directive which calls for a system of European reference networks .
These centres of excellence could prove a useful way of sharing knowledge , training and the exchange of information .
All too often we look at health-care-acquired infections or cancer-screening guidelines ; the answer is on our doorstep , and it is about time that we started learning from each other more effectively .
( PL ) Mr President , the main healthcare challenges facing us today are improving the health of older people , preparing to deal with geriatric diseases in relation to the ageing population , universal access to a proper level of healthcare , ensuring financial stability for national healthcare systems , giving particular attention to access to healthcare for disabled people , children , the elderly , and those from poorer families , guaranteeing the rights of the patient in cross-border healthcare , establishing cross-border electronic interoperability for medical records , while at the same time ensuring protection for personal data and the provision of good working conditions for employees in the healthcare sector .
The concrete measures proposed in the Social Package to meet these challenges , such as the preparation of a communiqué concerning meeting the needs of the ageing population , or the preparation of a green book as regards the issue of employees in the healthcare sector , give us some hope that we shall not remain only at the wish-making stage .
I am glad to see that so much attention has been paid to the issue of cross-border healthcare , which is so important in this age of ever growing migration .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , the directive means that more power will be given to the EU over healthcare , and I am opposed to opening up this field to EU legislation .
Healthcare is and must remain a national prerogative .
The idea that patients should engage in a form of healthcare tourism is an incorrect prioritisation of our common healthcare resources .
The new fundamental principle that we should have a right to care in another EU country without prior authorisation opens up a fast lane to care for young , linguistically talented and relatively healthy persons and poses the risk of diverting resources from those with greater care needs , such as our elderly and those with functional impairments .
Clearly everyone should have the right to care if they are sick in another EU country , but we already have that right without the need for new EU legislation in the field .
Healthcare remains a national policy area .
( DA ) Mr President , we all wish for the fastest , best treatment if we should fall seriously ill , but I do not want to see the American model , where well-off citizens receive the best treatment and vulnerable members of society second-class treatment - if they are lucky .
If they are unlucky , they receive none at all .
Therefore , we must lay down some basic principles .
There should be free and equal access to healthcare services for all , and people should be treated in turn and according to need .
That is to say , a public authority must carry out an assessment to ensure that a medical professional determines what constitutes ' turn ' and ' need ' .
It is the sickest who should be treated first , not the richest .
A way forward in terms of free and equal access to healthcare services for all citizens would be to scrutinise public contributions to treatment in private hospitals and tax credits for private health insurance .
EU legislation should not be oriented towards an ideological school of thought based on the internal market , but should aim towards a flexible system in Europe , which guarantees minimum rights for all citizens in terms of treatment .
( SK ) The directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare endeavours to solve an acute problem .
This problem is the conflict between the subsidiarity of healthcare systems and the right of European Union citizens to free movement , and also their fundamental human right of access to health services .
Free movement is the right of any citizen living in a Member State and his health moves with him .
Should he not be able to approach health services , he would face a serious obstacle hindering his free movement .
Complete equality of services is impossible because of different taxes paid in individual countries in respect of health services , as well as differing rates of treatment in individual countries .
Although many politicians worry about the onset of health tourism , especially from the East , their fears are unsubstantiated .
A very important thing for a patient is to be close to his relatives and not to face a language barrier .
The patient-doctor relationship is very specific .
The success of treatment partially depends on a patient 's trust in his doctor or in the health establishment .
A patient 's readiness to travel abroad to get treatment depends on the seriousness of the illness .
In cases of life-saving treatment or treatment of a serious illness , no other obstacles matter .
I think it would be preferable for these issues to be dealt with by the European Parliament rather than by the European Court of Justice .
It is sad that , although we are the citizens ' representatives , we find making decisions more difficult than the European Court of Justice which , in each case so far , has found that the patient was right .
I should like to mention one thing in conclusion .
Many of my fellow Members talk about the rich and the poor .
For me , as a doctor , there is only the patient .
I do not care whether he owns a Ford or is homeless .
( NL ) Mr President , to begin with , may I say how delighted I am to see our erstwhile colleague , Roselyn Bachelot , here with us today and hear her telling us once again that the European citizen is all-important .
This piece of legislation reflects that emphasis .
My compliments also go to Commissioner Vassiliou , who has seen this very difficult item of legislation through .
With this legislation we - the European Parliament , the European Commission and the Council - really are doing something for people .
The directive provides legal safeguards for mobility and at the same time offers a statutory basis for existing initiatives in the area of cross-border healthcare .
But when I compare this directive with the earlier versions , those which were opposed , I see that the focus is now more on patient mobility and less on health services , and the reason for that is to keep the Member States happy .
I have a word or two of criticism about that .
Border areas that have already taken some good initiatives on cross-border healthcare - for example the cooperative arrangement between the Universitätsklinikum Aachen and the Academisch Ziekenhuis Maastricht in my own province of Limburg , which as part of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion would dearly love to be a pilot area - are becoming far too dependent on mobility alone and thus on the whims of insurers or the goodwill or otherwise of national authorities , because the focus is now no longer on the services themselves .
We should take a good look at Article 13 to decide how we can get regions working together a lot more .
And whilst I am on the subject , Commissioner , may I make the point that we in the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion are very keen to be a pilot area .
Secondly , patient involvement in setting up national contact points .
Mrs Schmidt in Germany has taken an excellent initiative on this and we should look at how we might tie that in more closely to our own wider plans .
Another point is the ' list of treatments , other than those requiring overnight accommodation , to be subject to the same regime as hospital care ' , the purpose of which is to exclude certain functions from this directive .
This needs careful consideration too , because we cannot have a situation where an overly strict interpretation of that list rules out cooperative ventures of the kind I mentioned just now .
It is most important to know that effective cooperation makes centres of clinical excellence cheaper , not more expensive , and more readily accessible to people .
That , after all , is what we are aiming for .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner Vassiliou , Minister Bachelot-Narquin , Europe has an important duty to help guarantee everyone high-quality and affordable healthcare , close to home if possible or abroad if necessary .
So I am very grateful to you , Commissioner , for your initiative which unquestionably has many positive aspects in terms of guaranteeing quality and safety , information to the patient , more European cooperation , e-Health , reference networks and so on .
I also agree with you , Minister , when you say that it is not a good thing to leave rulings on patient mobility to the Court of Justice and that there is a need for legislation here .
I agree too with the view of Mr Bowis and Mrs Lambert that we ought perhaps to think about a better balance in the matter of prior authorisation of patient mobility , because that prior authorisation is an important instrument of Member States ' planning and policy .
A few other questions remain , Commissioner , about the fees to be charged , and mechanisms to prevent patient mobility leading to waiting lists in certain countries .
But I am sure , ladies and gentlemen , that these are questions and concerns which we shall be able to resolve as we discuss this directive further .
Once again , thank you for your initiative , Commissioner .
And we look forward , Minister , to cooperating with you .
Mr President , at the beginning of this year I conducted a number of consultation meetings throughout my constituency in the context of EU policy on social issues , and then these meetings fed into the Commission consultation on social reality stock-taking .
It was very clear to me that citizens are very interested in the EU becoming more involved in social policy , and that certainly includes patient mobility .
Indeed , the call for more social Europe was reinforced during the Lisbon Treaty campaign , and this response from the Commission , while not fully addressing the concerns of citizens , is timely and a step in the right direction .
I certainly welcome the proposals on patient mobility , but agree with some of the previous speakers that very many issues still need to be clarified - in particular , the issue of prior authorisation .
However , the bottom line is that patients must be at the core of any policy and should have no worries about costs , safety and quality .
In the mean time , patients must be fully informed of their existing rights , since legal uncertainty always works to the disadvantage of individuals who do not have many personal resources .
Finally , the French presidency referred to the fact earlier that some people will be disappointed that the issue of the mobility of health-care professionals has not been dealt with .
I am one of those people .
If we are to put patients at the core of any policy , then patient safety is paramount , so we must establish standardised accreditation systems for health-care professionals throughout the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , speaking in this debate I would like to say that , from the point of view of the new Member States , it is important to leave the possibility of introducing restrictions on the use of healthcare abroad to the national level , principally because of the insufficient funding allocated to healthcare in these countries .
Similarly , it is essential to apply the principle that a patient has the right to a refund of costs up to the value of what would be paid if the patient had used healthcare in their own country until such a time as the differences in development between the old and the new Member States have become significantly less .
Finally it is worth emphasising that the proposed solutions , particularly as regards the introduction of the European Reference Network , and also the European Network for Health Technology Assessment , provide an opportunity to raise the standards of medical care and also to make more effective use of healthcare resources in the European Union .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , as I am sure you know , the slogan of the upcoming Czech Presidency is ' Europe without barriers ' .
In this context I am glad that the Commission , in cooperation with the European Court of Justice , was able to put forward a proposal that breaks through one of the barriers , namely healthcare provision .
I approve of the fact that , thanks to the negotiations that have taken place so far , citizens are closer to a solution .
Being a physician , I should like to see the necessary documents adopted as soon as possible , but I assume that the matter is so complex that the old Roman adage of ' hurry up slowly ' applies here .
At present , I think that the following fundamental issues should be debated . Firstly , we all agree that it is necessary to ensure legal protection for patients who have the right to healthcare within the European Union , in keeping with the judicial decisions of the European Court of Justice .
Secondly , it is not possible for the directive to establish new competences for the Commission because they are not vital .
Thirdly , I think it is erroneous that , although the basic purpose was to ensure free movement of medical services , the text of the directive itself concentrates , first and foremost , on movement of patients in need of non-urgent healthcare .
Further debates represent an opportunity not only for the Czech Presidency but also for Europe .
Mr President , I am both looking forward to and dreading the cross-border health directive .
I am looking forward to it because I know so many people who are more disabled , and so many people who have died , as a result of a long wait for treatment in Irish public hospitals .
So the thought that my constituents will be able to get their medical records and travel without the current prior authorisation obstacle presented by the E112 scheme , to go and get treatment promptly , is wonderful .
I will certainly be advising those of my constituents who can travel to do so .
However , I am also aware that this will further exacerbate the problems in the Irish health system , and for those who cannot travel , and who must rely on that health system , I am in dread .
( SV ) Mr President , this issue is about the right of the individual to seek healthcare where good care is available .
The representative of the Group of the European United Left , Eva-Britt Svensson , said here earlier today that it will lead to healthcare tourism .
I would like to inform her that , when sick people seek care , it is because they are in pain , they are suffering , they are damaged , and they need care .
It is not about tourism .
Ultimately , this question is about the power of bureaucracy versus the right of the individual .
It is about whether old frontiers should be used as a barrier to people seeking healthcare or whether the openness of today 's Europe should be used as a means for people throughout Europe to get the best healthcare they can .
It was illuminating to hear what the Group of the Left thinks but , since I have the representative of the Social Democrats , Jan Andersson , in front of me and he is right after me on the speakers ' list , it would be interesting to hear from him whether he shares Eva-Britt Svensson 's view that sick people who seek care abroad are engaging in healthcare tourism .
Does he , like her , want to erect barriers of various kinds or will you , will the Social Democrats , work to ensure that we have the greatest possible openness , in which patients do not need to ask permission from the authorities to get healthcare ?
This question , Jan Andersson , is about Social Europe .
It is not about how individual decision-makers should determine what others can do , but how the individual can get the best healthcare .
Over to you , Jan Andersson .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me especially welcome Mrs Bachelot-Narquin .
We have worked well together in the past and I hope that we shall do so in the future .
Welcome to Parliament .
Briefly to Mr Hökmark , this is not a domestic debate .
I do not check my opinions with Mrs Svensson , I prefer to form my own .
I welcome this directive for several reasons .
We need clarification in legal terms .
I think it is better than the draft that we had previously .
There are considerable advantages , particularly for people who live in border areas , as I do myself .
That said , I would also point out that it is important to link the arrangements to the various systems around Europe , in terms of organisation , financing and similar aspects .
There is one aspect that we must pay particular attention to .
That is equality .
We know that there is prioritisation in healthcare , but it is important that people are all treated equally and that some should not be able to take precedence because of their resources , and it is important that we should be able to combine these two aspects in cross-border care .
The question of prior approval is also important .
That is something to which we must devote further discussion .
The limit specified in the directive is not good .
Inpatient care , outpatient care : it varies considerably from one country to another , and the pattern changes over time .
We must find other criteria .
I look forward to cooperation .
In our committee we shall be dealing with the financing of social security systems , which forms part of this cooperation .
I look forward to cooperation with the other committees on this matter .
( FI ) Mr President , the most important thing is for patients to receive good , safe and cheap care , and more often than not they want to receive their care as close to home as possible .
In other words , national healthcare services need to be delivered appropriately .
The Commission 's proposal before us should nevertheless be welcomed .
It is important that care and treatment can also be available in another country .
That would ensure more freedom of choice and that there were clearer guidelines and advice , whilst health and safety issues also become clearer .
For patients , then , this would be a good thing .
For the Member States the issue is slightly more complicated , because the directive cannot work well until the electronic social welfare and healthcare systems in the Member States of the Union are compatible .
We know that they are not today , and the implementation of this directive would demand a lot from the Member States .
We need to ensure that when the directive has been adopted it also means that patient 's details can pass from one system to another , information security is guaranteed and the patient 's safety is assured .
The patient is what is most important .
( DA ) Mr President , the road to hell is paved with glittering promises , and one does not need to be a professor to foresee the result of this proposal in its current form .
On the one hand there will be an ' A team ' consisting of the wealthy , the well educated and those with the right connections - generally speaking , all of us in this Chamber .
We are to be able to jump the waiting list in our home country and seek out the best experts in the EU - as we can afford to spend money on treatment , and we can afford the travel and other additional costs .
On the other hand there will be the poor and underprivileged .
They are allowed to join the back of the queue and , when it finally comes to their turn , they obtain the treatment that we , the richest , did not want .
On special occasions , the EU presents itself as an alternative to the United States , but the point is that the EU is increasingly resembling the United States - including in the health field .
Our group supports free and equal access to the treatment people need , so we reject this proposal .
( SL ) The social landscape of Europe has changed .
We are faced with new challenges which require a modernisation of the European social model .
The healthcare landscape of Europe is also changing .
Success rates in the case of some diseases are on the increase , as is spending on running healthcare systems .
However , citizens encounter huge differences in the quality of healthcare , both between the Member States and within them .
Cancer survival rates differ by as much as 10 % between the Member States .
I welcome the European Commission 's intention to look closely at the issue of healthcare within the framework of a renewed social agenda .
At the same time , however , I regret that the increased attention paid to citizens ' health-related rights has come about solely as a result of a judgment of Court of Justice .
I speak as someone who has himself survived cancer and who knows of cases where patients have been told ' there is nothing more we can do for you ' in one country and received effective care in another .
Freedom of movement means the ability to choose .
The ability to choose leads to greater competition and thus greater quality and possibly also lower costs .
I am sure that the directive on patient mobility will enliven Europe and have many positive consequences .
Our common goal is health for all .
The directive on cross-border healthcare undoubtedly means greater closeness to citizens , who are not interested so much in debates on competences than in the shortest route to health - naturally one which is clearly signposted .
The most successful European policy is policy which citizens feel in their pockets , as was the case with the roaming directive .
In the case of the directive on cross-border healthcare , citizens will not feel it directly in their pockets , at least not initially , but they will have greater choice for the same money .
And that is not a bad feeling , particularly where health is involved .
( DE ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , when we talk about a social Europe , we must always put people and their concerns at the forefront .
Putting them at the forefront means that we must have a top priority , which is that the health system should provide people with the best possible care locally .
That is the number one priority .
That is the proviso which must underlie our approach to this directive .
There are , however , many other considerations , for which we also need other solutions , be it because people are travelling or are working in other countries or be it because they have a rare disease or because they will receive better care in another country .
This means that there is also a need to remove the obstacles to mobility in such cases and to ensure that legal certainty is created .
That is the second priority .
The third priority is that we must remember time and time again that , under the European treaties , healthcare in the Member States is a matter for the Member States , and we must respect that .
In other words , the organisation and funding of healthcare systems are the responsibility of the Member States , and our legislation can do nothing to change that .
It is not an option , we cannot do it , and we have no intention of doing it unless we were able to agree at some future date to create a common health policy .
That would be the ideal scenario , but I am afraid we are still far from ready to take such a step .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we and the people of Europe are pleased that we can finally begin the parliamentary discussion of this proposal .
I regret that the threats the PSE Group made to the Commission last December resulted in a deadlock lasting several months .
The proposal is good and provides added value for the people of Europe .
We want to see the political creation of cross-border legal certainty , so that individuals no longer have to resort to the Court of Justice to assert their fundamental right to personal freedom of movement .
We are discussing a directive on patient mobility , not on health services .
Primary responsibility for the assured delivery , the quality and the funding of health care continues to rest with the Member States .
We know , however , that we need more cooperation among the Member States in the field of health care and more cross-border European input in research , in the key area of hospital provision and on the supply side .
This question is the free movement of patients .
We are not asking whether health-care systems and high-quality health services can be organised without unwanted side-effects ; we are asking how it can be done .
We are moving in an area between four poles : patients ' rights , protection of the healthcare systems , protection of health insurance schemes and quality assurance with regard to health services , security of funding and legal certainty .
Patients have a legitimate interest in seeking out what seems to be the best health service .
To enable them to do so , we need a legislative framework and legal certainty .
On the other hand , the great majority of the population want health services as close as possible to their own homes .
We have the problem of funding the system of health care in the Member States .
More mobility at the same cost is therefore the right way forward .
We have the issue of quality assurance with regard to health services .
We should launch the debate on European minimum standards in this area too .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I share the view of other Members that it is an important achievement to have this proposal on the table at last .
It meets a need , a reality on the ground and it means we can really do something for people .
Some members claim that only the well-off will be able to get themselves treated abroad .
We must make sure that healthcare abroad is accessible not only to the most affluent , because they are able to use the law to obtain expensive procedures .
Patients have a right to clarity and legal certainty and we can work on that , that is our job .
The proposal is a distinct plus for EU citizens .
It is not perfect , of course , there are a few improvements to be made .
I am thinking of the definitions of ' hospital ' , ' non-hospital care ' and so on and the identification of specific cases where prior authorisation may be warranted .
These are things we shall certainly address in the debate .
So I hope our debate will be calm and pragmatic and not an ideologically based debate .
Other aspects will need to be dealt with by national legislation , but I absolutely cannot agree with those who say that this proposal undermines the ability of Member States to organise their healthcare .
I think it most important that we discuss this proposal .
( SK ) Responsibility for the health systems in the Union rests first and foremost with Member States .
Responsibility for the organisation and provision of healthcare and medical services in accordance with Article 152 of the Treaty is fully recognised .
The proposal aims to introduce and ensure a transparent framework for the provision of safe , high-quality and effective cross-border healthcare within the Union , at the same time ensuring a high level of health protection while fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Although I wholeheartedly approve of the intention and goals set in the directive , I should like to point out certain shortcomings of the proposal that could be overcome .
Some are afraid that this type of care might place the health insurance systems in some Member States under undue pressure .
We need a more precise definition of procedures relating to providing care and reimbursement in respect of repeated hospitalisations and damages , as well as treating complications .
We must set a time horizon for reimbursement of costs and at the same time clearly state that the directive neither will not wants to solve the long-term healthcare issues in such establishments where the health and social systems usually meet .
The term ' beneficial for the patient ' must be specified .
The medical aspects should be taken into consideration in the first place , not subjective benefits .
When specifying the terms ' hospital care ' and ' outpatient care ' , it would also be good to specify the term ' specialised outpatient healthcare ' .
In addition to that , the problem of the method of reimbursement of prescriptions issued in other countries still remains .
Ladies and gentlemen , just like on those other occasions when we witnessed the introduction of free movement in the past , certain worries exist .
In my opinion , however , they are not insurmountable .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has been said that health services are a major pillar of the European social model .
For that reason , it seems entirely right that we should address the issue with a view to ensuring a high level of health protection and equal access to healthcare for all ; unfortunately , the text under discussion does not seem to be moving in that direction .
We need to avoid striking at the roots of the purpose for which the directive should be issued , and that is to guarantee , within the framework of free movement , the right of citizens to take advantage of health services within the Union .
In practice , the text can be seen as an instrument geared towards opening up the health market at Community level , something which is quite different and could well lead to a right to health for the well-off .
The text provides solely for the reimbursement of the costs paid by them and only the cost of the health service as compared with the cost in the country of origin , disregarding the costs of travelling to and staying in the host country .
Further critical points have also been discussed , ranging from the need to guarantee standards of service at Community level to the important issue of information .
For those reasons , I consider that more detailed thought is needed so that we can try together to provide European citizens with the answers that are still lacking in the directive itself .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to welcome the entire proposal made by the Commission regarding a new social package .
The necessity of modernising the European social model is obvious in the specific context of the 21st century and of the objectives sought in the Lisbon Strategy concerning sustained economic growth and the prosperity of the population .
The directive currently under debate is important in the enforcement of the renewed social agenda , particularly in the context of priorities related to the promotion of geographic and professional mobility , as well as to a longer and healthier life of European citizens .
I hope that the provisions of the directive will bring healthcare services closer to home , and I am referring to all social categories , including emigrants , people working abroad and undergraduates studying abroad .
It is essential that healthcare should provide secure , quality services , no matter where in Europe it is provided .
In this regard , I would like to stress the importance of education and training of European professionals in the field , as well as the importance of facilitating European communication and the exchange of good practice .
Given the crossborder nature of the directive , professional training should include knowledge of foreign languages and familiarity with the fundamentals of intercultural dialogue .
Not least , adequate knowledge of information and communication technology is just as necessary for the success of the directive ; moreover , it is crucial in strengthening the so-called field of e-health .
( RO ) The provision of healthcare services is a pillar of the European social model , and the creation of an internal market for these services should not encourage medical tourism , which will be available only to well-off patients who can speak many foreign languages and have access to information .
What is required is a clarification of the conditions for the reimbursement and licensing of healthcare , as well as a clarification of the concept of healthcare .
I am concerned about the effects that this directive will have on the new Member States .
European citizens will not travel to countries where healthcare is very expensive ; on the contrary , they will go to countries such as Romania , Bulgaria , or Poland , leading to an exodus of patients from Western Europe to Eastern Europe .
Although healthcare provision in the new Member States in accordance with clearly defined standards of quality and security does not apply uniformly to all types of healthcare , the demand for dental services in Eastern Europe is constantly increasing .
This will cause prices to soar in the host countries , rendering their citizens ' access to healthcare more difficult , owing both to high prices and to the fact that certain companies will look for customers willing to pay more .
Opening up the European market in healthcare services will have a severe impact on the healthcare system in Eastern Europe , leading to inequality .
Increased freedom of choice in the manner and location of healthcare provision is a positive thing , as long as all citizens have access to services , irrespective of their social standing .
( PL ) Mr President , the aim of the social package should be to guarantee universal and equal access to high quality healthcare services to all EU citizens .
To a certain extent , this objective can be reached by appropriate regulation at European Union level , but there are many problems that result from mistaken and ineffective solutions at the level of individual Member States .
For this reason , the Commission should encourage Member States to reform their national healthcare systems , primarily through spreading good practice and through effective financing methods .
A precondition for effective healthcare is the free movement of medical personnel between Member States .
In this context I must draw your attention to the restrictions that continue to apply to Polish nurses and midwives wishing to work abroad .
This is discrimination against Polish workers and is a blatant breach of the principle of free movement of labour and the principle of equal treatment .
I call on the Commission to put an end to these discriminatory practices and to give back to Polish nurses the right to carry out their profession , without restrictions , in other European Union countries .
( SK ) The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection held intensive discussions about the provision of cross-border healthcare back when the Services Directive was debated .
The agreed compromise was reached only because healthcare services were excluded from the scope of the Directive due to their specific nature .
Since this is a complex problem , I welcome this debate .
Clear and understandable information must be available to the patient even before he requests healthcare in another EU Member State , in particular regarding the level of treatment costs , the possibility of being reimbursed by his health insurer and the need for prior authorisation .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to adopt rules at European level that will enable the patient to make use of healthcare services anywhere within the EU , rather than make him a victim of the system .
Mr President , many speakers stress the fact that all patients , whether they travel or stay at home , are entitled to high-quality , safe health care .
Let us not forget that one of the biggest demographic challenges we have is an ageing population who will inevitably want health care in their own locality .
So we need clarity to respect the right of patients to access health services , and at the same time we need to respect the Treaty provision stating that the organisation of health services , especially financing , is a competence of the Member States .
We must recognise that 27 states have different systems , different funding systems .
I regret that the directive is not clear on this point , but I have confidence that our rapporteurs can clarify these issues : if we want to keep out the lawyers we must have clarity , not just to avoid patients going to court , but to avoid them going to court on cross-border medical negligence issues .
So we need to have more innovation in our approach .
The ideal mix , I believe , is to have patient mobility and to encourage Member States to buy in expert services , not just to treat one patient but to treat groups suffering from the same condition .
This could be more cost-efficient , and could enable patients to stay close to family and friends .
Mr President , this directive is wonderful in theory , but it could turn out to be a nightmare in practice .
I say this because it could lead to services getting better in some centres but worse in others .
I will give you an example : if patients from a small country like Cyprus with a neurosurgical problem all go to Sweden or Britain to have their neurosurgical treatment , then what will happen to the neurosurgical services in Cyprus ?
The standards will diminish , inevitably , and this holds for cardiovascular services , for orthopaedic services , for oncological services and for many others .
So we must be very careful .
I fully support this directive , but we must make sure that we do not make good centres better and bad centres worse .
We must be careful to raise the health standards right across Europe , in large countries as well as in small countries .
( PL ) Mr President , the purpose of the new social agenda is , among other things , to reduce barriers to mobility in a society that accepts the principle of equality , where there should not be any barriers in anyone 's way .
A very important issue here is the proposal relating to the directive concerning the rights of patients in cross-border healthcare .
This is needed for people to be able to function in today 's fast-moving world , where people travel hundreds of kilometres to attend a specific meeting .
For this reason it is very important that every European should know that if their lives are in danger , someone will save their life and safeguard their health without unnecessary regulations or other obstacles .
We should make sure that every inhabitant of the EU knows that , in order to be able to access healthcare in an emergency , they must have a European Health Insurance Card .
Patients must know that , in an emergency , they should be treated on the same basis as the citizens of the country where they are being treated .
Quality , productivity and , above all , the safety of patients are the issues that , for us , should be the most important .
( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commission for presenting this Directive .
I think it incredibly important that politicians have the opportunity to discuss patient rights , rather than it being left to the European Court of Justice to take decisions in such an important area .
In my view , patients are of supreme importance .
We must put the spotlight on patients , but for this reason we must also reflect on how to orient this Directive , so that the spotlight is on giving all patients the opportunity to receive good treatment .
Therefore , I believe it is important to ensure that the Directive enables patients staying at home in their own Member State to have access to proper treatment too .
Thus I believe that this prior authorisation should be the rule rather than the exception .
This is what I believe we need to focus on .
In addition , I would agree with my colleague Mrs Sârbu in what she said about the need for us to take care that this Directive does not create a divide between east and west , north and south in Europe .
Mr President , I welcome the proposal from the Commission .
The question that is being asked is ' What can Europe do for me ? ' .
I think it is important that we make health care available if it is not available in the home country .
As one of the people who has benefited from cross-border health care - but I could afford it - it is important that it is available to everyone right across the Community .
However , the issue that arises is that there should not be a delay in making sure that treatment is available .
That is one of the things that I think is important in developing this policy .
Mr President , I believe there are a number of principles that have to be addressed in this issue .
The first is that patients ' health obviously has to be at the heart of it .
We must not leave the issue of these rights to decision by the courts .
We as lawmakers must make the law in this area .
Thirdly , competition must not be encouraged , or be the outcome of this directive , between national health services ; nor indeed should competition generally be encouraged in this area .
( RO ) The new Member States are facing a significant level of migration of highly skilled workers in the health services sector , a phenomenon which is leading to severe imbalances , correction of which will require a significant financial outlay .
It is necessary that the new Member States benefit from extended European funding programmes to develop flexible healthcare provision for all patients , in a concrete , non-discriminatory manner .
( RO ) European mobility policy is one of the most important EU policies , allowing all citizens to establish themselves and work in those countries where they can benefit from an improved standard of living .
However , free movement is significantly hampered by concerns about the possibility of recouping the cost of medical treatment abroad .
Therefore , I move for the creation of a European health insurance scheme , recognised by all Member States , facilitating European cooperation in the field of crossborder healthcare .
This will lead to the development of a modern social agenda which will contribute to fostering opportunities in the field of education and employment .
( FR ) Mr President , this proposal for a directive is concerned with the interest of patients and it is that human approach on the part of the Commissioner and the Minister that I welcome .
I also appreciate the improved cooperation between Member States in terms of respect for national health systems and I hope this opportunity for Europeans will be enhanced by the provision of proper information , which is something they need .
Effectiveness and humanity : that is what pleases me in this proposal for a directive .
( EL ) Mr President , I am proud that this directive has been created and promoted by two Cypriot Commissioners , Mr Kyprianou and Mrs Vassiliou .
The directive is correct and necessary , and must be implemented .
The main focus of this directive is the patient , who is entitled to the best possible medical care , particularly when it cannot be provided in the patient 's own country .
The practical difficulties have been correctly identified and need attention , because bad practice may end up nullifying an idea that is sound in other respects .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start with a few personal comments and say how happy I was to meet up again with my colleagues from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Mr Andersson , its chairman , Anne Van Lancker , Ria Oomen-Ruijten , Jiří Maštálka and others .
May I offer them my warmest greetings .
John Bowis , speaking on behalf of the PPE , put the issue in its proper context by asking : ' What does Europe do for me ? '
He reintroduced the question of a neighbourhood Europe , followed by numerous others such as Dagmar Roth-Behrendt on behalf of the Socialist Party and Jules Maaten for the ALDE Group .
Many of those who spoke after John Bowis also emphasised that patients take precedence over states and systems .
That is very true .
Yet we must not end up by opposing patients , states and health insurance systems because any destabilisation of health insurance systems would have dreadful repercussions on the organisation of healthcare and , specifically , on the patients we want to protect .
That is why I would reply to Dagmar Roth-Behrendt that the question is not of patients ' right of movement within the European Union , which is a self-evident , fundamental right .
The question the directive raises is of reimbursement and reimbursement terms , of the right or not to reimbursement .
Article 152 of the Treaty makes it clear that Member States are free to organise and finance the healthcare they provide as they wish .
At the heart of the issue of prior authorisation lies the question of balance , of the soundness of the accounts of the national health support and insurance systems , especially those of the poorest states .
This text reminds us of that responsibility and under no circumstances can states use this directive as a means of evading those responsibilities .
Basically , Jean Lambert was saying that cross-border care is not a goal in itself and Derek Roland Clark pointed out that perhaps we should make sure the provisions of the new directive did not ultimately benefit only a few of the wealthiest , most educated and best informed patients while the poorest patients would , of course , be treated unfairly .
The key question here , however , the question under debate , which the Commission and the Council should look at in depth , is prior authorisation for hospital care because that is indeed where there is the greatest risk of deregulation of national systems .
Jean Lambert asked whether the proposal for a directive was compatible with the regulation on social security coordination .
The Court has found that those two reimbursement systems were compatible .
We must ensure , therefore , that the two systems are properly structured .
The proposal for a directive before us gives priority to implementing the regulation , which seems reasonable .
Yet the principle of the patient 's freedom of choice must continue to apply if , for any reason other than financial , a patient prefers to go down the road opened by ECJ case law .
Like Bernadette Vergnaud , some MEPs regretted the fact that this text does not cover all the difficulties encountered by patients within the EU , and more specifically in their country of origin .
When you look at the difficulties to be resolved by this text alone , you can see that it was unlikely that proposing a wider-ranging text would have been the best way of making progress in terms of resolving certain very practical problems , such as reimbursing healthcare for patients moving to another European country for the purpose of study , work or simply holidays .
Similarly , this is not just a directive on health services , to be regretted or welcomed .
So it serves no useful purpose to decry it as some kind of ' Bolkestein directive ' .
That really is not what this directive is about .
Once its basic principles have been established - and I have noted them - this directive must therefore enable us to preserve a certain means of regulation , as it already exists between the Commission and the Council but also between many MEPs on all benches , in regard to respect for these options open to patients .
As regards prior authorisation for cross-border healthcare , Member States must remain responsible for deciding on the range of care they offer .
It is also important that when a state imposes certain conditions of access to care for public health reasons - such as the doctor 's referral system or what is known as gate-keeping in English - its systems are respected and applied when patients turn to a health system in a country other than their own .
Obviously , this discussion on the directive cannot be dissociated from the Commission 's forthcoming communication or from the Council 's proposal for a recommendation on Community action in the field of rare diseases .
I believe it is entirely possible to hold those discussions at the same time .
Another issue that many MEPs raised was the interoperability of health information systems .
This directive may contribute to that in legislative terms .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of course we are only at the start of this dialogue , of the discussion on this subject , which will have to cover such vast areas as data protection , transparent enacting terms and perimeters .
Here again , however , with the directive creating legal certainty , we should be able to advance along the road of interoperability , which does not mean going it alone but , quite simply , harmonisation and greater compatibility .
Thank you all for your deep and meaningful contributions , which have shed great light on our debate .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been a very interesting discussion .
Let me say that very often we hear the question : how can we bring the citizen nearer to the European Union ?
This is one example of how we can make the citizen feel that the European Union is doing something for him or her .
Under the present system , there are many inequalities .
With the clear legal framework provided by the draft directive concerning citizens and the various issues we are trying to give clear information to the citizen about their rights and how they can exercise them .
It is true that there are concerns .
I listened very carefully to your concerns , and I am sure that during the course of the debate and the deliberations we shall have , we have to address these concerns so that the end result will be something which is really of benefit to the citizen .
This is not a Bolkestein Directive II - far from it - and we should never think that this is so .
It is about patients ' rights and how to exercise those rights .
We are not trying to harmonise health systems .
Member States can continue to exercise and regulate their health systems , and they can decide for themselves what benefits they want to offer to their citizens , and to what extent .
We are not trying to encourage health tourism .
We are not trying to give citizens the chance to have their faces and their bodies fixed ; rather , we are trying to give citizens the right to have proper health care when they are sick and they need it .
Nor do we expect a big exodus of European citizens from their home state to another Member State .
According to the calculations and to the impact assessment that we have , only a very small percentage of citizens wish to go abroad .
Why ?
Because they want to have the care that they need nearer to their families , they want to speak their own language and to be in a familiar environment .
However , there are cases when they need some extra health care which their home state cannot provide .
This is a right that we give them - this extra right to have an informed choice and decide for themselves where they go for their health treatment .
Indeed , we have had encouragement from the European Court of Justice to legislate .
We cannot leave it all the time to the Court to decide about the rights of the patient case by case .
This is not just .
How many European citizens can afford a lawyer and can afford to go to court ?
Only a very few .
Therefore , we must offer solutions to all the patients , give them the right information and let them decide for themselves what they need .
This is a time for all of us to work together - the Council , the Commission and Members of Parliament - to find the best possible solutions for patients .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner , I think the applause in the Chamber reflect Parliament 's satisfaction .
I have received , pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , six motions for resolution winding up this debate .
I would inform you that the EPP-ED Group has now withdrawn its motion for a resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in a few minutes ' time .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Healthcare for Roma has been systematically denied or rarely taken into consideration across Europe , despite the fact that access to healthcare is a fundamental right for European citizens .
The Renewed Social Agenda on cross-border healthcare must address the problems Roma encounter in their failure to have healthcare services within a short distance of their community .
Most Roma live on the periphery of urban centres , and miles away from health facilities .
Their segregation from these services results in the life expectancy of Roma being estimated at 10 years less than the national average .
The prevention of and vaccination against diseases prevalent in Roma communities as well as the question of emergency situations and regular health checks have yet to be resolved .
Another factor limiting the access of Roma to healthcare stems from their lack of identity cards , which would enable them to apply for insurance or social assistance .
With the fall of the communist regimes , many Roma were not acknowledged , or were forgotten or erased from country citizenship records .
Lastly , the health of Roma women must be addressed , as they are the caretakers of the Roma community .
If the Commission is to help Europeans obtain healthcare services within the EU , they must ensure this is universally and equally applied .
in writing . - ( FI ) In a properly functioning Europe , the patient must be able to apply for proper care and treatment wherever it is available .
If there are waiting lists for a heart operation or a hip replacement in one country , access to treatment in another country must be possible without any protectionist jungle of legislation .
The removal of barriers also means better use of existing resources .
Most of the speeches opposing the movement of patients and services appeal to the worst aspects of Europeanness , xenophobia and mistrust .
Properly functioning health services , both public and private , are part of the welfare society - the European welfare society .
in writing . - Cross-border healthcare is a key element of the social package .
While the EU has facilitated freedom of movement and the right to live and work in other EU countries , clarification regarding patients ' rights to access healthcare in other Member States was urgently required .
Despite numerous European Court of Justice rulings on this subject , citizens are not fully aware of their rights on this issue .
Moreover , they are not adequately informed about their exact entitlements , how to go about arranging treatment , or indeed reimbursements .
In Northern Ireland , projects have been piloted around the border counties which ensure that people can benefit from the most appropriately located healthcare services .
These projects have been very successful and have been very much appreciated by the people who have benefited from them .
In this regard , I would like commend the British Medical Association ( NI ) and the Irish Medical Association for their efforts in promoting cross-border healthcare between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland .
While I welcome this work by the Commission , I cannot help feeling that it is overdue .
Now that this issue has been clarified and given a legal framework , I sincerely hope that Member States will fully cooperate .
in writing . - ( NL ) We are still glad that the European Parliament excluded heath care services from the general directive on services .
Healthcare is after all a specific sector requiring a specific approach .
The fundamental premise of the proposal , in line with established case-law , has to be that the organisation and funding of healthcare are the responsibility of Member States .
This means on the one hand that patient mobility cannot be made an absolute right and on the other hand that there are no excuses for not investing in one 's own health system .
That premise also necessarily implies that Member States must be able to charge the real cost to the patient .
There must be solidarity , but there must also be the possibility of differential treatment for patients who have contributed in their own country through the social security and tax system and foreign patients who have not .
The fact that we have the directive is a good thing , but anyone familiar with the sector feels that it still needs a lot more work .
To my mind the quality , accessibility and financial sustainability of healthcare on the basis of socially responsible solidarity remain the key criteria here .
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe that access to quality healthcare is one of the essential values of a Social Europe .
Patients ' rights within the EU and crossborder cooperation in this field among the Member States constitute a significant part of the new social package .
Patients must have access to quality health services in any Member State and they must have the possibility of being reimbursed with amounts that are equal to the amount they would receive in their own country .
Today there are significant differences within the EU as regards both the quality of health services and the reimbursable amounts .
I believe that an assessment of the European health system and of the medical technology in use is required as a matter of urgency .
The appropriate equipment of all hospitals with the technology required to diagnose and treat various conditions is a prerequisite for the provision of quality healthcare .
Physicians and nurses move from one Member State to another both in search of better wages and due to the availability of better diagnostic and treatment facilities .
It is important that the directive on the patients ' rights include , according to EU priorities , a minimal list of health services which should be fully covered by health insurance budgets .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me , on behalf of you all , to welcome a delegation from the Knesset headed by Amira Dotan .
In the framework of the regular contacts between the European Parliament and Israel , an interparliamentary meeting will take place during this part-session .
This will be the 33rd such meeting between our two assemblies .
I bid a warm welcome to Amira Dotan and the members of her delegation , with whom we have already had the opportunity - on Tuesday - to converse at greater length .
We wish you success and hope that your work will be marked by a willingness to engage in dialogue and a desire for mutual understanding - qualities that are indispensable to a resolute quest for peace in the Middle East .
The European Parliament is following that process very attentively and is determined to be an objective and active contributor to the pursuit of peace in the Middle East .
( Applause )
Mr President , this is about the building in Strasbourg and the decision to go back .
The Secretary-General sent an e-mail on Tuesday morning saying we would go back in October .
I understand there was no vote or decision by the Bureau , which is strange .
Mr Rømer made no mention of the availability of the expert report .
I had to rely on information from the Vice-President for Transparency to know that the Secretary-General had told the Bureau he would make it available to Members on request in the French and German versions in which it exists , although he would not translate it .
I have now sent a total of three e-mails over the last two days asking for the report in French , with no response .
I find this unacceptable and I am now raising the matter under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure on accountability and Rule 96 on transparency .
I want to know the basis on which we are going back to Strasbourg .
I have read the note which went to the Bureau on Monday , but it seems to me that the works only relate to the false ceilings .
So , firstly , what do we know about the reasons for the collapse ?
Is it the design , the materials , the quality of construction or the building inspection ?
It has got to be one of those four .
Secondly , what does it tell us about the rest of the building ?
We do not know whether the whole building has been checked .
Are there faulty materials ?
One rumour is that the steel used in the building is the same as in the Charles de Gaulle airport roof which collapsed .
Is that true or not ?
( Protests )
Well , if you do not give us the truth , rumours will proliferate .
This is all without prejudice to Mr Matsakis ' concerns about asbestos in the building which he is pursuing with vigour , also with no response I think .
I want to know , first of all , why I have not been given the report , what is the basis for the decision to go back to Strasbourg , is the building truly safe , and who has decided it is ?

( Applause )
For my part , this is not , and should not be - and I hope it is not being - dealt with as a political issue .
People could have died if they had been there in August , and they could die if anything goes wrong .
Please could I have some answers ?
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Baroness Ludford , as far as I am aware , you are a citizen of the United Kingdom .
Citizens of the United Kingdom are noted for their pragmatism and their sang froid .
May I therefore advise you to keep a cool head now .
There was no reason to abuse the right to ask questions .
We are preparing an e-mail for all Members .
The technical details will be set out in that e-mail in the appropriate languages .
Have confidence in the parliamentary administration !
We are doing what is necessary .
There was no need to admonish us to tell the truth .
We are always bound by honesty in all matters , including this one , Baroness .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , on Tuesday five Members from four different political groups put up a large poster to publicise written declaration No 75 .
The requisite authorisation was obtained from the competent quaestor , Mr Fazakas , before the poster went on display .
Someone removed the poster on Tuesday afternoon without informing any of the authors of the written declaration .
Yesterday we could not find it at all .
Today we discovered that it is with the security service .
The reason given to us was that a political decision had been taken to the effect that this written declaration could not be advertised .
Since when has the administration decided what is politically right and wrong , particularly after the competent quaestor has given his approval ?
We are democratic Members of Parliament with the right to state our position .
You do not have to agree with the content of the declaration , but removing the poster without informing the authors is wrong ; it is a preposterous curtailment of Members ' rights .
I ask you to comment on this matter .
( Applause )
Mr Alvaro , your intervention , which is entirely legitimate , is the first I have heard of this incident .
I assure you that we shall look into this matter .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents has asked me to deliver a brief statement about tomorrow , the European Day of Languages .
I shall gladly do so , but please bear with me , because this statement is written in several languages , which makes it a daunting task for me too .
I ask you to take note of this statement .
On 26 September 2008 we are celebrating the European Day of Languages .
In that framework , the European Union , together with the European Council , is supporting a series of European initiatives aimed at promoting the valuation of languages and cultures and at highlighting to the European public the importance of learning languages .
( DE ) The linguistic diversity of Europe is an essential element of our intellectual heritage and is one of our cultural treasures .
In the course of European unification , linguistic diversity has gradually become less of a barrier and more of an opportunity .
This is why the latest communication from the Commission on multilingualism rightly describes our linguistic diversity as a trump card .
( FR ) Multilingualism and promoting linguistic diversity are cornerstones of our day-to-day activities in the European Parliament .
Our motto is ' no legislative work without translation ' .
( IT ) Translation and interpreting of our work as representatives of the peoples of Europe play a vital part in ensuring its legitimacy and transparency and bringing our Parliament ever closer to European citizens .
( ES ) In that context it should be noted that the European Parliament is the only international organisation which has a website and web television in 23 different languages .
( PL ) A European Union that is united in diversity need have no concerns about its future .
( DE ) Thank you for your attention , ladies and gentlemen .
( Applause )
Mr President , I have a point of order .
If you have the information to tell us that it is safe to go back to Strasbourg , why can you not make a statement now before we leave this plenary and risk going back to a building that some of us think is still unsafe ?
Mrs Lynne , all the information given to me indicates that the building in Strasbourg is every bit as safe as this building here in Brussels .
1 .
Community Media in Europe (
2 .
VAT on insurance and financial services (
3 .
Area of Freedom , Security and Justice ( AFSJ ) 2007 ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 1
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , may I move an oral amendment for the reformulation of Amendment 1 .
Before doing so , let me say that the report from Mr Deprez and the entire committee is excellent , and the PPE-DE Group would like to vote in favour of it .
We do , however , have one key point , which is the question of voting rights for migrants in the European Union , not because we reject enfranchisement in general but because we take the view that subsidiarity should apply to such decisions .
Electoral law is not a European matter .
For this reason , we would like to build a bridge to the amendment by proposing that it be reworded .
We ask our fellow Members in the other groups to support the new wording so that we can all approve this good report .
The new wording reads as follows :
' a proposal concerning the integration of long-term residents into the political life at European and local level ; a step forward which could help the social , cultural and political integration of these long-term residents ; ' .
( DE ) I ask for your support .
I see there are objections .
( The oral amendment was not adopted )
4 .
Concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union (
- Before the vote
( ES ) I have asked to speak pursuant to Rule 166 of the Rules of Procedure , in relation to Rule 45 ( 2 ) of the Rules of this House .
Rule 45 ( 2 ) was recently amended to prohibit amendments to motions for resolutions contained in own-initiative reports .
The result , as we shall see in the forthcoming vote , is that if a Parliamentary group wishes to amend one line or one paragraph of an own-initiative report , it is required to table a completely separate alternative motion for a resolution where the only difference is one comma , or the insertion or deletion of a single word .
Perhaps at the time it seemed like a good idea when the rule was being amended but what is happening now is that it is making it difficult to reach agreements within this Chamber , and reaching agreements should be one of our main objectives .
It is impossible to reach any agreement between political groups if the only thing we can do is table a separate text , as we will see in the vote shortly .
Mr President , I request that the amendment to Rule 45 ( 2 ) be reviewed because the effect it is having is absurd and it is interfering with the political relationships between groups in this Chamber .
( Applause )
I must point out that the European Parliament , in its wisdom , took that decision .
( Objection by Mrs Pack )
I am afraid so , Mrs Pack , but that cannot be altered .
In the meantime , we must adhere to the letter of the law .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Guardans should perhaps ask his group as it was one of the proponents of this rule .
I should nevertheless like to say this : the report on which we are voting today , the Mikko report on concentration and pluralism in the media , is the first report which we are approving under this procedure , which prevents us from having a full debate , which prevents us from tabling amendments , on a day when there has been a serious , very serious , attack on freedom of expression in Italy , with the announcement of the sacking of 25 journalists from the only television channel over which Berlusconi does not at present hold sway .
I think that the way in which we are debating these problems is also indicative of a lack of will in this House to introduce rules , laws or directives on media concentration and pluralism which are increasingly urgently needed in the European Union .
( Applause from the centre and the left )
Mr President , I would to thank everybody who contributed to this extremely important and high-profile report on media pluralism and concentration in the European Union .
The report is about safeguarding democracy .
We have tried to include everything that strengthens democracy in this report .
That is why you should try to focus and think twice before you vote .
What are you in favour of , and what are you opposing ?
We are sending this message to our citizens today .
Please think .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , as shadow rapporteur for this topic , I would like to join those who say that this system is not good as it is .
I would have liked to express the opinion of the People 's Party in the Parliamentary debate , but , as shadow rapporteur , I was not given the floor .
I would like to ask why , if pluralism in the media is so important , pluralism of opinion is not so important ?
I would have liked to explain the fact that we do not agree on some things , but I was not given the floor .
Of the whole Parliament , two people were allowed to speak on this topic ; the rapporteur and the Commissioner .
We absolutely must consider whether this system is good , because we are curious about each other 's opinions , and this is called pluralism of opinion .
Please , Mr President , help us to bring this to fruition .
( Applause from the right )
Ladies and gentlemen , I give Mr Cohn-Bendit leave to speak , but then we must proceed to the vote .
We can draw the appropriate conclusions about the consequences of our own decision .
If we have made a questionable decision , we have the right to amend it ourselves , but the amendment must be made in accordance with the proper procedures .
( DE ) Mr President , this particular piece of nonsense you just referred to was adopted by the majority of this House in spite of our voting against it .
It was your decision !
Give your chairman hell now so that he gets it amended !
( Applause from the centre and left )
We do not really want to give anyone hell , but conclusions can be drawn if the majority of the House so wishes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have no intention of looking in any detail at the inaccurate statements that Mrs Frassoni has made , but I feel that I must make one clarification to the House .
In Italy , it is not President Berlusconi but other groups which own television channels .
Mr President , in Italy , there are three state television channels : Rai 1 , Rai 2 and Rai 3 , there is the Mediaset group and then in Italy there is LA7 ...
( Protests from the centre and the left )
Ladies and gentlemen , there is no reason to get worked up .
You took a decision .
If Parliament has taken a decision that the majority may deem to have been unwise , it can be changed .
But a rule is observed until such time as it is amended .
That is the principle we follow in Parliament .
( Applause )
5 .
Getting a grip on energy prices ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 1
Mr President , I have a genuine point of order with respect to the new Rules of Procedure .
We have been told that , because debate has been curtailed , we can now put in more written statements over the single written statement we were able to do before the new Rules came into effect .
Today I tried to submit two written statements , and the internet site will not allow it .
So my voice in the debate for controlling energy has not been noted anywhere .
Can you make sure the technical problem is solved ?
The revised Rules of Procedure are not being adhered to .
You can submit a written declaration , Mrs Gacek , but that was not the right time to raise the point .
6 .
White Paper on Nutrition , Overweight and Obesity-related health issues (
7 .
Collective management of copyrights online ( vote )
8 .
' IASCF : review of the constitution - Public accountability and the composition of the IASB proposals for change ' ( vote )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , as you already said , the PPE-DE Group would like to request the postponement of the vote on this resolution .
Certainly , the governance of the International Accounting Standards Board is not going to be solved in the next two weeks , so we have time to vote about this resolution in the next mini-plenary session here in Brussels .
The reason for this is that we have got some new proposals from the European Commission and maybe it is possible to polish up some of the wordings of the resolution .
The deadline was very tight and that is why we want to have more time and to have the vote on this during the next Brussels session .
Mr President , I am speaking as Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
In the current financial crisis , everybody realises that accounting standards and their potentially procyclical nature are a major issue .
The governance of the structures that develop these accounting standards is a very important matter .
The European Commission , already addressed on these issues in the Radwan report , has chosen to draft a proposal that does not involve those who are responsible for the stability of the financial markets , that was drawn up hastily with American authorities who are reaching the end of their mandate and have been disowned by all the candidates in the American presidential election , and without consulting the Council or the European Parliament .
In a spirit of compromise and openness , we agree to reopen this discussion if the Commission for its part agrees to reconsider its proposal and to give a hearing to the European Parliament 's proposals .
That is why I would like the Commission to make a statement and undertake to reconsider its proposal .
In that case we would be able to support Mrs Kauppi 's proposal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission does not have a position on this point .
The Commission has not expressed an opinion .
Mrs Berès , did I understand correctly that you would support the proposer of this motion , Mrs Kauppi , in these circumstances ?
Then we shall take the vote on this motion .
( Parliament adopted the motion for postponement of the vote )
9 .
Social Package ( vote )
- Before the vote
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , just to confirm briefly that the PPE-DE Group has decided to withdraw our resolution on the social package .
We had a very full debate at the last part-session , at which all groups aired their views very fully .
Meanwhile , our group has secured the rapporteurship on the renewed social agenda , which reflects the immense importance we give to social issues , and we look forward to getting the considered comments from all political groups over the coming months , so that together we can produce a report of which the whole House can be proud .
( Applause from the PPE-DE Group )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( CS ) Mr President , I only want it to be recorded that I voted for Mr Foglietta 's report but my voting equipment failed .
Oral explanations of vote
( MT ) Naturally , it is difficult to be understood in this chaotic situation .
I wanted to stand to explain my vote in favour of the resolution we have just passed , that we have just approved , on the annual debate on the progress made in the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice .
Today , the Council of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs is meeting to discuss and approve the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
This is a very important subject and it is a very important proposal that is being discussed in the Council , and I hope that , in the discussion being held in the Council today , a declaration on the need to share the burden of immigration more fairly and equally is inserted in the Pact .
I hope that the Ministers adopt this Pact today and that it contains reference to this common responsibility .
( NL ) Mr President , for many reasons the resolution we have just voted on was unacceptable to me and certainly to my group too .
The main reason of course is that I believe Europe absolutely does not need a new , ' illegal ' wave of immigration .
Absolutely not .
It is all too easy for private-sector employers and governments to keep importing more and more foreign nationals from non-EU countries .
That causes a brain drain from the developing world to Europe , and ultimately does not benefit either the developing countries or Europe , quite the contrary .
We should at long last make a start - and I am looking primarily here to governments and to business and industry - on assimilating , re-educating and integrating into the regular labour market the huge , truly huge numbers of foreign nationals who are already here and who are not and never have been properly absorbed into our society .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the Mikko report because I believe the media has a vital role to play in safeguarding democracy .
With the expansion of the EU it is our role to ensure the convergence of standards for the protection of basic freedoms and democracy .
I was involved in the opinion of the ITRE Committee on the Mikko report , and I would like to congratulate her because I think new technologies have led to the emergence of new media channels and new types of content , and the media remains an important political tool .
In this context , a pluralistic media system is an essential requirement for the democratic social model .
When media ownership is concentrated in just a few people 's hands , this favours the monopolisation of the advertising market and represents a barrier to new entrants .
Competition law has helped restrict media concentration , but these problems still remain in a number of Member States where the market is dominated by a few large players .
So the report 's suggestion of linking media law and competition law is therefore to be commended .
( PL ) Mr President , media pluralism means diversity in the dissemination of information and the characteristic nature of broadcasters .
Both of these areas are currently under threat in the media sector .
An ever-increasing concentration of ownership among media companies that are competing in this sector has led to a situation where information that is valuable from the social and cultural points of view is difficult to find in the maze of easily accessible and standardised news for everyone .
It is difficult to predict what the worsening situation in this sector will lead to , not just for individual consumers , but for society as a whole .
The rapporteur was right to emphasise the role of the public sector broadcasters as guardians of diversity , with a mission to broadcast high-quality information .
She is also right to propose a model where there are strong public sector media outside the competitive media market coexisting with private media companies that are motivated by profit .
There can be no doubt about the importance of balance between these two pillars .
The text of the report , as well as the intentions of the rapporteur , seem to be clear and transparent .
The compromise reached during the discussions of the Committee on Culture is a good one .
In addition , the legal status of the new methods of disseminating information , such as Internet blogs , or other user-generated sites , should be clearly delineated so that the people creating these forms should be aware of their rights and responsibilities and any possible sanctions .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , I am happy to hear Parliament saying that all Member States must guarantee media pluralism and that public service broadcasters certainly have an important role there .
That is quite right and proper .
In a normal society that means democracy and freedom of information , and above all freedom of information for opposition groups .
Measured against those criteria , Belgium and even Flanders are not democracies .
My political party , for example , a big political party in that country , is routinely and openly discriminated against and boycotted by the Flemish public service broadcaster , and on the basis of official directives to boot .
Why ?
Because our ideas and attitudes are not ' politically correct ' or deviate from the prevailing line .
Not all that long ago the former head of the public service broadcaster openly admitted that the King of the Belgians had made him a baron to reward him for his discriminatory efforts against the opposition party .
This report , otherwise not all that bad , might usefully have included a paragraph on the treatment of opposition parties which do not toe the accepted line .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote on this report .
It quite rightly highlights various difficulties over media pluralism and the concentration of ownership in a number of Member States .
As a Fleming I can offer a word or two on the subject .
Because there is no state in the European Union which has more need , for example , of a neutral media ombudsman to ensure freedom of expression and pluralism than Belgium .
Here in Brussels , the institutional heart of the country , as my fellow Member has just said , not only the private media but also the organs of government shamelessly boycott the largest opposition party and deny people the right to free and balanced information .
It may be that the charter for media freedom which the rapporteur advocates can make this kind of abuse impossible , otherwise the whole thing will just be pure window-dressing .
I also wonder why it is that the rapporteur is keen on stricter regulation of the ultimate free medium - the Internet , and bloggers in particular - not to mention proper concern for authors ' rights .
Because it is precisely those states with no true media pluralism which most want tighter control over the Internet .
This report furnishes them with additional arguments and that is regrettable .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I shall speak in Hungarian .
Diversity of the media is a particularly important area for the European People 's Party , so we have decided that , instead of rejecting the report , our group will submit an alternative draft decision .
Whilst preserving the virtues of the original report , the parts that are unacceptable to us have been deleted from the text , and the recommendations that we felt it was important to emphasise have been inserted .
Among other things to which the group objected , the report specifically mentioned individual Member States , whereas we are convinced that a report about media diversity must be neutral and have general application .
The aim is not to shame certain countries as bad examples .
Similarly , we have not been able to accept the fact that the report states that some media empires are motivated primarily by profit and material interests : this is an exaggerated generalisation and we cannot accept it .
The report , which has produced fierce political debate , must in any event draw the attention of the European Commission to the fact that it should deal with this issue in a manner appropriate to the gravity of the topic , and examine what kind of Union or national measures need to be introduced in the interests of enforcing diversity . Thank you .
( SK ) I support effective control of energy prices .
The price volatility of recent months is clearly not in the interests of European Union citizens , while speculators / intermediaries make profits .
What is more , we are seeing an absolutely unacceptable situation where energy prices are determining the prices of food .
We cannot quietly accept the cynical argument that there is enough food on a global scale but not everyone has enough money to buy expensive food .
In the opinion of World Bank experts , biomass energy is responsible for up to 80 % of the sharp increase in food prices .
In this context I have stressed , on many occasions , the need to increase food reserves and to regulate the use of food sources for energy purposes .
This is a key problem related to food price control , and as such must be given much more specific attention .
( PL ) Mr President , we are currently facing rapid increases in the price of energy .
This has a direct impact on the quality of life of the European Union 's inhabitants and on increasing inflation .
This means that we should create instruments to protect Europe 's inhabitants from the consequences of these price rises .
Even though we have recently seen reductions in oil prices , I believe that we should pay greater attention to mechanisms aimed at ensuring price stability .
There is also the idea that there should be greater transparency in energy markets so that , in future , they should be less susceptible to speculation on world markets .
While discussing the issue of energy , one cannot but emphasise the need , first of all , to intensify the work being done on increasing the proportion of energy obtained from renewable sources , including nuclear energy , secondly , the introduction of new coal technologies and thirdly , we must introduce a wide-reaching programme to improve energy efficiency .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted against the Foglietta report , and I would like to thank all my fellow Members who supported me in rejecting it .
Although obesity is an increasing problem , this White Paper does not bring us any closer to a solution .
On the contrary , it presents a random hotchpotch of diverse recommendations and demands for legislation .
This makes us look ridiculous .
I am pleased that at least the proposal on the red , amber and green colour-coding of food labels was thrown out , but other proposals survived , including some that pre-empted decisions which are in the process of being taken in the realm of food labelling , for which I am the Parliamentary rapporteur .
We decided that we shall call for censorship of advertising , that we want to ban artificial trans-fatty acids but intend at the same time to indicate TFA content on food labels , that our waistline will be officially measured in future and that the salt content in food will be monitored , which is tantamount to demanding intervention in food recipes .
A new definition of healthy eating has been initiated ; one of the stipulations is that healthy eating is possible only with organic produce .
This amounts to discrimination against those who engage in conventional farming .
There is to be no such thing as bad food , which our legal regime would ban from the market .
All consumers have the right to be informed , but they are also entitled to respect , which means that they must be allowed to make their own decisions .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( SV ) This report on non-profit local community media in Europe deals with an area which is considered to need additional funding under EU support programmes .
This is yet another example of how various special interests in this Parliament seek to increase the number of EU support programmes and , in addition , increase the financial resources allocated to them , so that they can hand out appropriations right , left and centre .
It is incomprehensible that support for non-profit local community media should be seen as an item of expenditure to be funded at EU level .
The subsidiarity principle leads self-evidently to the conclusion that this is expenditure for the Member States or regional political bodies .
They have the expertise on these media , and it is they who have the facilities to determine whether such expenditure should take precedence over the need for resources for such things as healthcare , schools , welfare etc .
In the interests of subsidiarity , we have voted against this report in its entirety .
in writing . - ' Community media ' often plays an important role in local communities .
It is an influential source of information amongst the local media ; sometimes even the sole voice of local communities .
That is why the European Union should focus more on these media , especially after the failure of the Lisbon Treaty , as they may serve as an efficient means to pass on EU related information to citizens .
As rapporteur for the report on the active dialogue with citizens on Europe , I fully support any kind of communication tool which may help to bring closer the EU to the citizens .
Nevertheless , I am convinced that an essential precondition for community media as well as any other local media financed , even partially , from public funds , is to be independent not only from national but also from local power .
I know that community media , especially their financing , should be a primary concern of Member States , due to their various forms and local specialities .
Where we may help at European level is in giving more visibility to the issue .
This report is the first step in that direction .
in writing . - The Resetarits report , which I supported , makes reference to the importance of media in strengthening cultural and linguistic diversity .
This week saw the launch of the first ever Gaelic language television channel - a welcome development in the promotion of the linguistic diversity of both Scotland and Europe .
in writing . - Community media has always had an important role to play in our society .
Such media can promote intercultural dialogue by combating negative stereotypes .
The EU must fully recognise this by improving Community media 's legal recognition and access to radio spectrum for broadcasts .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I cannot support this report .
While I agree with , and welcome , many of its proposals , I have concerns regarding the narrowing of the scope of the VAT exemption in respect of investment funds .
I believe it is better to maintain the status quo .
in writing . - The EPLP believes that the upgrading of VAT requirements for financial services has been long overdue .
The rapporteur has shown great diligence in his application to this task .
We believe his approach has been very sympathetic to the issue of passing on costs to consumers and that he understands the problems that could be faced .
We are uncertain how some points can be properly managed at a practical level - in particular , on the discretion for companies to be allowed to apply VAT .
So we have reservations which could not be expressed in the particular amendments , because it was an ' en bloc ' vote 1-28 .
The EPLP support the rapporteur but would have voted against Amendments 6 and 21 .
I would personally like to thank Joseph Muscat for his work on this report and others and for his collegiate attitude in the European Parliament .
I hope his career goes from strength to strength and that we can welcome him back as a future prime minister of Malta very soon .
in writing . - Whilst in favour of cooperation between Member States in the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice ( AFSJ ) , UK Conservatives are voting against this resolution as we remain consistently opposed to any calls for further harmonisation in the field of AFSJ .
In particular we are against calls in the report for the adoption of those Lisbon Treaty provisions which can be adopted under current arrangements .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption by a very large majority of the resolution on the annual debate on progress made in 2007 in the area of freedom , security and justice .
It is a text of high quality that forcefully reminds us of the need for the rapid adoption of the Lisbon Treaty , which will strengthen the area of freedom , security and justice by providing for fundamental improvements in regard to the legitimacy and effectiveness of EU action .
It also invites the Commission and the Council to define the new priorities of the next multiannual programme for the area of freedom , security and justice for the period 2010-2014 .
Lastly , it proposes a number of vital measures to be adopted in the area of fundamental rights and citizenship , in regard to border protection and to immigration and asylum .
Those are the priorities advocated by our political group and most of them can also be found in the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which needs to be implemented on the basis of concrete action .
in writing . - ( PT ) While we agree with several points in this resolution on the so-called ' Area of Freedom , Security and Justice ' - a euphemism for the real process of bringing justice and home affairs , which are sovereign powers of the Member States , into the Community system - it includes a set of objectives , priorities and proposals that we firmly reject .
In particular because it plays deaf to the rejection of the so-called ' Lisbon ' Treaty - insisting on its imposition by the end of 2009 and calling for the process of bringing justice and home affairs into the Community system to be taken forward - bearing witness to the disrespect the EP majority shows towards the Irish people 's sovereign and democratic decision .
And also , among other reasons , because it sets as objectives the development of the Schengen Information System ( including decisions relating to the Prüm Treaty ) , Frontex and EU immigration policy ( which is selective and protective and which criminalises immigration ) .
And despite complaining that the ' Union is creating de facto police and judicial cooperation with third countries , notably the US , by means of bilateral agreements on a range of issues , thereby circumventing the formal democratic decision-making procedures and Parliamentary scrutiny ' , the EP does not call it into question .
in writing . - ( DE ) 1 .
The motion describes the Treaty of Lisbon as ' an essential and urgent precondition for ensuring that the Union is an area of freedom , security and justice ' .
The Treaty of Lisbon has been rejected as a result of the Irish referendum .
It is high time that was accepted .
2 .
The motion calls for the full entry into use of the second-generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) and for the strengthening of Frontex .
The border protection agency Frontex is responsible for the operational implementation of the inhuman policy of closing off the EU to people in distress .
This policy is an affront to humanity and must therefore be rejected outright .
in writing . - Generally speaking we support the idea of granting long-term residents the right to vote at European and local elections .
However , we believe it is for the Member States to decide on the right to vote in local elections in accordance with the relevant international conventions .
in writing . - ( IT ) I should like to stress the importance of safeguarding pluralism in the media ( already cited in Article 11 of the Charter of Rights of the European Union ) in order to underpin a democratic process through which the various citizens of Europe can be provided with information in a transparent manner .
We know that political pressure too often influences the media , especially those within the public service , which need a sizeable and stable market share so that they can rise above inadequate funding and political lobbies .
I will therefore vote in favour of this motion for a resolution , which seeks to entrust three European universities with the task of monitoring this pluralism using indicators of reliability and impartiality .
I also agree on the need to create supervisory systems to guarantee editorial and journalistic freedom in all Member States .
The time is ripe - given the coming 2009 European electoral campaign - for us to draft together a Charter of Media Freedoms to combat the current precarious working conditions of many publicists and journalists .
Finally , the new media channels , relayed in Europe and worldwide , do indeed need funding , but must also be used responsibly ( for example the status of weblog authors and editors should be defined ) and greater media literacy should be encouraged throughout Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) I reaffirm that I attach great importance to freedom of expression and media pluralism .
Blogs are tools that may be a threat to people 's privacy and can be put in the same category as ' violation of the press laws ' if they are untrue or malicious .
in writing . - ( DE ) A pluralist media system is a fundamental prerequisite for the survival of the European model of a democratic society .
The concentration of media ownership , however , creates an environment that is conducive to the emergence of monopolies , erects barriers to market entry and leads to uniformity of media content .
The development of the media system is increasingly driven by the profit motive .
If conflicts of interest between concentration of media ownership and political authority are to be avoided , competition and media law must be dovetailed .
The fact is that such conflicts of interest damage free competition and pluralism .
In order to strengthen pluralism , there is also a need to guarantee a balance between public and private broadcasters .
In addition , I call for measures to improve the competitiveness of media groups in order to foster economic growth .
European and national competition rules must be applied consistently so as to ensure keen competition and an open market .
In particular , national media regulation must be transparent and efficient .
For this reason I welcome the Commission 's intention to develop indicators to measure the plurality of the media .
I also call for the creation of additional indicators to measure factors such as democracy and codes of conduct for journalists .
Moreover , I believe that the provisions on media concentration should also regulate the means of access to Internet content and its dissemination .
in writing . - ( SV ) Marianne Mikko 's report is a shining example of when good intentions go too far and end up in conflict with the independence of the media and the fundamental principles of freedom of expression .
Mrs Mikko 's original proposal - which , among other things , covered the possibility of registration , a right to reply and facilities to prosecute authors of blogs - was far removed from the conception I have of freedom of expression and opinion-forming .
Fortunately the report was redrafted on these points before the proposal came before the plenary .
However , this redrafting was not sufficient to enable me to support the report ; on many points , the proposal is still in conflict with the independence of the media , free opinion-forming and freedom of expression .
Amendment 5 - which was finally approved by Parliament - is a better alternative to the report .
Better but not good .
The issue of media concentration and diversity is important and should be discussed .
But this resolution is not the right way to go .
Questions concerning the media must always be handled in a responsible and considered manner .
When it comes to media independence , freedom of opinion-forming and freedom of expression , I cannot compromise .
These values are far too fundamental to tinker with .
I therefore abstained in today 's vote .
By this action I seek to show my support for the debate , but also to express my concern over repeated attempts to regulate questions concerning the media and freedom of expression .
in writing . - ( PT ) With the changes introduced into the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , which in these circumstances does not accept specific proposals for amendments , what has just been voted on was not the Mikko report , but rather an overarching proposal for an alternative resolution .
The final resolution approved is clearly better than the report , and we voted for it for that reason alone , but it retains certain aspects that we disagree with .
Our principal disagreement concerns the way it addresses a pseudo-balance in interlinking so-called ' competition law ' with media law , in that experience has shown that the interests of capital outweigh all rights and freedoms , including freedom of expression in the media , very often calling pluralism into question .
Although it states elsewhere that ' the main objectives of public authorities should be to create conditions that ensure a high level of media quality ( including those of the public media ) , secure media diversity and guarantee the full independence of journalists ' , we know that this is difficult to achieve when the democratic state 's role is weak .
The truth is that when the principal media outlets are owned by economic and financial groups , freedom of expression and journalistic independence are not guaranteed .
in writing . - I congratulate my colleague Marianne Mikko on her report .
I will be voting in favour of the joint alternative motion for a resolution tabled by my group jointly with the Liberals and Greens , which is the closest to my own position .
I see no reason why something that is illegal in written or oral form should be legal on the internet .
Of course , enforcement may be difficult , but that is not a reason for inaction .
After all , we have speed limits on remote country roads , when policing it is very hard . Yet this is not used to justify a free-for-all .
in writing . - ( SV ) This report and the alternative resolutions tabled with it fall outside the legislative procedure and are nothing more than an expression of the desire of the federalist majority in the European Parliament to get the EU even more involved in the field of culture and media policy .
During the preparation of the report , the rapporteur went much too far in her ambition to control and supervise the blogging universe .
As luck would have it , the committee backed down somewhat in its proposal to plenary , and the motions tabled by some of the political groups are better than the report itself .
But the basic question remains : why should this report be debated in the European Parliament at all ?
The question of media concentration is important - so important that it should continue to be handled in the Member States .
We have therefore voted against this report in its entirety .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Marianne Mikko 's report on concentration and pluralism in the media in the EU .
Access to free and diverse media in all Member States is vitally important these days .
The two-pillar model that was introduced for private and public television and audiovisual media services has developed very well .
So that this development process can continue as fruitfully as possible , stable funding must be provided for public broadcasting corporations , enabling them to promote public interests and social values , to preserve pluralism in the media and to give people access to high-quality content .
I also support the creation of a charter for media freedom .
This would be a bridgehead for efforts to guarantee freedom of expression .
Provision for the independence of journalists , however , must be made by means of specific legal and social guarantees .
The concentration of media ownership is also a problem , since it encourages the emergence of monopolies .
There is therefore a need to merge competition and media legislation in order to guarantee access , competition and quality .
The report more or less covers all the main points , and for this reason I am backing the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( RO ) As we all agree , pluralism should be a vital element of the mass media .
Pluralism must be supported , and the adoption of the Mikko report constitutes a major step in this direction .
The need for a balanced mass media market should be recognised and supported by the Member States , which should commit themselves , both individually and collectively , to giving European citizens the opportunity of obtaining accurate and diverse information .
Cultural diversity , as well as the ever-increasing need for integration of the migrant population and of minorities , along with the importance of providing quality information to the active population , are the priority reasons for creating a Media Freedom Charter .
I would like to express my full support for the European Parliament 's recommendation that public media services should be encouraged to act as alternative providers of information to ones based exclusively on commercial criteria .
Active exercise of rights and obligations by European citizens , and their being informed and capable of understanding and criticising the provision of information is a necessity which should bear on every measure to be adopted in the future both by European institutions and by each Member State .
in writing . - New technology has led to the emergence of new media channels and changes in media content .
A wide-spanning media system is essential for nurturing democracy and free thought .
I broadly voted in support of Marianne Mikko 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) Concentration in the media is a widespread evil and must be combated .
First of all , however , there are several countries in the EU where concentration in the media is a problem , and it is therefore unacceptable to mention only one country .
Secondly , in several places the report calls on the European Commission to act in an area of activity that is covered by the subsidiarity principle .
Had that been amended , or had I been able to vote for such an amendment , I would have approved the Mikko report .
The increase in media ownership by the few makes for greater monopolies and stifles the essential diversity of opinion .
Access to information today seems unrestricted and at the same time deficient .
Business groups own a large proportion of the media and Internet services and are also their own best-advertised customers .
It is essential to safeguard quality public television that is pluralistic , open and independent .
As for freedom of expression on the Internet , the EU should place great emphasis on public dialogue to ensure both freedom of expression and the protection of personal data .
The debate has only just begun .
By cooperating with civil society , solutions can be found .
The amendment of the Rules of Procedure , as adopted by us on 8 July 2008 , resulted in new rules on own-initiative reports .
During this second September part-session , we have had the opportunity to see how these rules work in practice .
During the Monday evening debate on several own-initiative reports , it turned out , however , that this change was not the most felicitous .
Only the rapporteur and a representative of the Commission were heard in the debate on each report .
The debate lost its dynamism because the shadow rapporteurs were not allowed to speak either .
Even the rule that members who took part in the preparation of the report can present their comments in writing is proving problematic .
The rule in force is that , during the course of one part-session , each member can react in writing only once .
The procedure for voting on own-initiative reports is also proving problematic .
Under the new rule , amendments are not admissible for consideration in plenary .
Only an alternative motion for a resolution may be tabled on behalf of a political group .
In practical terms , the shortcomings of our decision affected this very report , by Mrs Mikko , on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union .
The relatively balanced report contained some points concerning particular Member States .
I think that the contents of a report touching on such a sensitive theme should remain neutral .
I did not intend to vote against the report but we did not get the chance to vote on the motion for a resolution tabled by our political group , the PPE-DE Group .
I am asking for this rule to be changed .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , pluralism in the media means diversity in the dissemination of information and the characteristic nature of broadcasters .
Both of these areas are currently under threat in the media sector .
An ever-increasing concentration of ownership among media companies that are competing in this sector has led to a situation where information that is valuable from the social and cultural points of view is difficult to find in the maze of easily accessible and standardised news for everyone .
It is difficult to predict what the worsening situation in this sector will lead to , not just for individual consumers , but also for society as a whole .
The rapporteur was right to emphasise the role of public sector broadcasters as the guardians of diversity , with a mission to broadcast high quality information .
She is also right to propose a model where there are strong public sector media outside the competitive media market coexisting with private media companies that are motivated by profit .
There can be no doubt about the importance of balance between these two pillars .
The text of the report , as well as the intentions of the rapporteur , seem to be clear and transparent .
The compromise reached during the discussions of the Committee on Culture is a good one .
In addition , the legal status of the new methods of disseminating information , such as Internet blogs , or other user-generated sites , should be clearly delineated so that the people creating these forms should be aware of their rights and responsibilities and any possible sanctions .
There will be more of this type of content .
Basing these measures on a code of ethics is a step in the right direction .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the resolution on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union that has been adopted , Members of the European Parliament , including myself , were right to speak in favour of guaranteeing freer access to diverse mass media as well as of freedom of expression .
It should also , however , be pointed out that , as regards Internet blogs , the resolution differs significantly from the initial version of the report by Marianne Mikko and the Committee on Culture and Education .
This report assumed there would be a clarification of the status of Internet blogs and user-generated sites such that they would be subject to regulations that are similar to those used for other publications .
However , the resolution that was in fact adopted calls for an open discussion on the status of Internet blogs .
For this reason I voted in favour of the resolution .
In my view , the Internet and , specifically , Internet blogs , play an important role in promoting media pluralism and freedom of expression and , as such , should be free from any restrictions .
Point 25 of the report in its previous version , if it were interpreted badly , constituted a threat to the freedom of expression of authors using this ever more popular medium .
I would state in the strongest possible terms that any similar attempts at regulation and control in the future should be rejected by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( PL ) During today 's vote , I supported the resolution on concentration and pluralism in the media in the European Union .
I agree with the principle that motivates the rapporteur , namely that there has to be some equality as regards standards for the protection of democracy and basic freedoms .
In today 's world , the mass media have an enormous and ever-increasing influence .
The appearance of ever-newer media is a positive development .
It increases dynamism and variety in this sector .
I believe that , in this regard , there is a need to create a system of monitoring and implementation based on indicators of media pluralism that are set in a reliable and impartial manner .
We should defend media pluralism as an important aspect of democracy and freedom , in order to guarantee access to free and diverse mass media to all the inhabitants of the European Union .
In addition , I can see that it would be worth creating a charter of media freedoms , which would provide guarantees not just for the social rights of broadcasters and journalists , but would also guarantee freedom of expression .
in writing . - ( RO ) Continued increases in the price of oil is leading to major concerns as regards the impact of this phenomenon on economic growth within the EU , and in particular as regards its negative effect on consumer purchasing power and the quality of life .
EU foreign policy is crucial in this regard .
Since the EU economy still depends to a significant extent on energy imports , it is necessary to institute a common energy policy based on the principle of solidarity , security and diversification of sources and external supply routes .
In my capacity as rapporteur on regional cooperation in the Black Sea area , I have constantly stressed the importance and urgency of these actions .
Today , however , I urge the Commission and the Council to bring forward concrete measures to reduce EU energy dependence in the immediate future .
My appeal concerns not only oil imports , but also gas imports , and includes the implementation of the Nabucco project .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted against Amendment 1 on the taxation of windfall profits , because we think that the text proposed is unclear and we question both how it is to be implemented and , more especially , what the ultimate purpose of the proposal is .
However , we voted for the amendment advocating reduced VAT on energy-saving goods and services , since that is one of many possible ways of stimulating the switch to more energy-efficient alternatives .
We would , however , point out that taxes are a national matter and decisions on them can only be taken by the Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for this resolution because , in stressing the discrepancy between the value of crude oil on the international markets and the final price of fuel , it manages to address this sensitive issue without taking the emotive approach adopted by some governments , such as the Portuguese Government , for example .
In Portugal , Minister Manuel Pinho revealed not only his total confusion ( and limited power to intervene ) , but also an unacceptable interference in the regulator 's independence .
This is no more than wishful thinking in the run-up to elections .
I reject any administrative price-fixing or fiscal harmonisation of fuel at European level .
I agree to tax intervention ( VAT and production tax ) , provided it is temporary and selective in favour of the most seriously affected households and industrial sectors .
To my mind , the solution essentially involves reinforcing current oil regulations .
Rather than expecting it to fall into line behind the Minister 's statements or consumer complaints , the Competition Authority should act within its powers of initiative to overcome the climate of mistrust surrounding its capacity to oversee the oil sector .
Portuguese public opinion deserves a firm guarantee that anti-competitive practices are not a factor in the establishment of prices .
If it is confirmed that they are , then the Competition Authority must intervene impartially and impose exemplary sanctions .
in writing . - I am happy to support the practical ideas contained in most of this resolution on rising energy prices .
National and regional authorities need to bring action plans as soon as possible to protect our most vulnerable citizens .
In the medium term a shift to renewable sources of energy coupled with increased energy efficiency will help protect us from the inevitable swings in prices that come with reliance on fossil fuels , but in the here-and-now concrete action is needed to relieve and eradicate fuel poverty .
I do not agree , however , that liberalisation of the energy markets is part of the solution to rising prices .
in writing . - I voted for the joint motion for a resolution on ' Getting a grip on energy prices ' .
However , I voted against Amendment 1 calling for a windfall tax at European level .
Rather , due to different levels of energy charges across the Union , this is something that must and should be done at national level .
in writing . - I voted against the resolution on energy prices .
Whilst I wholeheartedly agree that rising energy prices require affirmative political action , I reject the resolution 's references to ' low carbon ' energy .
I reject the idea that increased nuclear energy can have a positive impact on the environment and believe that political attention should be focused on non-nuclear renewable energy sources .
in writing . - I welcome the positive vote today on recognising energy poverty and reducing VAT for energy saving goods .
in writing . - ( SV ) There is much that the EU can do to reduce the problem of obesity and on which we should focus attention in Parliament .
It is good therefore that Parliament today voted for the report on nutrition , overweight and obesity .
One of the consequences of that decision is that Parliament is now calling for a ban on trans-fats .
At the same time , however , we think that the report could have said a lot less about what schools should do and what food they should serve .
We think that is best decided at national or local level .
in writing . - ( PT ) The fight against the serious public health problem of overweight- and obesity-related disease must be a priority from the early stages of life .
This report asks Member States , local entities and school authorities to monitor and to improve the quality and nutritional standards of school meals .
Nutritional information on food is important , particularly the difference between natural trans-fatty acids present in meat and dairy products and those produced during industrial processing ( artificial ) .
The undifferentiated labelling of trans fats will only confuse consumers , create a negative image of healthy dairy products and have undesirable effects on consumption , undermining public health ( reduced intake of important nutrients such as calcium and proteins , for example ) .
European indicators such as waist size are useful for monitoring the risk factors people are exposed to in relation to various obesity-related diseases .
An understanding of the distribution of abdominal obesity facilitates the planning of more effective measures to minimise such problems .
I agree with colour coding to label foods because , rather than clear and easily understandable labelling , what Europeans need are signs that they can interpret in order to make healthy choices .
in writing . - ( PT ) Overweight and diet-related diseases are a serious public health problem , which means that the fight against obesity must be set as a priority from the early stages of life .
The Foglietta report is highly relevant in calling on Member States , local entities and school authorities to monitor and improve the quality and nutritional standards of school meals .
I believe that nutritional information must always be provided on food , particularly an indication of artificial trans-fats , because these have more negative effects on health .
Failure to distinguish artificial trans-fats from natural fats would mislead consumers and only contribute towards a negative image of some animal foods that contain natural trans-fats , such as meat and dairy products .
I also voted for the development of European indicators such as waist size and other obesity-related risk factors because I believe they may be useful in the future for assessing the risks facing the population , and for the success of the measures implemented .
in writing . - I cannot support this report or Amendment 6 as I feel that it is inappropriate to include tax- or VAT-based issues in a health-based report such as this .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Foglietta report and welcome the White Paper on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues .
Obesity is a major problem across Europe and conditions related to obesity and bad nutrition have serious consequences across societies .
In my own country , the Scottish Government has taken positive steps to improve the nutrition within public institutions such as schools and hospitals and such initiatives are to be encouraged across the EU .
in writing . - ( FI ) I voted in favour of Mr Foglietta 's own-initiative report adopted by the Committee on nutrition , overweight and obesity in our public health strategy .
I applaud the basic view that industry should be given a chance to try and reduce health problems as a result of being overweight or obese through self-regulation , but where the Commission would also be empowered to ensure that attempts at reasonable and responsible advertising ( especially in the case of children ) , for example , and reductions in the amount of salt , fat and sugar that people consume in food are actually realised .
It is important to provide consumers with comprehensive information on food package labelling , so that they know how to choose between good , better and worse food .
In my view , and in contrast with current practice , the content of artificial trans-fats should definitely be included in food product descriptions .
I voted against the line our group adopted on this
I supported our group 's opinion , however , on the use of colour coding in the labelling of food .
Colour-coded labels , whose purpose it is to send a clear message on how good a product is for the health and which has provoked much debate in Europe , are often misleading , and so of no value whatsoever .
Many UK supermarket chains for this reason have aimed to do away with a practice they have previously adopted .
in writing . - ( DE ) I shall be voting for Alessandro Foglietta 's report concerning the White Paper on a strategy for Europe on nutrition- , overweight- and obesity-related health issues .
I agree with the rapporteur on the need for restructuring measures in health , sport and nutrition .
Problems such as overweight and unhealthy eating habits occur most frequently among socially and economically deprived sections of the population .
One of the first ways to solve the problem can be implemented in schools .
More PE lessons and a balanced diet for children and young people would be among the first steps towards a healthier lifestyle , and nutritional science should be a compulsory subject in every European school .
In addition , the labelling of food products would be welcome , since it would enable consumers to compare products and to distinguish between good and inferior food .
The report does not offer a perfect solution , but it does propose some very good measures .
These measures can change a few things for the better , which is why I judge them very favourably .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is laudable of the European Commission to concern itself with healthy food and exercise for all citizens , to prevent them from becoming overweight , obese and chronically ill .
I certainly support the intention to sound the alarm in face of the obesity epidemic that has struck three million children and 20-30 % of adults , while 14 million children and half the adult population are overweight .
I welcome the fact that the influence on consumer behaviour of flavour enhancers - such as glutamates , guanylates and inosinates , which are found in massive quantities in a great many prepared dishes and industrially prepared food - is being recognised and analysed .
At the same time I regret that my amendment , which seeks to promote healthy eating habits by consulting Euro-Toques , an association of chefs that adheres to a code of honour and supports the intrinsic quality of products and the protection of local production , was not adopted .
I believe we would be well-advised to draw on their know-how in order to promote best practice , in school dining halls among others , and to develop a taste in young people for quality food and healthy eating habits .
in writing . - I welcome Alessandro Foglietta 's report on the White Paper on nutrition , overweight and obesity-related health issues .
The report contains a number of positive recommendations such as the proposal for an EU-wide ban on trans-fatty acids that have been found to be linked to heart disease and female infertility .
However , I would join my colleagues in supporting measures that go further .
Schools , for example , should not find themselves in the position where they have to consider the option of housing advertising of unhealthy foods on their premises .
My vote reflects these views .
Obesity has taken on epidemic proportions .
The most obese people in Europe are to be found in Greece , where 3 in 4 are overweight and there has been a 956 % increase in fast food .
To combat obesity , drastic measures must be taken here and now :
VAT on fruit and vegetables must be reduced ;
VAT on health-food products and protection of traditional products must be reduced ;
Correct nutrition must be ensured from infancy ;
In schools , food must be checked in canteens and there must be physical exercise ;
Advertising and misleading information on products with a high fat , sugar or salt content should be banned ;
Clear nutritional information on labels should be compulsory , so that consumers can make healthy diet choices ;
Synthetic trans-fats and flavour enhancers in industrially produced convenience foods should be banned .
At the beginning of 2009 the European Commission programme for free distribution of fruit and vegetables to schools comes into effect .
This will be funded with European capital to a total of EUR 90 million annually and will be supplemented with national funding .
The Greek Government must secure the capital to launch this programme immediately .
in writing . - The need for clear labelling on food will help in our fight against obesity .
I was very disappointed to see the rejection of mandatory front-of-pack labelling with colour coding in this report .
This is a measure I strongly support .
I welcome the calls for an EU-wide ban on artificial transfatty acids .
in writing . - There are a number of basic principles that have to be applied to the right of EU patients to seek care in another member state other than their own .
WE cannot allow the ECJ to make policy in this area on a case by case , piecemeal basis .
They will decide purely on market grounds and not on the basis of the uniqueness of health care as a non-market universal service .
The health and wellbeing of patients has to be at the core of the law we make in this area .
Until such time as there is agreement that we can harmonise our national health services to the highest standards , then MS must be free to plan and fund and manage services to deliver high quality public health services within their borders .
Competition between national health services must not be an objective or an outcome of this legislation .
The best interests of patients will not be served by treating health as simply another commodity to be bought and sold .
This in my view would drive standards down .
in writing . - ( SV ) This resolution states views on appropriate policy measures covering such matters as employment protection , the fight against poverty , labour market measures , the integration of elderly people into the job market , professional mobility and differences in remuneration .
Important labour market questions of this kind must on no account be regulated by way of lectures from the EU institutions .
The Member States are better placed than the EU institutions to develop successful policy in these areas .
Any international coordination that may be needed should be pursued within the framework of global organisations with broad democratic legitimacy , such as the ILO .
We have therefore voted against this resolution in the final vote .
in writing . - ( NL ) We are still glad that the European Parliament excluded heath care services from the general directive on services .
Healthcare is after all a specific sector requiring a specific approach .
The fundamental premise of the proposal , in line with established case-law , has to be that the organisation and funding of healthcare are the responsibility of Member States .
This means on the one hand that patient mobility cannot be made an absolute right and on the other hand that there are no excuses for not investing in one 's own health system .
That premise also necessarily implies that Member States must be able to charge the real cost to the patient .
There must be solidarity , but there must also be the possibility of different treatment for patients who have contributed in their own country through the social security and tax system and foreign patients who have not .
The fact that we have the directive is a good thing , but anyone familiar with the sector feels that it still needs a lot more work .
To my mind the quality , accessibility and financial sustainability of healthcare on the basis of socially responsible solidarity remain the key criteria here .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The session was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Progress report on the reform of the European schools ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the progress report on the reform of the European Schools , by Katerina Batzeli and Erna Hennicot-Schoepges - B6-0454 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for having agreed to address this question , which was tabled some four months ago .
Let me remind you of the responsibilities of the EP Committee on Culture and Education , which , according to Annex VI , Section XV ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , include ' promotion of the system of European schools . '
Those schools give priority to educating the children of Community officials .
Those children , classed as category I , make up around 70 % of the total , pay no enrolment fees and the Commission contributes about 60 % of the funding .
Category II children , who make up 5 % , and category III , who make up 25 % , pay school fees of between EUR 4 000 and 16 000 .
The 14 existing schools teach nearly 21 000 pupils , from nursery school to baccalaureate level , out of a total of 100 million in the Union of 27 , in 14 official languages with an identical curriculum in all the language sections .
Compared to the situation of all the other school children in the European Union , these pupils are , therefore , highly privileged .
In 2006 the Commission promised to reform the system - a laudable undertaking - with a view to establishing a European education system applicable to all types of school that wished to award the European baccalaureate , based on a common curriculum and , where possible , tuition in the mother tongue .
The school in Parma , which is approved by the Board of Governors of the European Schools , will be the first school of its kind to award a European baccalaureate in June 2009 .
For its part , the Board of Governors of the European Schools undertook an in-depth assessment of the baccalaureate with a view to the ongoing reform .
A study commissioned by the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education , which will be available in October , shows that 94 % of those who have passed the baccalaureate go on to higher education in the main European universities and that 62 % of them study in a university outside their country of origin .
There is , therefore , far greater mobility among these students than among others .
That means we have at our disposal a European educational system that has proved its worth .
In its resolutions of 2002 and 2005 , the European Parliament advocated a profound reform of the schools system with a view to better governance and greater openness .
Given the successive enlargements of the EU and the increasing number of EU agencies and places of work of its staff , surely it is urgently necessary to reform the model of the European schools system and to begin to transpose it into the general educational systems ?
Is it not time to offer European citizens a well-tried , multilingual and flexible model of schooling that responds to their concern for mobility and to draw on the experience gained from the European schools ?
Of course I know what the reply will be : that is not within our powers .
At least we should work on this because surely the perception of the European schools as elitist and the categorisation of pupils within those schools are incompatible with the objectives of a single market , mobility and greater social cohesion ?
What progress has been made in the process of reform and greater openness to ensure that the European schools system can move towards a system of European schooling , while maintaining everything that has been achieved to date ?
What kind of Community funding systems could be envisaged to improve the running of the accredited schools ?
Parma may show us a way forward .
Lastly , I would like to ask the Commissioner what progress has been made in the field of education for children with special needs ?
I am well aware that this subject is of interest to a large number of fellow Members and I thank the Commissioner and the President for this opportunity to hold a public debate on it .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I thank the honourable Members for these questions and for this opportunity to discuss these issues in the European Parliament again .
For the Commission , the reform of the European School system is a priority issue , and this is one of the most complicated items we are dealing with .
The Commission has always strongly promoted the wider opening of the European School system , and progress has been achieved .
Political agreement on this issue was marked at the ministerial meeting of November 2006 , under the Dutch presidency of governors of European schools .
Following formal approval by the Board of Governors in April 2008 of the concrete modalities to achieve this goal , any accredited school in the Member States can now teach the European curriculum and deliver the European Baccalaureate .
It is up to the relevant authorities of the Member States to take initiatives to concretise this opening of the European School System in their national schools .
The opening of the European School System is in line with the European Parliament 's wish to ensure that this would be possible both in places where an EU decentralised agency is located ( so-called ' type-II schools ' ) , and in locations without a direct EU presence ( so-called ' type-III schools ' ) .
After almost 50 years of existence , the European Baccalaureate has indeed acquired a high intrinsic value .
The Commission wants to maintain the high quality of this diploma .
The Board of Governors of the European Schools approved in April 2008 a revision of the European Baccalaureate Agreement .
Accredited schools can now deliver the European Baccalaureate .
In 2007 , Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education initiated a study to analyse the academic and professional careers of former pupils of the European Schools , as the honourable Member just mentioned .
This study will show the specific benefits and possible difficulties experienced by former pupils of the European Schools .
The Secretary-General of the European Schools has also launched a study to make an external evaluation of the European Baccalaureate .
I trust that the combined results of both studies will provide key elements to assess how to further improve the European School System in order to best adjust it to the changing needs of its pupils .
Finally , I can inform you that the European School System has considerably increased its efforts to integrate children with special educational needs ( SEN ) .
In the school year 2004 / 2005 , the European Schools had 274 pupils with special educational needs .
In the last school year , there were 411 such pupils enrolled in the European Schools .
The SEN budget allocated for 2008 is EUR 3 123 000 ; in 2004 , the SEN budget spent was a little over EUR 2 million .
The Commission would like to thank the Disability Intergroup of the European Parliament for taking the initiative to set aside a reserve of EUR 200 000 for a pilot project for a SEN resource centre .
This initiative gives the European School system the opportunity to better fulfil the needs of SEN children .
The Board of Governors of the European Schools approved in July 2008 the proposal to use the European Parliament reserve of EUR 200 000 to make an evaluation of the existing SEN policy in the European Schools .
This study will allow the European Schools to improve the quality of integration of SEN pupils .
The European Commission launched in July 2008 the financial procedure for the liberation of the European Parliament reserve of EUR 200 000 .
The transfer to the budgetary authorities is currently being initiated .
Progress has been achieved , but it is crucial that the European Parliament supports the reform process initiated by the Commission in order to finalise this reform and put it fully into practice as soon as possible .
Again , the crucial role must be played by Member States .
I would like to underline that we have good contacts with the Member States .
I hope that the Swedish presidency - which is not the presidency of the European Union but the presidency in the European Schools Board - will develop these initiatives .
I would like to stress that the report drawn up by Mr Bösch , a Member of the European Parliament , has been very useful and he has been very instrumental in this issue .
I myself will do everything to develop the system of European Schools , because we are experiencing great difficulties with a system that was designed in 1953 , and we must therefore implement some serious changes to make this system flexible and work well .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I have asked to speak because I am concerned .
We are talking about the European Schools today , and I am grateful to Mrs Hennicot for that .
I should like to draw the attention of Commissioner Kallas to a specific aspect of the European Schools , namely religious education .
During the course of last year a number of worrying reports reached me .
As you all know , the Board of Governors of the European Schools ruled last year that a minimum of seven pupils of the same language was needed in order for a subject to be taught in the mother tongue .
For general subjects such as geography and maths this is not a problem , but it is very different when it comes to religious education .
This raising of the minimum number means that there are now European Schools where pupils are no longer able to receive religious education in their own language .
I am most concerned by this , especially at primary level .
I think that religion , talking and learning about the standards and values we all prize so greatly in Europe , is extremely important .
In religion , feelings are very important and as we all know , children are best able to express feelings and emotions in their mother tongue .
I find it unacceptable that , depending on their language and nationality , some pupils can and others cannot receive religious education in their own language .
So I ask the Commissioner to give thought to this and to set clear guidelines .
All pupils , whether their mother tongue is English , German or Dutch , must have the same opportunities and the same quality of instruction .
Consideration should be given not only to the pupils but also to the position of teaching staff .
The ' minimum of seven ' rule means that every year the question arises of whether there are enough pupils , and teaching staff are not sure whether religious education will be provided in the following school year .
This professional uncertainty has consequences when it comes to finding good teachers of religious education in all languages .
I urge the Commission to emphasise the importance of religious education for European School parents and pupils and to hold out for the continuation of religious education in pupils ' mother tongue at the European Schools .
on behalf of the PSE . - ( ES ) Commissioner , we have already noted here that the European Schools were , as official centres of instruction , established jointly by the governments of the Member States of the Union to provide multilingual and multicultural education primarily to the children of the staff of the institutions and that for many reasons they now need to be reformed , essentially in the light of new needs .
The Union 's institutional development , enlargement , and the proliferation of agencies have led to changes in the profile of the pupils in the European Schools both as regards culture and language and in terms of numbers of pupils ; applications to register have risen sharply .
Moreover , increased flexibility in employment contracts has led to new family and employment circumstances which affect social and family profiles and families ' needs .
As Parliament has already noted in two resolutions , reform is necessary to modernise the schools so that they provide the required quality of service for which they were established , are accessible and overcome specific problems of access or segregation .
To that end I welcome the Commissioner 's announcement on the two studies now under way , we will see if they bear fruit .
In short , despite the increase in the number of Community languages and the increased complexities we face on many fronts , progress must be made in the process of reform , openness and improvement of these schools while ensuring that their qualifications are recognised in all Member States of the Union .
Having said that , I would like to put two specific questions to the Commissioner .
The first relates to a number of complaints I have received from the parents of some pupils who have studied at the European School : it would appear that when they leave after taking the European Baccalaureate to continue their studies , one point is deducted from the average mark awarded ; in other words they are penalised .
I would like to know whether you are aware of this practice and the reason for it .
The second question relates to the children of Parliamentary assistants .
I have also received complaints from assistants who have to send their children as category three entries if they want them to attend these schools ; in other words , they have to pay school fees .
I have visited the page which sets out all the information on how the Euroschools work ; I have it here and shall read it in French because that is the language I found it in .
It says , under category one :
( FR ) ' The children of staff in the service of the Community institutions and of the organisations listed below employed directly and continuously for a minimum period of one year . '
( ES ) A list of twelve points follows ; point 4 says :
( FR ) ' Persons with a directly binding contract of employment , governed by private law , with the European institutions ' .
( ES ) This , then , is the situation for people or the group of people who we might well think of as falling within category one . I would like to ask you why the children of Parliamentary assistants have to register under category three and pay school fees .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , firstly I would like to say on behalf of my group that it is true that the present system is fairly complicated .
It needs to be simplified , and we know that matters of education basically fall within the competence of the Member States , though in the case of the European Schools it also lies with the Union .
Wherever there are EU agencies there must also be European Schools .
That is a basic principle , and we should also remember that our various strategies allow us to tell the citizens of Europe that education is always an investment in the future .
It is on that basis that we should act in the case of the European Schools .
I would next like to raise a few points concerning education .
The first concerns the extent to which it is free .
I think that we in Europe should have a debate on making all education free , whatever school we are talking about .
Every child and young person should have the chance of a good education and the opportunity to benefit from good teaching , and not having to pay is one guarantee of that .
I think that if the Member States want this and if we really believe that education is an investment in the future , we can achieve this goal .
It is also important that teaching is done in the student 's mother tongue , as that is the basis of identity .
Children and young people at European schools come from different cultures and different nations .
It is important that they are taught in their own language , but is also vital to remember that we need special teaching facilities and also that students need to be taught cultural awareness , as they are often rootless , coming as they do from one country to another , which is a new and alien environment .
For that reason we should also make sure of their overall personal development and growth as human beings .
This is also the basis for European human rights policy and the European notion of humanity .
As for the special facilities I mentioned , class sizes are one thing that could be invested in .
Class sizes must not be too large and every child should be given the chance to receive tailor-made options .
I will end by saying that the real educational standards amongst us Europeans will be measured in terms of how we treat those close to us who are worse off and how we look after children and young people , and the European schools are a shop window for the world .
What are our actual standards of education and how do we look after our young people ?
Are we prepared to invest in them and their future ?
I hope that Europe can afford to do that and that it does actually invest in children and young people and in the European schools .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , 50 years of experience in European Schools that are faced with the specific problem of different languages , cultural diversity and migration makes one consider whether this experience should be used to make this school model more widely available .
It is not just the children of officials working in European institutions who need to be taught foreign languages at the highest level , as well as integration with their peers from other European countries .
It is not just they , who , because their parents have taken up posts abroad , need a particular approach to schooling .
We are opposed to discrimination .
Why then should children other than the children of these officials be excluded from those schools ?
I would also like to draw attention to the issue that is being considered by the Committee on Culture and Education , namely the need to reinstate the classics , Greek and Latin , in schools in Europe and also an emphasis on teaching Latin and Greek in the European Schools .
I believe it is essential to give urgent consideration to the need to extend and reform European Schools as well as the principles according to which they operate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , as a member of the Committee on Culture , allow me to extend my warm welcome to the initiative of Erna Hennicot-Schoepges and Katerina Batzeli , members of the Committee on Culture , to address an oral question to the European Commission and have this debate on the progress of the reform of the European schools .
Speaking of multilingualism and its importance , let me use this opportunity to raise a serious concern we have in Romania , where the recent initiative of the Ministry of Regional Development to complete the translation of the EU 's regional operational programme from Romanian into Hungarian met serious attacks from the Romanian Social Democratic Party run by several leaders of the former communist regime .
Please note that this is happening in one of the 27 EU Member States in the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , at a time when Commissioner Leonard Orban issued a policy document entitled , ' Multilingualism : an asset for Europe and a shared commitment ' .
In the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , a debate on the reform of the European Schools could not be of greater importance , as we live in a multicultural and multilingual Europe , where different cultures and languages coexist .
We need to encourage and enable such cultural interaction for successful European integration .
Therefore , our European educational system needs to reflect this multicultural characteristic and allow a healthy and easy coexistence .
European schools in particular were set up to meet these needs - to provide multicultural and multilingual education while also strengthening European identity .
However , in an enlarged EU with greater citizen mobility and more agencies being created in different Member States , it has become a challenge to meet these needs .
As the questions in today 's debate underline , there is a great need to focus on reforms , as it has proved to be more and more complex to provide multilingual and flexible education of high quality .
Allow me to stress the fact that only by allowing students to express and practice their own cultural identity and use their own mother tongue throughout their education and formation can we allow them to evolve as true European citizens .
If students studying in European Schools are not able first to develop their national identity through the use of their mother tongue and culture , I believe that they will not have a strong basis to build their European identity .
Thank you for your attention and I wish you good luck in the reform process of the European Schools .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , a number of years ago two problems were identified with the European Schools .
One was that they were lagging far behind in inclusiveness and integrated policies for special education needs ( SEN ) children .
The other was that when parents would make an application to the school for a child with special needs , they had a practice of saying that they were not really able to meet their needs and the parents should go and find something else .
This really was not good enough .
In December 2007 , Parliament set money aside in its budget to ' contribute to the financing of first-class education for SEN children and to promote the concept of inclusive education and that this sum is to be released upon presentation of a proposal for the launch of a pilot project for the SEN resource centre comprising qualified personnel with relevant experience and appropriate teaching materials ' .
In the time I have I will not go through the negotiations , the back and forth , that have gone on about this pilot project .
What has come about is that the pilot project has become several half-posts in psychology and some other resources , but it is not what I would see as a pilot project : actual classes , integrated classes throughout the European Schools .
I feel it is time for us to be very clear about the goal .
The goal is inclusion and the goal is to integrate children in a way that is possible for them .
There are now 411 SEN pupils in the European Schools in the SEN project .
This is 2 % , and yet disability in the general population is 17 % .
We are still not allowing enough children with special education needs into the schools , so we are still missing out on 15 % .
I cannot believe the figure for the population of people entitled to those schools is different from that in the general population .
We certainly need to have a project and assess the situation but we could do that for ever - we have been looking at the situation for ever !
It is time to move beyond the pilot schemes .
It is time to make a real approach to children as standard practice in all the schools .
We are a long way from doing that .
This is the other meaning of diversity .
It is not just about languages and cultures : it is about peoples ' needs and their abilities and catering to the wide diversity of that as well .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , while there is no doubt that the attempts to develop a European School have to be welcomed , we must not forget that the strategic objective is in some ways to make Europe into a guide from the scientific and social points of view , and into a model of cohabitation .
In that sense , we then have to build on Europe 's cultural roots , for instance what Rome gave us in terms of law , what Greece gave us in terms of philosophy , and what Germany gave us in terms of music .
However , it also has to be said that those languages considered to be dead , such as Latin and Greek , now need to be revived - and there is clear evidence of this - since they are languages that the most sophisticated American companies , such as General Motors or Yale University , consider fundamental for the modus operandi of entrepreneurs or , if you like , heads of family .
It also has to be said that Christianity and the Christian values of our roots are fundamental elements in any genuine European School .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , my fellow Members have presented you with a series of requests for more progress in European schools , which serve as examples for other schools in the Member States .
Please answer my question about how much local legislation affects European schools .
We have found that there are differences between the schools in the Netherlands , Belgium , Germany and Luxembourg .
We have identified these differences specifically in the approach to children with learning difficulties .
They have received different treatment depending on whether they are in Brussels or in Luxembourg .
While we are on the subject of pupils , why should they be separated into categories ?
Why do they have to make a careful choice of Baccalaureate courses before they have any lessons ?
Why do religious knowledge and classical languages have to be taught according to the number of pupils in the class ?
Why are children not taught the history of their country of origin ?
Why are children not taught in their national language ?
Let us turn now to staff : meritocratic selection in all the countries will provide a uniform standard among teachers ' associations .
Do you check the selection process in all countries ?
There is a turnover of administrative staff , but there are people who remain head teachers for more than 20 years .
Why is there no selection of head teachers ?
Flexibility , as you have said yourselves , will bring better results .
The authorities of the Member States must take care to ensure that they do not have schools exclusively for ' elite ' immigrants , but ones that serve as models for other immigrant schools .
( PL ) Madam President , I have come here not just as a Member of the European Parliament , but also as a person with practical experience of the European School , as I am the father of a child that attended the European School in Brussels for three years and who last year took the baccalaureate .
From family experience , as well as from my occasional observations , for example , at parents ' evenings at this , which is one of the four European Schools in Brussels , I feel that I know what we are talking about today .
I wanted to say just one thing : the number of these schools is increasing .
When my son went to this school three years ago , there were three schools in Brussels and now there is a fourth one .
The permitted number of pupils in classes in European Schools is 32 .
It is worth noting that in many European countries the permitted number of pupils in a class is considerably lower than in the European Schools .
Our interest in this subject is clear : we have to take an interest in something that , as the European Union , we pay for .
More than 50 % of the budgets of these schools comes from European Union funds .
The conclusion , Madam President , is this : it is sensible to open up these schools , but this should not be at the cost of teaching quality or an excessive number of children and young people in these schools .
( RO ) European Schools are recognised in Europe as elite institutions that provide quality education to young people .
In 1953 , Jean Monnet said that the purpose of these schools was to bring together European children , irrespective of their nationality , and to instill in them the European spirit and sense of belonging , so that they may eventually create a united and prosperous Europe .
The reform programme of these schools must take into account the following important issues .
All of the 23 official languages of the European Union must exist within these schools , and children must be given the opportunity to speak their native language .
Unfortunately , there are still some official EU languages which are not spoken in any of the European Schools .
Furthermore , one of the objectives of European Schools is to foster unity within groups of children , to bring them together and to facilitate the development of a spirit of tolerance and communication among them .
Therefore , I believe that dividing them into three categories is not a sound measure .
Those falling into the last category , ' others ' , as it is called , get the opportunity to attend such a school only if there are places left after the children of European officials have been admitted .
This categorisation is discriminatory and I suggest that it should be removed from the statute of European Schools .
( PL ) Madam President , the concept of the ' European School ' is become increasingly popular .
This is a result of globalisation , which affects everything , including education .
For this reason we have a guiding principle that we try to observe .
This is where the problems begin .
Finding an answer to the question ' what should the school be like ' is very difficult .
Should it be an elite school or universal , should it impose its own style and curriculum on all pupils , or should it be a school that moves in certain directions , but takes into account national and regional traditions ; should it be a school where pupils are taught to appreciate and respect their own traditions , culture , history , religion and language , or should it teach openness to the cultures of other nations through multilingualism and appreciation of the whole world ?
There is one issue that , in principle , does not arouse any doubts .
As there is a European Union , then diplomas issued by all the educational institutions of Member States should be recognised in the Schools .
( RO ) I believe European Schools to be the schools of the future in the EU , as they take into account increased mobility and the globalisation process and consequently give every student the opportunity to study in his / her mother tongue , thus promoting multilinguism .
I have researched this schooling system myself .
I visited the oldest European School in Brussels , which was established more than 50 years ago , and I met over 40 Romanian students who have the opportunity to study in their native language .
It should be said that European Schools foster social inclusion , as students of different nationalities get to know and help one another .
I would like to stress the effectiveness of the way in which the baccalaureate examination is organised , as it stimulates high performance and prepares students for their future lives as European citizens .
I believe that the European School system should be extended to all the Member States , so as to become part of a common European policy in the field of education .
Moreover , I move for the establishment and support of regional European Schools , which should take into account one basic principle of the European Union - regional policy in a mobile , knowledge-based Europe .
( RO ) European policies concerning the reform of traditional schools and their evolution towards the status of European Schools , with the involvement of local and national administrative structures , require , in my opinion , three major types of reform : systemic reform , including reform of the curriculum , based on quality and effectiveness ; continual reform , involving evaluation of and capitalisation on previous results , adapting them to European Schools ; and a third reform , based on the responsibility and ownership of all social actors .
In this last regard , I believe that European schools should be taken as the model for a world school , where an ' after-school learning ' component should come into play .
Young people should have a special programme from 14.30 to 17.00 during term time , as well as during the summer holiday .
( RO ) In their 50 years of existence , European Schools have proven their quality as regards the education of future generations .
However , I believe that in today 's debate we should focus on the need to adapt European Schools to present-day requirements , taking into account the enlargement to the EU-27 as well as such phenomena as globalisation , migration , and increased professional and geographic mobility .
There are two major issues that I would like to stress .
First of all , we need to open up European Schools to a greater extent , so as to integrate all citizens in need of such assistance .
Secondly , I believe that the recognition of degrees in all European countries is a priority .
Madam President , a human being takes about one third of his or her life to get ready for mature life through education .
The second observation that I want to make is that the construction of the European Union - what we are doing right now - also requires an adequate education .
There are many technical aspects , like equipment , diplomas and so on , but the Commission , as executor , needs to uphold the idea of education based on more languages , on common principles and on respect for national values .
This is very crucial .
Education obviously requires the investment of money , but if you do not support making this investment , then you will have to accept ignorance , which I think will be more costly for us .
So the European School is an admirable project , and I support it .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Schools exist on the basis of the Convention signed in 1957 .
There have been many changes in Europe over the past 50 years : a series of enlargements , an increase in the number of institutions and agencies and much more flexible employment contracts .
There can be no doubt , therefore , that the European Schools system also needs change and reform .
There are a number of important areas that need changing .
The issue that interests me the most is pupil selection , that is , the division into categories : one , two or three .
After all , on the one hand the EU is trying to increase the mobility of European citizens in the labour market and to eliminate barriers and , on the other , it is blocking access to the Schools to children of potential employees of various institutions and companies from the whole of the EU .
A solution needs to be found to the problem of overcrowding in certain schools .
Measures also need to be taken as regards children with special needs .
Finally , I would like to ask for consideration to be given to the possibility of creating European Schools in the new Member States .
( PL ) Madam President , the education philosophy in European Schools and the teaching programme that leads to a European Baccalaureate should serve as an example of multilingual and multicultural education for all Member States .
The growing number of student exchanges in European educational institutions and the globalisation of the world 's economy mean that the true value of the European Baccalaureate would justify making it more widespread .
It should also be recognised by institutions of higher education in Member States and also in third countries .
Unfortunately this cannot be accomplished without a substantial increase in funding .
At present European Schools are perceived as elite schools that often exclude children whose parents are not EU officials .
The exclusion of the greater part of society from the possibility of benefiting from European Schools is contrary to the objective of increasing the mobility of European citizens in our labour market .
Member States themselves often try to create a new education system that will prepare young people better for the challenges associated with globalisation and a flexible labour market , while the system of European Schools and the European Baccalaureate have already long been in existence and , what is most important , have had excellent results , so we should duplicate them as much as possible .
Madam President , I rise not merely as a Member of this House but also as a former schoolmaster .
I wonder whether I might ask Commissioner Kallas , at his next meeting with the Council of Ministers , to have a particular word with the British Minister of Education to see whether or not it is possible that he might learn some of the lessons of the successes of the European School model .
Perhaps in particular he might consider reversing the disastrous decision of the British Government to make the teaching of languages voluntary , in other words dropping European languages from the British curriculum .
Secondly , you might just remind him that Europe was divided for half a century , but that it has now been reunited for 20 years .
Perhaps he might consider suggesting to his curriculum advisers that they remind the next generation of the history and the culture of Central and Eastern Europe , in which Britain traditionally was very much involved and did actually seek to support .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the stress should not just be on the criticism , from various sides , of the inadequacies of the current model of governance .
I believe that we all have a duty to understand , after this debate , what is at stake , i.e. the model that the European Schools can represent for the European area of education ; and since we want to overcome the challenge of the European area of education and are keen in this respect for good practices to win out , it is absurd and contradictory that we are sticking to a level and a model of governance unable to meet the challenges which we face .
In my view , today 's debate offers the Commission more than enough of a spur to realise that we have to undertake a radical overhaul of our schools .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would like to put two further questions to the Commissioner , who gave a figure but it is the current figure .
Commissioner , are there also to be increases in appropriations for the next financial perspective ; is there a system of funding in place that will ensure that these schools can continue to function ?
Apparently at this very moment they are short of 40 English teachers , given the financial problems experienced by Her Majesty 's Government .
May I ask you what solution can be envisaged in view of that situation ?
Secondly , the schools themselves would like more autonomy .
Are you in favour of greater autonomy or would you prefer to keep to the present system , which is cumbersome and often ill-suited to local situations ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , several very serious and important issues have been raised .
First of all I would like to remind you that the European Schools system is a completely independent body .
It is based not on the Treaty of 1958 but on the Statute of 1953 , it has its own Board , its own Statute , and all rules are adopted by this Board .
The Commission is only one voice on the Board .
As for the content of the education , this is fully the responsibility of the Board , and all this , including the different proportions between the language sections , and the curriculum , is totally in the hands of the Board of Governors of the European Schools .
So the Commission has not very much to say .
As to financing , this is the second thing I would like to say in reply to one important question .
The infrastructure is provided by the host countries .
So the schools are built by Belgium , Germany , France etc .
This gives us the full picture of the limits we have in developing the infrastructure .
What about the content of education ?
The honourable Member mentioned in her introductory remarks that the quality of the education is high - and it is high .
This is one of the main priorities of the European Commission , to give every possible support so that this quality will be high .
This will really be a benchmark for European educational systems , that European Schools give pupils an education which is highly appreciated everywhere .
So I do not have any information that pupils with a European School education have any specific difficulties in getting to university after school if they so wish .
Concerning teachers , they count as part of the infrastructure , so teachers are also provided by Member States .
English teachers , for example , are provided by the United Kingdom ; in other words , the burden for bigger languages is correspondingly much higher .
We , the Commission - or the European budget - pay the operational costs for this .
This gives us a combination that results in a rather cumbersome system , and one objective is therefore to reform the system and to bring more clarity to responsibility and financing .
You can also see the problems with Belgium , where , it has been said , one of the four schools is still a temporary school .
The construction of the fourth school has been postponed and postponed , and we are in intensive discussions with the Belgian Government about this .
On the openness of European schools , in our view the key issue is the European Baccalaureate , and the certification of schools which want to award the European Baccalaureate .
We promote this idea , which has basically been adopted by the Board of Governors , so the basic rules exist .
Now the question is how to put this into practice in the Member States .
Again , the leading role lies with the Member States .
So this will to some extent settle the problem of different pupils .
Today , as I said , I am meeting Parliament and I hear your observations that category III is something which must be excluded , but I also regularly meet our staff - it is the same size , comprising hundreds of people - and they of course have a clear demand , namely that education for their children must be guaranteed .
So there is a requirement - and this is emphasised very strongly in the Treaty , in the Staff Regulations , in the regulation - to provide places in the schools and then , of course , the question arises who will distribute these other places which are to remain free and definitely in Brussels ?
This is more and more difficult .
This is for me a very complicated question .
At the beginning of this Commission , we insisted on behalf of our staff that there must be more clarity , and so the Central Enrolment Authority has been established by the Board of Governors to settle these questions .
So this is the overall picture , and I must just repeat that the Commission 's attitude is that we must bring clarity to the financial issues and clearly share the burden , have clear responsibilities , clear obligations , and then we can also find better solutions to the infrastructure questions , but we cannot have any kind of reduction in the quality of education .
About some specific questions , one honourable Member raised the question about disabled students .
You said that there are many more of them but I do not know that anybody has been rejected when parents have asked for special treatment : it has always been provided .
So , if you have facts that there are some hidden pupils with disabilities , please provide these facts and we will deal with them .

Now , about parliamentary assistants , you know that at present parliamentary assistants are not covered by the Staff Regulations , they are a kind of special staff members in Parliament , but you know also that negotiations are ongoing to settle this and to have more precise rules , and then we can also consider what to do about access to the European Schools for the children of parliamentary assistants .
So these are more or less the questions which were raised , and of course all these questions - religious education , languages - are clearly in the hands of the Board of Governors , and the Commission is just one voice on that Board .
The Board of Governors is dealing with these issues very seriously .
They have held long discussions about this , and I can assure you that the Secretariat-General of the European Schools is very attentive to all needs of the different languages and different religious aspects .
So this is their responsibility .
Just one thing more : if Parliament can draw Member States ' attention , and especially if all Members of the European Parliament who have their own connections in their home countries can encourage the Member States ' Ministers of Education , to promote this idea of the European Baccalaureate because this is their choice .
We now have rules on how to go ahead with the European Baccalaureate .
Now it is up to the national ministries to find interested schools .
I know that there are a lot of interested schools , but the national authorities in many countries have not shown enough enthusiasm about this project , which can be a step forward and which can really then be a positive mark for the European Baccalaureate , so we can have European Schools not only in Brussels but everywhere - in new Member States and old Member States .
This is a symbol of Europe .
The Baccalaureate and European education is one element in our architecture .
The debate is closed .
I would wish everybody a happy Day of European Languages tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) I agree with the various solutions proposed for the reform of the European Schools : my privileged role as the Committee on Development 's rapporteur on the Erasmus Community action programme leads me strongly to support the need for a multilingual and flexible European Schools model in which mother-tongue teaching is maintained ( and is taught by teachers who are native speakers ) but which is , at the same time , the same for all without class distinctions .
The European Baccalaureate will be the first instrument , followed by the opportunities offered by Erasmus , to guarantee real mobility for students , in Europe and then throughout the world .
Tutoring obviously has an important role to play in the social , cultural and linguistic integration of incoming students and the achievement of excellent linguistic skills needs to be encouraged , with support from intensive courses ( as has been underscored from 2001 to today by the Day of European Languages held every 26 September ) .
I consider that cooperation between the current European Schools and regional ( primary and secondary ) schools is a sine qua non for the development of a new European Schools system , but I cannot hide my concern for the future of Italian regional schools which - as a result of the new ' Gelmini ' reform - could well disappear in some smaller , geographically disadvantaged , communities .
in writing . - The processes undertaken by the European Union in the last few decades and the ever-evolving educational system have meant that a new perspective on the role and importance of the European Schools has to be taken into consideration .
Given the latest enlargement of the EU to 27 Member States and with the increase in EU staff that implies , the significance of a well-reformed European School has become an issue of high priority .
In order to improve future expectations from the European Schools , we must approach the sensitive issues challenging the current system and identify the problems in order to design the foreseeable changes .
Thus there is great demand for a newly drawn-up and comprehensive reform of the European Schools , so as to make them more competitive and transparent on a European level and to design their full-weight purpose in a more up-to-date way .
The implementation of the principle of non-discrimination while granting fundamental freedoms to the pupils must be at the core of the new system in order to make it fully operational and in their own benefit .
Nevertheless , the financing of the European Schools must be also reevaluated by taking into account indiscriminating measures for the pupils with regard to their division into categories .
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations included in the register ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting : see Minutes
Dates of forthcoming sittings : see Minutes
Adjournment of the session
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament .
( The sitting closed at 16.05 )
Formal sitting - Ingrid Betancourt
Ladies and gentlemen , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it gives me great satisfaction and a great feeling of admiration to welcome Ingrid Betancourt to the European Parliament today .
A warm welcome to you , Mrs Betancourt !
( Applause )
The fact that you are with us today is a testimony to the fact that courageous people never give up hope in the fight for freedom and human dignity .
After your release on 2 June 2008 I had the honour of writing to you on behalf of the European Parliament and welcoming you back to freedom .
Now the moment has come for you to be here as our guest .
You were held captive for six years , four months and nine days .
You alone know what you had to go through during those 2 321 days , but you have become a symbol of freedom throughout the world and a symbol of human resistance to enforced distress and the deprivation of fundamental human rights as well as a role model of dignity and courage for us all .
Your children were with you all the way .
I will never forget how your two children - your daughter and your son - sought me out several years ago when I was in a different role , and how they advocated for their mother .
That was the love of children for their mother .
You can be proud of your children !
( Applause )
Terrorism as practised by your kidnappers is a direct assault on our values , on freedom , on human dignity and on democracy .
Mrs Betancourt , your example shows us very clearly , yet again , that democracies must never retreat in the face of terrorism .
It is a political and moral duty to ensure that the rule of law is always upheld .
During your captivity , many members of the European Parliament worked tirelessly for your release and I know that many representatives of the various Ingrid Betancourt committees are here today - active champions of your cause , people who are working for the freedom of all hostages in Colombia .
I would like to greet and extend a warm welcome to all of you who spoke up on behalf of Ingrid Betancourt and are here in the European Parliament today .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we must tirelessly continue our efforts to secure the release of all those who are still being deprived of their freedom .
This is another reason for your visit to us today .
You yourself said : ' For a victim of terrorism , the greatest danger of all is to be forgotten .
When I was in the jungle , I had a face and I had a name .
I am now asking we do the same for those who stayed behind . '
Those were your words , and they still are .
In the name of the European Parliament , we call today for this to happen .
This year we are celebrating the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948 .
This declaration presented the first worldwide , formal obligation to protect the dignity of each and every person and the equality of all people , without regard to skin colour , religion or origin .
Article 3 of the declaration states : ' Everyone has the right to life , liberty and security of person . '
Many , many people have been deprived of their freedom because they have defended human rights .
At the conference entitled ' The defenders take the floor ' , which is being organised this week here at the European Parliament , we have heard numerous testimonies from people who have been oppressed , arbitrarily arrested or forced into exile because of their fight for fundamental rights and freedoms .
We have also had the opportunity to discuss in detail how we can better protect these people and support their work .
Mrs Betancourt , we are all honoured and delighted to ask you now to address the European Parliament .
Ingrid Betancourt , you have shared your heart with us , the freely elected Members of the European Parliament and 