Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 6 May 2010 .
Statements by the President
To begin with , I would like to give you some information .
Firstly , the Sixth International Day Against Homophobia is being observed in the European Union , today .
Exactly 20 years ago , the World Health Organisation removed homosexuality from the International Classification of Diseases .
The European Union is fighting discrimination on all fronts .
This also includes homophobia .
The obligation to protect the discriminated is embodied in our most important legal acts - in the treaty and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is referred to in the treaty .
Secondly , this month , we celebrated the 60th anniversary of the Schuman Declaration , and on 8 and 9 May , our Parliament held Open Days in Brussels and Strasbourg .
Visitors were able to see the work of Parliament close up and learn about our everyday work .
The buildings were open to all citizens .
In all , over 33 000 citizens of the European Union visited Parliament in Brussels and Strasbourg .
We also had a meeting in this Chamber with 800 young people from all the countries of the European Union .
There were 11 Members of the European Parliament with me .
We talked with them , we sat together and discussed matters related to the Union .
The third piece of information .
Last week , on Tuesday 11 May , I had the great honour to present the Charlemagne Youth Prize in Aachen .
First prize was won by the ' Train for Europe ' project from Germany .
Second place was won by a project from Ireland and third place by a project from Bulgaria .
Young people from all countries of the Union entered the competition .
The German project brought together representatives from 21 European countries , and 24 vocational schools worked together to design and build a train .
The main Charlemagne Prize was presented on 13 May two days after the Youth Prize , also in Aachen , to the Prime Minister of Poland , Donald Tusk .
Fourthly , last week , I took part in the Conference of Speakers of the European Union Parliaments in Stockholm .
The speakers of all 40 national parliaments were represented .
We spoke about future cooperation and also about the coming Belgian Presidency .
The conference was organised by our friends from the Swedish Parliament , and also from the Spanish Parliament , which currently holds the presidency of the European Union .
We are going to have regular meetings of parliamentary committees , amongst other things , and also joint sittings of European national parliaments .
I would also like to express my good wishes and congratulations .
Two European Union Member States , the United Kingdom and Hungary , have new governments .
We wish them stability .
In the European Union , we have a great need for stable governments .
They are needed , amongst other things , to enable decisions to be made quickly .
We represent the Community method of the European Union , but cooperation with governments is , to us , of fundamental significance for the efficiency of the European Union 's activity and its effectiveness for the citizens .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is just to remind you that this morning in Afghanistan , two soldiers of the Taurinense Brigade were killed in an attack .
The European Union plays a difficult role on the stage of peace and war , and I ask , as the session opens , that Parliament should join in offering condolences and support to the families of the victims at this very difficult time .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I had actually asked to be allowed to speak for a minute to say the same thing as my fellow Member , Mr Mauro , and so I join Mr Mauro in offering my condolences .

I believe the entire Chamber is united in remembering the two Italian soldiers who were killed this morning .
I believe that our sorrow must be tempered by indignation , solidarity with the families , support for the wounded and rejection of all forms of terrorism .
However , there must also be renewed action by Europe along with individual nation states to ensure that the peace mission is even more effective and can occur under safer conditions .
Thank you , gentlemen , for pointing this out to me .
It is very important that we always express solidarity with the soldiers who , on our behalf , are fighting terrorism as well as various other forms of abuse in Afghanistan and other countries .
We should express solidarity with their great commitment to our common cause , a cause which continues to be important throughout the world .
This is our custom in the European Parliament .
Thank you once again to both Members for drawing my attention to this .
Mr President , while we are remembering the tragic losses in Afghanistan , we should also remember that , almost on a daily basis , we are losing British soldiers who are giving their lives in the NATO mission taking place in that country .
We should recognise the tragic losses , and feel particular sympathy for the families of all our service personnel , from whichever country , who are serving under the auspices of NATO .
I agree with you entirely .
I think we all have the same view on this .
They are Europeans who represent all of us in the fight against terrorism and all forms of violence around the world .
They are our representatives .
( FR ) Mr President , I believe that it is in fact only right to pay tribute , as you have just done , to those who die in action .
It is only right , too , that we spare a thought for all those workers who die each day at work because their employers do not provide them with the resources necessary to work in good conditions .
Calendar of part-sessions for 2011 : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Order of business
We will now proceed to the order of business .
The final version of the draft order of business as adopted by the Conference of Presidents on 12 May 2010 pursuant to Rule 140 has been distributed .
Monday - no changes .
Tuesday - no changes .
Wednesday :
I have received a letter from Mr Casini , Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , in which the Committee requests that the European Parliament consult the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the proposal for a regulation on the Citizens ' Initiative under Articles 304 and 307 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
I anticipate that voting on these proposals on consultation will take place on Wednesday at 12.00 .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
We will now proceed to the final establishment of the order of business .
Concerning Monday and Tuesday , there have been no requests or submissions about amendments to the order of business .
There is , however , one proposal about Wednesday .
The Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested taking a vote on Mr Czarnecki 's report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2008 , Section II - Council .
Mrs Gräßle will move the request on behalf of the PPE Group .
Mr President , this morning the Council answered the outstanding questions via the Spanish Presidency .
One of the main conditions for a vote on the report is thereby met .
Moreover , through the Spanish Presidency , it has raised the prospect of joint discussion and elaboration of a proper discharge procedure , thereby meeting the second main condition .
In so doing , the Council is subjecting itself to the scrutiny of Parliament - and that is a milestone that we should recognise .
I am therefore recommending to all groups that they vote in favour of including the decision on discharge on the agenda .
However , the resolution itself will be dealt with during the June part-session .
Mr President , I will be brief .
We are able to support this motion for the reasons stated .
An official letter is on its way to Parliament .
I , too , see this as a good sign that the Council - or at least , so I hope - is prepared to demonstrate the transparency and willingness for consensus that it has demonstrated here , including in respect of the External Action Service .
To this extent , I agree with Mrs Gräßle .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I am surprised that the two large groups are now promising to vote on this report .
A coordinators ' meeting was held in the Committee on Budgetary Control that I myself chaired .
This morning , documents were indeed received from the Council , and I scrutinised them .
They include an annex that is identical to the annex to the document we received on 10 March .
In actual fact , then , nothing has changed , and so I should like to recommend that we vote against placing the Czarnecki report on the agenda for this part-session .
In my opinion - and I want to be very firm about this - the Council is simply taking us for a ride .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Voting on the Czarnecki report will take place on Wednesday .
The deadline for tabling amendments is Tuesday , 18 May at 12.00 .
The Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested postponement of the debate on Mrs Bauer 's report on working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities until the next part-session .
The request will be moved by the rapporteur , Mrs Bauer .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , on 22 March , I received a reply from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to my request that this report be tabled at the May plenary .
The Committee stated in its reply that since there was less than a month , which is the normal cooling-off period , between 28 April , when the Committee voted on this report , and this plenary , this report could therefore not be tabled at the May plenary .
However , without anyone asking , the Council of Ministers - presumably at the recommendation of the socialist political group - decided that it should nevertheless be tabled at this plenary , irrespective of whether or not a month had passed .
As a result , the political groups simply have not had time to formulate their positions on or to discuss this report .
Therefore , I ask that we postpone this until the June plenary .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I find it strange that Mrs Bauer - whom I otherwise hold in very high esteem - failed to mention that the report has been rejected .
I find it just as strange that Mrs Bauer forgot to mention that she has been in contact with the Council about a report that has been rejected .
That is not usual parliamentary procedure .
It is therefore absolutely right to put this on the agenda .
( Applause )
It is true that this Commission legislative proposal was rejected in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
However , this House has the good custom of a subsequent one-month cooling-off period to ensure we are well-prepared for the plenary session .
Contrary to the wishes of the rapporteur , this customary law of Parliament 's has been violated in this case .
It is a very complicated proposal , and the groups , too , need time to prepare , which is impossible in two days .
For this reason , I would ask you to support the rapporteur 's suggestion that the vote on this proposal be postponed until the June plenary .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
The debate on the Bauer report will be postponed until the next part-session .
Thursday
As for Thursday , there is the following proposal : the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested replacement of the debate on the arrest of journalist Ernest Vardanyan in Transnistria , which is scheduled for Thursday afternoon , by a debate on the situation in Thailand .
So , instead of the debate on the arrest of the journalist Ernest Vardanyan in Transnistria , a debate on the situation in Thailand .
The request will be explained further by Mr Preda .
( RO ) We asked for the debate on the situation of the journalist arrested illegally in Transnistria on worrying charges to be replaced by the debate on Thailand at a time when the situation in Thailand has worsened dramatically during recent days .
We urge fellow Members from all political groups to ensure that we focus our attention on this situation in Thailand .
We have heard an explanation of the request .
Who would like to speak in favour of the request ?
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the situation in Thailand is deteriorating by the hour ; human lives are at stake ; it appears to be a much more important item for an urgency debate for this Parliament to deal with on Thursday .
At the same time , there are some developments to the case of Mr Ernest Vardanyan in the break-away so-called state of Transnistria , which the initiators would like to examine .
Therefore , I move for this to be replaced with a discussion on Thailand .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that whatever we discuss and decide here will not change anything , either in Thailand or in Transnistria , so it is pointless to change things around .
The debate on the arrest of journalist Ernest Vardanyan in Transnistria will be replaced by a debate on the situation in Thailand .
These are urgent matters , which are discussed on Thursday afternoon .
The order of business for our plenary sitting has been established .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
( The order of business was thus established )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance ( Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
( EL ) Mr President , apart from the pressure from financial quanta , the insecurity in the euro area ...
( The President cut off the speaker and asked for order in the House )
Ladies and gentlemen , please do not talk in the Chamber during the plenary sitting unless you can do so quietly .
Colleagues on both sides of the European Parliament and in the centre , Chairs of political groups , dear colleague from Luxembourg , please sit down and stop talking .
Colleagues , this is a plenary sitting , so please stop talking and give us the opportunity to carry on with our one-minute speeches .
( EL ) Mr President , apart from the pressure from financial quanta , the insecurity in the euro area is also the result of copious political rhetoric on the part of European institutions and politicians .
Flawed European economic governance reacted , in my opinion , too late .
Of course we need financial equilibrium in Europe .
At the same time , now is the time for European political union to direct economic union via a global crisis exit strategy and to introduce a more effective regulatory framework for operating the financial markets and for protecting the euro against speculative pressures .
I refer , for example , to the need to revise the directive on market abuse .
By the same token , I repeat my proposal to create a European credit rating authority .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to take the opportunity in this House today , as I was unable to do so on the ' European Day for the Victims of Terrorism ' on 11 March , to pay a well-deserved tribute to these victims in recognition of the enormous sacrifice made by those who have paid the ultimate price in the name of freedom .
We urgently need to start to work on a directive to protect the rights of the victims of terrorism , who are always the ones who are overlooked and who suffer the humiliation of being unjustly equated with their murderers .
It is high time that we within these European institutions recognise the dignity of the victims of terrorism , and help to defend their right to protection and justice .
This right should soon be embodied in a law that honours all those who make this possible , whose first article should state that support to victims of terrorism entails recognition of their right to justice and that no government should ever pay a price for this .
I call on all those in a position to defend the victims never to forget that true peace is a peace born of justice , and that is the only peace that those of us who believe in freedom and democracy in Europe and anywhere else in the world should defend .
( ES ) Mr President , the closure of a large part of European airspace over recent weeks following the eruption of the Icelandic volcano has had serious consequences for the entire European economy .
This is clearly the case for the passengers , airlines and airports of the aviation sector , but it is also true for the tourism sector .
That is what I wanted to talk to you about .
In Spain , this is our second-largest industry .
In the islands I hail from , it is the main industry .
There is huge concern for the effects of the volcanic cloud on the tourist industry .
There is talk of losses of EUR 42 million a day .
It has dealt a serious blow to the tourism sector , which is still concerned about what the future repercussions may be .
Mr Tajani , the Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship , has committed himself to study the losses in this sector .
My request today would be for an urgent relief package both for these airlines and for the other businesses in the tourism sector , and for the tourism sector to be treated as a priority .
( FR ) Mr President , the European Union has many tools to make it a global leader in the manufacture of clean cars and , in particular , of electric cars .
The Commission must ensure that this project is a major European objective by encouraging the large car companies on our continent to cooperate with one another , with such cooperation extending from research and development to marketing .
It must encourage the widespread installation of accessible and interoperable charging points in Europe , starting with urban areas .
It must draft and enforce common rules and standards - if possible , at international level , but certainly at European level - and it must do so without delay .
Lastly , it must encourage the Member States to gradually replace their fleet of combustion vehicles with electric cars .
( SL ) Today , we are marking the International Day Against Homophobia .
I cannot comprehend that there are still many people who turn a blind eye to violence based on sexual orientation and identity .
I strongly condemn it , just as I condemn any form of violence based on race or ethnicity , religion or belief , age or disability .
I am very concerned by the misleading , offensive and even hate-fuelled statements which can still be heard .
I am shocked , time and again , by acts of violence , both verbal and physical , committed against people of same-sex orientation or members of various minorities .
Today , most Europeans say that the burkha should be banned .
While I agree that no one should force women to wear such clothing , I am concerned that a ban might result in an outcome the exact opposite of that intended : women who are prepared to wear the burkha going to prison .
We cannot permit religious arguments to fuel discrimination and violence .
Finally , we are all human beings , so we need to take a long hard look at whether it is that we really are unable to show greater tolerance to those who are different from us or that we simply do not want to .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw your attention to the ' Science and Innovation Citizens Agenda ' initiative , launched by the Spanish Presidency of the Council through the Ministry of Science and Innovation .
The European public is invited to go to the website ' www.reto2030.eu ' and select which challenges in science and innovation , from those put forward by fourteen European personalities , should be solved by 2030 .
The results can be seen online and on a scoreboard in the hall of the European Council building in Brussels until 26 May .
The Competitiveness Council will be informed of the result on that date .
I call on you all to vote for one of these challenges and to disseminate information about this initiative in your respective countries so that , as Jean Monnet would say , our personal participation enables us to progress towards a European Union for individuals , towards a European Union for the public .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , democracy requires institutions whose task is to monitor civil rights to be independent of state and party authorities .
The requirements in EU directives concerning regulatory bodies are identical with regard to complete independence and strong powers , impartiality and transparency .
Unfortunately , in Bulgaria , changes are being made to some of the confirmed successes of our democratic system , such as extending the period of office beyond five years , the possibility of re-election and a rotation system for changing personnel - all measures which guarantee independence .
Change is being brought about without any analysis or perspective , while distancing from good European practice .
A reduction in expenditure is the only argument used for undermining the institutions which are combating discrimination , regulating the media and protecting competition .
There is already the tendency for actions to be targeted at financial and audit institutions .
I am warning the European Parliament and European Commission of this as I hope that this will help deter such intentions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to highlight the importance of the written declaration on corruption that I proposed together with four other MEPs , and which half of the European Parliament , plus one , approved , with the aim of committing the Council and Commission to legislation that is truly effective in fighting corruption .
I have returned from a visit to Greece on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control and one of the reasons behind the Greek structural crisis is certainly the squandering of public money , something which also occurs in Italy : Italy is eaten away by corruption , as we have recently seen .
This corruption mainly hinges on the illegal management of public money , and the relationship between one political faction and a faction of businessmen and white-collar organised crime .
It is important for the European Parliament to make its full pressure felt on the Commission and on Member States - Member States that do not conform should be penalised - and for the European institutions responsible for controlling corruption and the fight against organised crime to be strengthened .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , on the International Day Against Homophobia , I would like to ask you all to remember all those who have been victims of violence and personal insults as well as mental and physical abuse in the past year in our EU Member States on account of their sexual identity .
Under the EU Treaty , discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation is banned , yet this ban is not being consistently implemented by the Member States .
In Member States such as Lithuania , the authorities are attempting to ban the Diversity Parade , thereby inciting an atmosphere of homophobia .
In my country , Germany , an attempt is being made not to fight homophobia in schools .
Mr President , it must be ensured that protection from discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation is respected as a human right .
( LT ) On 24 February , together with representatives from Latvia and Poland , I submitted a written declaration on equal treatment for farmers in the European Union , which draws attention to the unequal subsidising of farmers in EU Member States .
In some Member States , subsidies are 7 times higher than the minimum , on average 4 times , and many new Member States are below the EU average .
Such a situation falls foul of one of the Community 's most important principles - the principle of solidarity .
I call on the Council , the Commission and Parliament to equalise direct payments or at least reduce the disparities and , at the same time , end the unequal treatment of Member State farmers .
I call on my fellow MEPs to support written declaration number 11 referred to on equal treatment for farmers in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to draw your attention to the question of chiropractic .
This is an independent health profession that focuses on the diagnosis , treatment and prevention of mechanical disorders of the musculoskeletal system and their effect on the nervous system and general health using manual therapy .
Although chiropractic is taught on independent , harmonised university courses throughout the European Union , it has yet to be recognised uniformly in the European Union .
In order to safeguard access to the same care and treatment for patients throughout the European Union , I call on you to sign the written statement which I have drafted , with the assistance and support of other members , to get chiropractic recognised at European Union level .


Mr President , British taxpayers will end up contributing some GBP 10 billion to prop up the euro - a currency we resolutely rejected - as part of the GBP 215 billion hand-out from the International Monetary Fund .


This is in addition to the GBP 8 billion if Greece defaults on its debts , and GBP 5 billion in loan guarantees to Latvia and Hungary .
Britain may end up giving a total of GBP 23 billion to bolster the euro .
But , if the shoe was on the other foot , I can only imagine that the Commission would rub their hands in delight at the prospect of a failing pound and a weakened London .
The recent onerous legislation on hedge funds is the clear signal of this .
The invocation of Article 122 of the Lisbon Treaty is the loosest interpretation of legislation I have ever witnessed and , in my opinion , demonstrates a sort of political hoodwinking that proves that every paragraph of every article of every treaty is not even worth the paper it is printed on .
I would suggest the justification of exceptional occurrences fails to take into account the fiscal irresponsibility that created this mess .
The latest move robs Britain of vital veto powers by allowing qualified majority voting on future bail-outs .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , it is essential to the operation of the rule of law that institutions are subject to their own laws and rules .
Rule 24 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure states quite clearly : ' the non-attached Members shall delegate one of their number to attend meetings of the Conference of Presidents ' .
It does not say that the delegates shall be chosen by vote , but by what other method are joint decisions to be taken ?
Telepathic signals , possibly ?
The administration for the non-attached has said that the delegates should be chosen by consensus .
However , it has not attempted to define how consensus might be established and has not attempted to arrange for a delegate to be chosen by this method .
When attempts have been made to choose the delegate by election , these attempts have been declared to be invalid .
What has been the response of Parliament to all of this ?
They are going to change the rules so that the delegates - so-called - can be chosen by the President of the Parliament rather than the delegators .
How long before the President of Parliament excises our right to vote in the plenary session ?
I would like to remind you that the European Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs interprets this kind of situation and is certainly going to continue working on this .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the volcanic ash in the air above Europe has held up proceedings in Europe 's institutions .
It has , in particular , stymied the European Parliament 's plenary session in Strasbourg as almost half of MEPs have failed to get here .
Strasbourg is presumably a difficult destination to reach , and downright impossible in exceptional circumstances .
On this point , I would like to ask the following question : is this not yet another sign that the European Parliament needs to make a decision about having just one main site , and that to be in Brussels ?
I assume you will all agree that against the backdrop of a financial crisis , establishing a single main site for Parliament will save millions of taxpayers ' euros .
It will also make the travelling circus , as our once-monthly move is often described , a thing of the past .
( SK ) The protection of people belonging to ethnic minorities is , quite rightly , an important component of international development and relations between states .
We also discuss it here on the floor of the European Parliament , and we emphasise European values and the duty of governments to adhere to these values .
In this context , I would like to talk about the political sensitivity of the issue , as there is a great possibility of abuse in this regard , particularly now , as governments are acting unilaterally in pursuing these issues , without consulting those that are affected .
I consider it undesirable and unacceptable for these issues to be pursued in an insensitive manner with the aim of influencing the domestic political situation in another country , sometimes just before elections , as this would ordinarily be considered arrogance .
In case anyone has not understood me , I have been talking about the current problems in Slovak-Hungarian relations .
Mr President , corruption has been an important cause of the crisis , with powerful companies and powerful individuals misusing policies , institutions and funds for their private benefit .
The challenges of corruption do not disappear with development : it only becomes more sophisticated .
So far , domestic efforts have not been effective in all Member States .
We should not ignore this reality ; we should recognise it .
We have reached the moment when the Commission and the Council must establish , as a matter of urgency , a solid anti-corruption mechanism in the Union and the Member States .
Any delay will hurt the interests of European citizens .
( SL ) Slovenia and Croatia are two neighbouring countries , nations which , for centuries , coexisted without any serious problems .
That is the case today , as well , and the majority of Slovenes are in favour of Croatia gaining membership of the European Union at the earliest possible opportunity .
After 18 years of negotiations , in 2009 , the two governments succeeded in resolving their border dispute and , in particular , the disagreement about the northern Adriatic sea border , which was an issue of legitimate concern for Slovenia .
An international arbitration agreement designed to solve this problem equitably was signed in Stockholm , in the presence of the Swedish Presidency .
The process of the agreement 's ratification has effectively entered its closing stages .
We , in Slovenia , still have to vote on this , in a referendum scheduled for 6 June this year .
I call on European political forces , especially the European People 's Party , to familiarise themselves with the campaign taking place in my country this month , and to contribute to a positive outcome , which will reinforce good neighbourly relations and enable the unstable Balkans to have a European future .
Mr President , the eurozone came extremely close to meltdown 10 days ago , but the European rescue package has given our common future a chance .
I believe the crisis has more to do with deep-rooted problems in some eurozone Member States than with speculators : Member States with fiscal indiscipline , inefficient labour markets and massive debts in the private sector .
To save the eurozone , we have to reform its governance .
Last week 's governance proposal from the European Commission contained some good ideas : for instance , much more emphasis on fiscal policy and a clear coordination in fiscal policies between Member States .
These proposals should also take into account a common programme of structural reforms .
In Spain last week , Mr Zapatero chose the austerity programme so that he could avoid the electorally riskier labour-market reform .
Finally , do not worry about the value of the euro : the common currency 's fall is good for the eurozone economy .
( FR ) Mr President , we in Parliament have been dismayed to learn of the creation of a working group tasked with discussing an ' advanced status ' for Tunisia .
Why are we dismayed ?
We are dismayed because not a day goes by without reports reaching us from that country illustrating the increase in threats and acts of intimidation against all those men and women who still dare to criticise the methods of that regime .
Without going back over the most recent results of the municipal elections - 90 % of the votes were in favour of those close to the seat of power - I shall cite a few examples .
On 6 May , the journalist , Zouhair Makhlouf , was arrested and manhandled by the police while on his way to a dinner with the former president of the Bar of Paris .
On 18 May , the journalist , Fahem Boukadous , will no doubt be sentenced to four years ' imprisonment .
What was his crime ?
To report on the social unrest in the Gafsa Basin and on the repression that followed it .
The lawyers Abderraouf Ayadi , Ayachi Hammami , Mohamed Abbou and Radhia Nasraoui are the victims of constant intimidation .
The Internet is increasingly being censored .
I shall give one example , Mr President , if I may : my blog is now censored ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , at present , practically every political debate on the economic and financial crisis is concerned only with how many billions of euro are required to plug the next black hole .
In general , these debates are still being conducted clinging onto the skirts of Mr Ackermann and co .
What we really need , however , is a fundamental debate on the current monetary system .
We should at long last be debating matters such as how to rid our system of its growth imperative .
What can we do to check the banks ' urge to provide credit ?
Should we abolish interest ?
How can we arrive at a distinction between value and monetary value ?
We should use money to create value for our society , not to create monetary value !
Before we are overtaken by events , we should use such a debate to attempt to reform the monetary system from inside .
This will only be possible , however , if we have strong and , above all , independent policies .
Mr President , as I am sure everyone is aware , we now have a new government in the United Kingdom , which we can call the Lib-Dem / Con coalition .
In the agreement reached between the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democratic Party , it says that : ' We agree that there shall be no further transfer of sovereignty or powers over the course of the next Parliament ' - i.e. to the European Union .
Of course , anyone who knows anything about this at all knows that there will not be any more transfers of sovereignty requiring a referendum because this has all been done under the Lisbon Treaty .
So there will be no need to ask the people of Britain , or of any other country in the Europe Union ; it will all happen anyway .
However , if Mr Cameron is really genuine about what he is saying , then he has a golden opportunity to actually keep to that pledge because , as my colleague , Trevor Coleman , pointed out a few weeks ago in this Chamber , the addition of new Members to the European Parliament means that the Lisbon Treaty will have to be re-ratified by all the Member States .
So , in Britain 's case , Mr Cameron now has a golden opportunity either not to re-ratify the treaty or to put it to a referendum of the British people .
Let us hope he keeps to his word and does that .
( SL ) Last Saturday saw the celebration , at the Belvedere Palace in Vienna , of the 55th Anniversary of the signing of the Austrian State Treaty .
This is , without a doubt , an important date in Austria 's history , as it effectively signified the establishment of Austria 's statehood and dignity .
Acting through its ambassador , the Slovene Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the Austrian Government on this occasion , or rather called its attention to the fact , that the provisions of the Austrian State Treaty concerning the rights of the Slovene minority in Austria have still to be implemented .
Bilingual road signs in Carinthia are still a taboo topic , so to speak , and the government in Vienna has time and again yielded to the extremist views of the Carinthian nationalists .
At the same time as congratulating the Austrians on this anniversary , I call on them to adopt a more amicable policy towards their minorities .
( FR ) Mr President , today , the International Day Against Homophobia , must be an opportunity for us to restate our commitment to universal respect for human rights throughout the world , at a time when provisions or practices involving discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity still exist in a number of countries .
We must also condemn even more strongly the increasing number of physical assaults and the repetition of homophobic statements .
The code of silence must end here .
Teaching tolerance is one part of the solution , because attitudes still need to change , including in our European countries .
We must not overlook the matter of teaching tolerance ; quite the contrary .
Lastly , European diplomacy must be harnessed to ensure that legislation decreeing that homosexuality is a crime is abolished in those countries in which it remains in force .
I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to launch an appeal in this regard to Baroness Ashton .
( BG ) Mr President , I wish to express my view on the comments made by certain fellow Members from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , who made unfounded attacks against the Bulgarian Government .
For the first time since the start of its post-Communist transition , Bulgaria has demonstrated political will , not only in words , but in actions , too , by combating corruption and organised crime .
The tangible results achieved in this respect are being applauded both by Bulgaria 's international partners and civil society within the country .
The support ratings for the prime minister and interior minister are 56 % and 60 % respectively .
However , the question remains as to why Bulgaria has lagged behind so much and is bottom in terms of living standards in the European Union .
The answer to this question still needs to be found in the self-seeking ambitions of the Communist elite from the late 1980s .
They have managed , during the 20-year transition period , using the repressive State Security system and its tentacles in the state economy of that period , to turn their political power into economic power too and hand it over to their sons and grandsons , as well as retain their agents in key ministries , banks and industrial sectors in the country .
The present government is combating the unregulated binding relationship between politics and economics , using every legal instrument permitted in a European constitutional state .
I would simply like to end by making an appeal to fellow Members in the S & D Group to learn from the experience of their fellow German Members regarding the successors of the former communist party in the GDR .
The BSP ( Bulgarian Socialist Party ) is the direct successor to the Communist Party in Bulgaria , in the same way as the Left Party in Germany .
The difficulties in forming a government in North Rhine-Westphalia highlight how current this issue is even at the moment in Europe .
( RO ) Last week , I paid a working visit to see the communities of seasonal workers in the Huelva region in southern Spain .
I saw some excellent things there and the Spanish authorities deserve to be congratulated on this .
However , there are also numerous problems related to legal and illegal immigration , to work contracts which need to be signed in future in the native language of those who will be going to work in foreign countries , not to mention a huge number of problems related to working and accommodation conditions .
I believe that the European Union directive concerning the seasonal workers scheme must reach Parliament as soon as possible so that we can deal with the problems in as helpful and efficient manner as possible .
( BG ) Mr President , on the evening of Thursday 14 May , I was handed in the town of Kardzhali in southern Bulgaria 54 000 signatures collected from citizens who want normal working conditions and strong local government .
This petition has been collected from the seven Kardzhali municipalities in just 10 days .
People support the fight against corruption at every level of government .
However , they are against the strong-arm methods and actions carried out for show , which are used by the executive to relieve courts and the prosecutor 's office of their duties , as well as curtail the authority of local government and repress it .
For example , the Mayor of Kardzhali himself has been investigated 138 times during the last year , 13 times alone for the same project .
More than 700 checks have been carried out on the 30 municipalities with DPS ( Movement for Rights and Freedoms ) mayors in less than a year , whereas municipalities with GERB ( Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria ) mayors have been spared such checks .
In addition , the provincial governor of Kardzhali did not even allow us to hand in the petition in the actual administrative building and we were forced to meet out in the open .
I made a commitment to inform Europe 's institutions about this civil protest .
Mr Kazak , you spoke too quickly for our interpreters .
It was not possible for them to interpret your speech precisely .
That concludes the item .
Equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity ( debate )
The next item is the report by Astrid Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity and repealing Directive 86 / 631 / EEC ( 17279 / 3 / 2009 - C7-0075 / 2010 - .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when circumstances dictate the need for exceptionally responsive policies , the subject on which I am going to speak to you shows that perseverance is also a virtue .
Since the early 1980s , I have been continually calling for a reform of the 1986 directive , because it did not achieve its main objective , which was to improve the status of assisting spouses in family businesses in the areas of social security and maternity protection .
By adopting my 1997 report , Parliament had already called for the amendment of that directive , the wording of which was too timid , even though the Council of Ministers had not even endorsed the more ambitious European Commission proposal of 1984 .
In spite of numerous reminders , the Commission needed a great deal of persuading up until October 2008 , when it finally proposed repealing the watered-down 1986 directive in order to replace it with a text with a more solid legal basis .
Parliament adopted its amendments at first reading on 4 May 2009 .
In order to improve the Commission proposal , we felt , in particular , that it should be mandatory for spouses and recognised partners to become members of the social protection scheme of self-employed workers so as to ensure , among other things , that they are personally entitled to an old age pension .
Indeed , if membership is voluntary , too many spouses tend to turn down the opportunity to create rights for themselves and find themselves - for example , after a divorce - without social protection , even if they have worked for decades in the family business and contributed to its prosperity .
Unfortunately , this principle of mandatory membership did not obtain a majority in the Council of Ministers .
What is more , the latter took nine months to come up with a common position .
It was finally issued by the Spanish Presidency , which has demonstrated exceptional tact and perseverance .
I should like to thank the Presidency and Mrs Reding 's staff , with whom I have been negotiating since January .
Thanks to their understanding and their diligence , we were able to reach an agreement with the Council that will enable the new directive to enter into force after our vote tomorrow .
Of course , we had to make concessions , but we have the satisfaction of having served the interests of self-employed workers well .
Accounting as they do for 16 % of the labour force , with a third of this percentage being women , they represent a considerable force in Europe .
Their spouses - women mainly - who actually help to run the family business , whether in the agricultural , craft trade , commercial or professional sector , are still too often , in some Member States , invisible workers who , if affiliated , would increase the activity rate and would also help to achieve the objectives of the 2020 strategy more quickly .
Since I have recalled the long and difficult birth of this directive , I must mention the progress made as regards maternity protection for self-employed women and the spouses of self-employed workers .
At their request , the new directive enables them to take 14 weeks ' leave .
As the German saying goes , Politik ist die Kunst des Erreichbaren , or politics is the art of the possible .
I know that there are some Members in this House - fortunately they are in the minority - who believe that self-employed workers and their spouses should sort out their social security for themselves .
I am very familiar with this argument , having heard it 20 , 30 years ago in my own country , when it was made compulsory for farmers ' spouses to join the agricultural pension fund .
Today , these people are happy .
I would also like to stress that the progress that I described upholds the principle of subsidiarity because it leaves the Member States free to decide how they arrange the social protection of spouses , in accordance with their national law , and whether they implement it on a mandatory or a voluntary basis .
As you can see , Madam President , I do not have the time to tell you here about everything else that I like in the directive , but you can see that we are still capable of producing European directives that serve the interests of Europeans , in the social sphere , and which even have the effect of reducing distortions of competition within the single market .
I am grateful to everyone , including my colleagues from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , who contributed to the directive .
( Applause )
Mrs Lulling , I did not want to interrupt you , but you are entitled to four minutes now and two minutes at the end .
You therefore have one minute left for the end .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am pleased to be here for Parliament 's debate on the draft recommendation put forward by Ms Lulling on the Commission 's proposal concerning application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women in self-employed activities .
Our proposal sends a strong signal that we cannot stand by while women fall into poverty through a lack of social protection .
It also takes a big step forward in terms of promoting female entrepreneurship .
I hardly need to stress the importance of both those points in the current situation .
I wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the rapporteur , Ms Lulling , to reach an agreement with the Spanish Presidency on this technically complex and politically sensitive matter .
The Commission fully supports the text which the committee approved by an overwhelming majority on 3 May , and I urge Parliament to do so too .
Adopting the text as it stands would send a clear message to the Council and pave the way for the final adoption of the proposal .
More importantly , this would make a real difference on the ground at a time when it is very much needed .
I would like to begin by thanking our fellow member , Astrid Lulling , for the long and systematic effort she has put into the amendment of this directive .
In connection with the submitted opinion , I would like to emphasise three points which I consider to be important .
In the European Union today , there is insufficient protection for self-employed women who are mothers , and there are insufficient improvements in the situation of spouses of self-employed people .
I trust that the adopted text will apply to all sectors and not just to agriculture .
The creation of favourable conditions for the development of family firms involves supporting small and medium-sized enterprises .
It involves creating a space for private initiative and new jobs .
One component of such an environment is social protection for those deciding to assist in the business activities of their spouses .
Their work is of just as much benefit to the economy as the work of an employee .
They therefore have the same right to social protection as the state accords to employees .
However , in looking for suitable mechanisms for this protection , we must fully respect the principle of subsidiarity .
The choice of instruments must remain in the hands of the Member States .
Finally , children need their mother more than anything else in the first months of life , regardless of whether they were born in France , Germany or Slovakia .
I trust that the newly-drafted directive on maternity leave will soon extend maternity benefits to 18 weeks for all working mothers without exception .
Thank you , Madam President .
I wish to express my thanks to the Commissioner , the representatives of the Council and , last but not least , to Mrs Lulling , with whom I have enjoyed excellent cooperation , and also to all my colleagues in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
In actual fact , we are at an important juncture in the European Union , which is going through a crisis , but this directive supports female entrepreneurship .
The European Union must develop and support entrepreneurship among women in order to help create jobs and guarantee equal opportunities on the labour market , especially at the current time .
I wish to say that we have supported within this proposal for a directive the position that self-employed women , spouses and life partners of self-employed workers who decide to have children should enjoy social protection and paid leave .
We support the need to ensure protection for workers ' spouses in order to remove the obstacles preventing entrepreneurship among women .
We also support the granting of clear powers to national bodies for promoting equal opportunities and treatment between men and women .
Breaks in their involvement in the labour market during maternity leave should not be a handicap to mothers .
In fact , Member States must find suitable means of support to help them maintain their professional role in society , with a view to balancing their family and working life .
At the same time , I welcome the importance of finding ways in which these mothers can become reintegrated into the business environment , thereby actively contributing to supporting their own family .
The enforcement and protection of economic , social and cultural rights and the improvement of both professional and family life are fundamental objectives which must be promoted by this new directive .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank Mrs Lulling for the endless hours she has spent achieving a good compromise and agreement with the Council .
Regardless of the variety of opinions on the individual key issues in the directive and bearing in mind that it is still being considered at second reading , I wish to confidently state that the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe concurs with the compromise decision reached so that this legislation can be introduced as quickly as possible by Member States .
Updating this legislation enables us to guarantee equal treatment for men and women , with particular attention focused on the issue of social protection , especially protection for self-employed women .
This new legislative framework will allow us to ensure the same degree of protection in both cases when women are self-employed and when they are only spouses and partners of self-employed workers .
As a result of this amendment to the directive , Member States will provide standard social security entitlements , including 14 weeks ' paid maternity leave for self-employed women and for the spouses or life partners of self-employed workers .
The amendment to the directive is a sufficiently current and positive decision which will give self-employed women and the spouses or life partners of self-employed workers the opportunity to enjoy the same social security entitlements as employees do .
The spouses and partners are not employees .
However , it must be taken into consideration that they usually assist the self-employed worker - a practice which is widespread in my country in the agricultural sector , in small firms and in the liberal professions .
This update to the legislation will allow Member States to decide and give self-employed women and spouses assisting self-employed workers the opportunity to join a social security scheme on a voluntary or mandatory basis .
This should guarantee equally well social protection and rights for women when they are employed in a family agricultural business .
Along with dealing with market risks , production and the financial crisis , they must also provide for the best scheme for their own social and health insurance .
This is the only way to improve in real terms the situation of both self-employed women and their spouses and of female life partners , mainly with regard to their social and economic protection , independent of that of their spouse and partner .
I believe that this comprehensive legislative text marks a small step which is , all the same , exceptionally important in terms of equal treatment for men and women .
This is the path towards achieving the strategic aim of equality of rights for men and women and towards the programme which we recently updated - Beijing + 15 Platform for Action .
By making this small , but vital step , I believe that we will continue progressing towards better reproductive health programmes , a general market for European health care and insurance services and towards maternity protection and a good quality of life , regardless of geographical , social , cultural and ethnic differences .
Moving in this direction provides us with the freedom to prioritise and with a helpful way of combining a career with family life , thereby establishing the sound , harmonious basis for sharing equality and responsibility between the sexes .
Madam President , I too should , naturally , like to congratulate Mrs Lulling , as well as all those members of the Council and the Commission who have worked on this directive .
Nonetheless , I should like to make the same point as Mrs Lulling .
I believe that it is a matter of concern that some Member States place so many obstacles in the way of the standardisation of non-discrimination and equal treatment at European level .
This is not the only occasion when we have witnessed this : we are also witnessing it in the case of the directive on multiple discrimination and equality of treatment in other domains , and I believe it is something which should give us pause for thought .
We cannot appeal to subsidiarity when we have such an important and basic issue , that of the clear , fundamental rights of everyone living in the European Union .
I believe that this can never be an excuse for allowing any person to suffer from discrimination inside the European Union .
I believe that the directive that is about to be adopted - and I hope it will be - will now resolve part of this problem .
I think that that is a good thing , that it is important .
It guarantees greater equality of treatment for those individuals who are currently seeking opportunities for self-employment and , logically , for their dependents too : the wives or husbands of these self-employed persons .
Nonetheless , there is another important issue , and this is something I think we need to stress .
Some have called increasing maternity leave to 14 weeks progress , and indeed it is .
However , let us not forget that there is another directive on the table which also highlights the need to extend this leave - and I insist that it is leave and not absence due to sickness - on the grounds of equality .
This also means necessarily that there cannot be discrimination , not just between Member States , but also between the types of activity that those who wish to apply for this leave wish to carry out .
Consequently , this need to ensure equal rights , as much between Member States as in relation to the type of activity and the type of social security coverage we have today , is - and I insist on this - a priority which goes beyond the directive which we about to adopt today .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , firstly , I would like to congratulate Ms Lulling on this report : she made a valiant effort .
When I first heard of this report , I wondered how it would work logistically .
The aim of the report is admirable and supports the principle of equal treatment for self-employed women and men workers and their spouses .
But then I thought how this report would be greeted by , for example , a self-employed sole trader , such as a plumber or an electrician .
For argument 's sake , let us say his wife would be helping him in the evenings with the paperwork and answering the phone from home .
How does the report fit in here ?
Would he be expected to pay social contributions to cover his spouse , thus enabling her to qualify for maternity leave if needed ?
Could this sole trader , who in today 's economic climate is struggling , afford to pay this indirect tax , and indeed would he and his wife want this extra burden ?
If they didn 't see it as a benefit , would they just not pay the contributions - after all , no one really knows she is helping her husband - and is this not what married people do , help each other ?
Then I took this scenario a step further : a few years down the line , they get divorced , as happens often enough , what happens then ?
This poor guy will be skinned in the courts by his wife for not paying the contributions .
Interesting times , and an interesting side-effect to our report .
The number of self-employed workers in the United Kingdom has risen to 1.7 million .
One reason for this rise is that employment opportunities are fewer these days , so people look towards starting their own work .
Should the state not , in these circumstances , support their effort ?
I have studied Ms Lulling 's amendments and feel that she has made a valiant effort to improve what was originally a heavy-handed report on self-employment .
However , I am still concerned about legislation in matters of employment being made in Brussels .
I believe that this work is best left to national governments , who are best geared to evaluate the needs of their citizens - as , indeed , the report says .
I support Ms Lulling 's recommendations that the national systems should recognise the importance of protecting self-employed workers , and we should stand against all forms of discrimination , but I am still not convinced that this House is best placed to work on employment matters .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission .
I would also like to give my sincere thanks to Mrs Lulling , as it is thanks to her great commitment and excellent work on this matter we have now reached the second reading .
We have an agreement on the right of those in self-employment and their life partners to equal treatment and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports the proposal .
The workforce that we are talking about is mostly made up of women and they have previously been invisible .
This necessary revision of the earlier directive removes the discrimination that had previously put the self-employed and their life partners at a disadvantage .
Women in self-employment and the partners of the self-employed clearly must be covered by the Member States ' social insurance systems .
Another important point in the directive that has been negotiated is that , in the event of a future directive on longer parental leave for employees , the Commission must inform Parliament and the Council in order to enable us to provide those in self-employment with equal rights to employees if appropriate .
I would also like to add that , in view of the EU 2020 strategy and the efforts to increase growth within the EU , discrimination against female entrepreneurs must cease .
They must also be entitled to parental leave and the ability to combine working life and family life - something that we discuss so often .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if any difference still exists between men and women in the employment market , we are only too well aware that this difference is even more marked among the self-employed .
In fact , women are too often forced to sacrifice their own career ambitions for the sake of taking on a role and a workload arising out of the absurd presumption of dedication to their families .
To resolve this problem , I believe we must implement measures - such as those contained in the directive we are discussing - whilst keeping our eyes firmly fixed on the family as our guiding star , as this is the only way that these measures will be meaningful and have a hope of success !
Freeing women from the agonising dilemma of choosing between the role of mother , wife , entrepreneur , means lightening the family workload and going straight to the heart of the matter , through specific positive measures to support the family .
Unless it puts the family at the centre , any package of measures will be a ragbag of strategies that will ultimately prove fruitless .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after 24 years , it is time to update and adapt the directive on the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity .
Two years after the Commission presented its proposal , the Spanish Presidency has now negotiated a workable and acceptable compromise with our rapporteur , Mrs Lulling .
Naturally , it is not everything we could have wished .
More regulation and more insurance obligations were a matter of debate .
We had to resolve the matter of how strict the constraints should be or can be as regards the necessary social protection for women in self-employment and , in particular , assisting spouses , most of whom are women .
If women are assisting in small and medium-sized enterprises , then they must at least have their own protection .
This must also come from the enterprises themselves , however .
As we know , self-employment represents an opportunity , but also a risk - particularly as regards the level of income , which often fluctuates .
However , it is not only by private means that the risk of basic social protection can be covered .
Each person in society should take responsibility for their own protection - to the best of their ability - in order not to become a burden on society and to be covered for all the situations that arise in life .
I am pleased that the proposal covers all those in self-employment and is not limited in scope to those engaged in farming .
The Member States can decide which path to take - whether they want to make this cover mandatory or voluntary .
That is subsidiarity .
The 14 weeks ' maternity leave for self-employed women is a good decision ; it will place these women on an equal footing with those in employment , and provides sufficient time for the healthy recovery of mother and child .
This new directive is a major step towards equality and represents an important reduction in risk for men and women who take on the challenge of self-employment .
I would like to thank everyone who contributed to it .

( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this directive on the equal treatment of men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity is of crucial importance , as it secures social conditions comparable to those of employed women for millions of European women who are self-employed , entrepreneurs or who assist their spouses .
The most important and key element of the directive is the right to a minimum of 14 weeks ' maternity leave .
The need to secure better conditions for self-employed women becomes apparent when we look at how few women , relatively speaking , currently become self-employed .
In the EU , only 8 % of the female workforce is self-employed , whereas the figure is 16 % for men .
We must motivate more women to become self-employed and , in this respect , the directive marks a step in the right direction .
Many women would like to become self-employed but lack the courage on account of the uncertain social conditions .
In my opinion , this directive should be viewed in the light of the important work on a general maternity directive being carried out by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Securing the right for all European women to take maternity leave without this diminishing their position in the labour market is a cornerstone of equality in Europe .
If we in the EU are to achieve our goal of ensuring the welfare of our citizens , we need to give the women of the EU a proper opportunity to take maternity leave .
If we in the EU are to achieve our goal of ensuring the welfare of our citizens we also need to increase the birth rate .
I hope that this directive will merely be the first of two steps to achieving this .
We are now ensuring that all European women have the right to maternity leave . The next step must be to provide paternity leave , too , so that we can ensure genuine equality .
( FI ) Madam President , first of all , I want to thank the rapporteur for what is an excellent compromise .
Recently , we in Europe have been speaking about competitiveness , especially within the framework of Europe 2020 , and how we could establish this sort of competitiveness , in particular , by increasing the number of small and mediumsized enterprises .
If we want to encourage entrepreneurship , these issues now being considered regarding the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity are of key importance and are a part of this debate .
We need to establish a genuine alternative with regard to entrepreneurship for people , both men and women .
Furthermore , there should be support for academic entrepreneurship , making it a component of study programmes .
In this respect , we are a long way behind the United States of America , among others .
When we speak of equality , we have to remember that one of the indicators that describe the situation with regard to equality is specifically the matter of entrepreneurship and the opportunities to be an entrepreneur , regardless of gender .
If we compare the figures in Europe , we find that most entrepreneurs are still actually men .
If we consider the matter of growth entrepreneurship and how we could support it , it grieves me to say that at the moment , the statistics show that the desire for growth among female entrepreneurs lags far behind that for men .
Of course , there are many reasons for these figures , but the fact remains that at present , the social security systems for entrepreneurs , for example , are so unsatisfactory that they pose challenges specifically for female entrepreneurs , as we have heard in this discussion .
Moreover , if we are to bring together issues of maternity , parenthood and entrepreneurship , it is going to take special action , because the work of a selfemployed person is often erratic in nature , the working day is long and one 's livelihood is uncertain .
This legislative text is an excellent step forward towards a more motivating and equal approach to entrepreneurship .
( PT ) Madam President , it is important that this process is drawing to a close , despite its limitations .
It is time to ensure that all women who work - including the millions of self-employed women , and the spouses and de facto partners of self-employed workers - have the same rights , notably in terms of maternity leave .
Although this directive is along the right lines , it does not go all the way in fighting discrimination and guaranteeing equal treatment .
It is a positive step , which we support .
However , we do not want to stop at 14 weeks of maternity leave , and we intend for the new directive on maternity and paternity leave to also apply to these situations in the future .
This , of course , will be an ongoing struggle , although we welcome the progress that has been made so far and congratulate the rapporteur on her dedication throughout the process as a whole .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today , the European Parliament is sending out a strong message to women who assist their spouses in their self-employed work .
From now on , their social rights will be considerably enhanced , and I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , on the work she has done .
Europe must protect .
Under the new definition of ' assisting spouse ' , spouses and partners will be eligible for social protection in the event of sickness or retirement .
Bakers ' spouses will now be able to benefit from social rights .
It is regrettable , however , that the Council did not agree to compulsory membership , but simply adopted the system of voluntary membership .
Maternity leave is also provided for all women .
The new text provides for a minimum period of maternity leave for self-employed women and wives of self-employed workers throughout the European Union .
The duration of this leave is currently set at 14 weeks .
I am the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the directive on the health and safety at work of pregnant workers .
I sincerely hope that , with the adoption of this text , the duration of maternity leave will be increased ; and why not subsequently increase it for self-employed women ?
To conclude , Europe has proposed some creative and pragmatic solutions to help couples to reconcile professional and family life .
It is now time to switch to taking action and to implement the proposals as quickly as possible .
Europe 's campaign to protect women is making headway with this text .
However , we MEPs must continue to eliminate the inequalities between men and women .
( PT ) Madam President , this directive needs to be reviewed urgently .
This report is important because it is going to resolve the unjust and discriminatory situation of self-employed workers and , at the same time , promote entrepreneurship amongst women .
From now on , self-employed women and the spouses and de facto partners of self-employed workers have the right to maternity pay , identical in duration and remuneration to that of salaried workers .
There is , however , a prerequisite to contribute to social security .
It is right and only fair that this should be the case , as salaried workers also make social security contributions .
It is also considered fundamentally fair that the right to maternity leave should not be reduced for the agricultural sector and that it should be extended to all self-employed workers who I recall represented 10.5 % of all workers in the European Union in 2007 .
This , I would say , is why it should apply to all self-employed workers , irrespective of their field of activity ; be it in the craft industry , in commerce , in the liberal professions or in small and medium-sized enterprises .
We have to promote equality , so I hope that the European Parliament will adopt the proposals that have already been adopted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
( PL ) Adoption of the current measures is very important from the economic and social point of view , but also because of the values represented by protection of the family and equal opportunities .
The current crisis and the rise in unemployment it has caused are affecting weaker groups in particular .
One of these groups are women .
Therefore , legal measures which provide for an equal position for the self-employed will make it easier for women to start up in business on their own .
This is important , therefore , in view of the need to speed up economic development in Europe and reduce unemployment , but it is also important because increasing numbers of women are deciding to start up on their own .
It is they who make the decisions , they who are in charge of their own firms , they who decide what to do and how to spend the money and they should not suffer discrimination .
Small businesses are , therefore , a place where women can fulfil their ambitions - women who want to be professionally active but who do not want to give up their family life .
Indeed , these measures will also allow Member States which are thinking seriously about family policy to take the opportunity to improve their own legislation .
I would also like to draw attention to a certain group which requires further protection and needs us to give consideration to its situation .
I am talking about women who work in the home .
Working in the home is not treated as work , although in fact , this involves the performance of around 200 tasks every day .
Women working in the home are often not protected by retirement pension or health care arrangements and are not entitled to any holidays .
In relation to this , I think regulations should be brought into force which will make it easier for these women to benefit from all forms of social protection .
( ES ) Madam President , I just wanted to reiterate my thanks both to Mrs Lulling and the Spanish Presidency .
To Mrs Lulling for her persistence , tenacity and hard work in getting to the point we are at today , and to the Spanish Presidency for allowing different and opposing points of view to be expressed within the Council , which has allowed us to have this agreement on the table today .
In this debate , we are confronted with the amendment to Directive 86 / 613 / EEC , which has clearly indicated that it does not comply with the objectives set for it .
I think that it is essential to highlight the crucial importance of this agreement at a time of crisis and uncertainty in Europe , a time which has not hindered progress regarding the social protection of female , self-employed workers in the Union .
I should like to remind you that in 2007 , more than 10 % of workers in the European Union were self-employed .
The agreement we have reached may not be the best solution , but it does provide the opportunity for further progress to be made in the future .
The main objective of this directive is for social protection to be extended to the partners of all self-employed workers , including unmarried couples , and for all self-employed workers or self-employed couples to be covered by social security , which is not offered today by all Member States .
At this time , we are actively engaged in the design of the EU 2020 strategy where we shall define the future of the European model .
This future cannot neglect the principle of equality of treatment , and it is therefore essential to move forward with the type of measure that guarantees this principle .
My hope is that the step we take today , with the adoption of this proposal , is the first of many future ones .
( PL ) I am delighted at the near unanimous adoption of Mrs Lulling 's report by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
The report concerns the introduction of amendments to the directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment between women and men engaged in activity in a self-employed capacity .
It is very important that a compromise has been reached and an improvement made to the situation of self-employed people , who make up about 10 % of all people in the labour market .
Among the amendments introduced , the most important is the possibility for self-employed people and their spouses or life partners to receive social benefits , including , most importantly , the possibility to pay contributions towards their own retirement pension , and also to have paid maternity leave analogous to that which is given to women who work for an employer .
These entitlements are to be provided for by legislation at EU level .
They are measures which will not only help to improve the situation of women , but will also reduce the significant inequalities that exist between the self-employed and people who work for an employer .
Millions of people who work in family businesses will at last gain the ability to benefit from voluntary social protection based on affiliation to a system of social insurance , without which they have been in a worse situation .
This is an important step forward , all the more so because the compromise reached this year had , for many years , been impossible to achieve .
I encourage all fellow Members to endorse this report .
I would like , at this point , to thank Mrs Lulling very sincerely , because thanks to this report , many self-employed women will find life easier .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with this excellent report by Mrs Lulling , the European Parliament is trying to reduce still further the differences in treatment between men and women in the workplace , and I welcome this move .
It is another step on what is still a very long road .
Indeed , I believe it is vital to stress the importance of social protection for the assisting spouses or recognised life partners of self-employed workers .
Let us not forget that , in many European countries , assisting spouses still do not have a status in their own right , that their work is not recognised , and that they are not covered by social security for self-employed workers .
We are in the year 2010 , and women in some Member States are still suffering a lack of recognition of their rights and are entirely dependent on their spouse 's insurance .
In these times of economic crisis , we cannot allow these assisting spouses to depend on a system that could plunge them into poverty , from one day to the next , in the event of divorce or separation , for example .
That is why we cannot agree to the possibility of Member States maintaining national provisions limiting access to specific social protection schemes or to a certain level of funding .
Assisting spouses must be covered as regards pensions , family allowance , health care , incapacity benefit and maternity benefits .
Lastly , at this stage in the negotiations , it is the Member States that will decide whether this social protection should be implemented on a mandatory or voluntary basis .
That is why I strongly urge all the Member States to do their utmost to ensure that this protection is mandatory .
We must all combat job insecurity and the failure to recognise rights , especially in times of economic crisis .
( CS ) I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur , Astrid Lulling , for the work she has done .
I also share her view - as do other Members - that the greater maternity protection for self-employed women and the improvements for spouses of self-employed people should not be limited by this directive just to people working in agriculture , but must , of course , also apply to other areas , including the liberal professions .
Assisting spouses do not have their own legal statute everywhere , so their work is not always recognised and they do not have independent social security arrangements .
It is absolutely necessary to recognise their professional status and to define their rights .
I am pleased that the Council has recognised Parliament 's opinion from the first reading that maternity payments should make it possible to take a break of at least three months , the minimum necessary for a normal course of pregnancy and for the physical recuperation of the mother after a normal birth , although for the healthy development of the child , it is optimal to have at least two years of individual care at home .
I am sorry that the Council does not regard these three months as the absolute minimum standard that the Member States ' social systems should provide automatically , and that only additional payments could be provided on a voluntary basis .
( EL ) Madam President , I , too , would like to endorse and welcome the present compromise , because it raises the question of democratic deficits which women in particular have had to face for years , when they help their self-employed husbands in trade , in handicrafts , in small and medium-sized enterprises and in the liberal professions , without any recognition over the years for their work .
Self-employed persons and their partners , the majority of whom are women , have rights .
They are not invisible workers ; they have rights to social security , to health care , to a pension , to maternity leave , to parental leave and to paternity leave .
Women have sacrificed themselves for years for their husbands , for their professional development , for their children and their family , by providing cheap , unpaid labour .
Often , after divorce or the death of their husband , they are left with no insurance , with no benefits or compensation .
The present compromise addresses some of the existing inequalities .
However , the need is indisputably looming for further support for women , to promote the equality of female entrepreneurship , especially at a time of economic crisis and when the European Union is defining its policy for tomorrow , for the European Union in 2020 .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much for allowing me to speak on this subject .
Around 30 % of all those in self-employment in the EU are women .
They are particularly highly represented in small and medium-sized enterprises , especially in the service sector , and , in this capacity , make a significant economic contribution to our society .
These women should be given the same opportunities as their male colleagues without having to resort to quotas and the like .
Self-employed women often have to grapple with the problem that becoming a mother could endanger their livelihood .
In view of the increasingly ageing population , it is now more important than ever to ensure effective maternity provision and to give priority to families .
Family firms where the women assist in the business also play an important part - whether in the professions , in the trades , in retail or particularly in farming .
In all these areas , it is necessary to ensure appropriate social and legal protection .
Nonetheless , the Member States should always retain competence in respect of social legislation and this should never be transferred to the EU .
It is a matter of using compromises and options to take into account divergent social policy traditions , such as whether to make insurance for assisting spouses mandatory or voluntary .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to join in congratulating Mrs Lulling .
I welcome the fact that this report takes a further step towards realising the principle of equal treatment of men and women , including in the area of self-employment .
One important cornerstone - and quite rightly so - is that it covers not just spouses , but also life partners .
At long last , assisting partners can enjoy an equal level of social protection , and this also applies to maternity provision .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , should very much like to congratulate Mrs Lulling .
It gives women in particular completely new opportunities in the area of self-employment in small and medium-sized enterprises .
In a time of crisis such as this , we should bear in mind that self-employment is fit for the future , that new jobs can be created here , and that it also allows us to develop completely new sectors .
We have developed Girls ' Day , for example , to encourage young women to take up technical occupations , because it is in these technical occupations that brand new opportunities are arising and in our present society , people are not really aware of the full spectrum of occupations available to women .
Finally , it is also women who , time and again , ensure stability in the area of finances .
I believe that in times of crisis , it is particularly important to ensure that the equity and venture capital in enterprises can be exploited equally by women .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , today we have made progress in the fight against poverty and for the promotion of female self-employment .
This is not the end of the process , but it is a huge step forward .
Subject to the Council 's endorsement , for the first time ever , self-employed women will have the right to maternity leave .
The Member States will also have a clear obligation to grant social protection to assisting spouses , on request .
I want to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , and Parliament as a whole , for all the work that has been done to achieve this success .
Lastly , I want to say a word on Ms Lulling who , for many years , has fought personally for this issue .
That fight has now been won , and I am deeply grateful for her commitment , which has led to this remarkable achievement .
Madam President , I would first like to thank Mr Oettinger for representing his colleague , Mrs Reding , in such excellent English .
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am satisfied .
I am grateful to all the Members who took the floor because they support the position held by the overwhelming majority of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , which will enable this text to be adopted tomorrow .
I should like to reassure Mr Romeva i Rueda .
This text is not perfect .
It still falls short of my requirements .
We have not yet won the war , but we have won an important battle .
This is a step in the right direction .
I should also like to say to Mr Romeva i Rueda and Mrs Figueiredo that they should not worry about maternity protection ; what they want is provided for in Recital 17a .
Read it ; I do not have the time to read it out .
There is just one amendment .
Were we to vote for it , it would not be possible to adopt the directive under the Spanish Presidency , and we would risk losing months , if not years , and all for nothing , because - I should like to reassure the authors - what they are proposing in their amendment is proposed , in different terms , in Amendment 4 , which was adopted at first reading and taken up in its entirety by the Council .
I therefore believe that these Members could , in good conscience , vote for the other amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 18 May 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The directive on equal treatment for self-employed men and women has the aim of unifying the applicable European legislation and replacing a number of directives which address this policy on a piecemeal basis .
Social conditions for self-employed people and employed people vary widely in the Member States , and social security provision in the event of long-term or permanent exclusion from work is practically non-existent in some cases .
Self-employed people often do not have sickness insurance .
They work when they are sick , because it is financially more advantageous .
Women return to work after giving birth , and do not take maternity leave .
Assisting spouses do not have their own social security arrangements .
Self-employed people are essential to the functioning of the economy and they have an irreplaceable role in society .
These people provide for themselves and their families financially , pay taxes into state coffers and pay social and health insurance .
The state does not have to contribute to their maintenance .
Their role is particularly irreplaceable in regions where , for various reasons , there is a shortage of jobs with so-called ' large ' employers , and also in agriculture .
It is therefore necessary to unify minimum standards that will help ensure an equal status for self-employed people as compared with employed people , and equality between self-employed men and women .
The aim should be greater protection during maternity , recognition of leave for the purposes of caring for family members and recognition of the contribution of an assisting spouse .
in writing . - The proposal we are debating this week is not a technical one .
It 's a matter of justice and common sense - in two ways .
It 's not only morally , but also economically clear that we need to grant the social protection and the maternity benefits to pregnant self-employed women and self-employed men 's pregnant spouses or life partners .
We cannot discriminate against those women or the partners of those men who chose to dedicate themselves to this type of work , especially when we all agree that we do need to encourage more women to enter the world of business .
While we are trying to find our way out of the crisis , we encourage creation of work , including that of independent workers .
This is also why we need to make sure that there is an incentive for women to start such work opportunities .
Secondly , we cannot discriminate against the new-born children in these families .
It is unacceptable when a child has the right to have her mother or father around ( without jeopardising the living of the family ) for the first weeks of his or her life , because the parent is classically employed , while the other child hasn 't got this right , because the parent is self-employed .
Energy performance of buildings ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Silvia-Adriana Ţicău , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the Council 's position at first reading for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the energy performance of buildings ( recast ) ( 05386 / 3 / 2010 - C7-0095 / 2010 - .
In 2008 , the EU undertook to cut energy consumption by 20 % , as well as to ensure that 20 % of the energy consumed comes from renewable sources by 2020 .
As part of the European Council meeting held on 25 and 26 March 2010 , European Union leaders set a common target of a 20 % increase in energy efficiency by 2020 .
Buildings are responsible for 40 % of the total consumption of energy , as well as for 35 % of polluting emissions .
Improving the energy performance of buildings will have a major impact on European citizens ' lives .
Across the EU , families spend , on average , 33 % of their incomes on water , electricity , gas and maintenance .
In fact , this figure can even reach 54 % in the case of families with very low incomes .
Investments in improving energy efficiency will result not only in lower energy bills , but also in creating 2.7 million jobs in the EU by 2030 .
In November 2008 , the Commission tabled a legislative proposal for reforming Directive 91 / 2002 concerning the energy performance of buildings .
In April 2009 , the European Parliament adopted by a huge majority its position at first reading as part of the codecision procedure .
Subsequently , Parliament and the Council conducted intense negotiations during the Swedish Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
In November 2009 , a political agreement was reached on the technical aspects of the legislative proposal .
This agreement has the following main achievements .
A separate article was introduced , along with several recitals and provisions concerning funding-related aspects .
The Commission must identify the existing financial instruments and fiscal measures and table new proposals by 30 June 2011 .
These provisions are also supplemented by a declaration from the Commission .
All new buildings must have a net energy consumption of close to zero by 31 December 2020 , while the majority of energy must also come from renewable sources .
This deadline has been brought forward by two years for the public sector .
In the case of buildings with a net energy consumption close to zero , Member States will set clear objectives and devise action plans , which will also feature support measures .
The energy performance of buildings which undergo major renovation or of the renovated parts of these buildings must meet the minimum energy performance requirements also applicable to the buildings ' technical systems and components which have a significant impact on the building 's energy performance .
New provisions about certificates were introduced .
A minimum amount of information must be specified in a certificate , including funding options .
Provisions were introduced on issuing and displaying energy performance certificates .
The energy performance indicator from the building 's energy performance certificate must be included in adverts for selling or renting the building or part of it .
There must be more information provided and greater transparency regarding the accreditation and training of experts and the provision of information to owners and tenants .
Consultations must be held with the local authorities and they must provide support in enforcing recommendations , introducing new provisions aimed at local town planners and architects to ensure the buildings ' energy efficiency is taken into consideration .
Smart metering systems and active control systems have been introduced , such as automation , control and monitoring systems designed to save energy .
No common methodology will be devised but , by 30 June 2011 , the Commission will produce a comparative methodology framework for calculating the optimum level in terms of costs and minimum energy performance requirements .
The directive will be reviewed by 1 January 2017 .
The Council 's common position is based on the agreement signed in November 2009 between the European Parliament and Council .
This is why I recommend its adoption .
Mr President , honourable Members , it is rare in politics to have an opportunity to present proposals and measures as a win-win situation .
Today , we have just such an opportunity : the forthcoming adoption of the recast version of the directive on the energy performance of buildings .
Buildings are responsible for 40 % of energy consumption and for 36 % of carbon dioxide emissions in the EU .
Implementing economic measures to reduce energy consumption in the residential sector can make a significant contribution towards achieving our 2020 goals for greenhouse gas reductions and energy saving .
In so doing , we will , at the same time , bolster our energy security and create growth and jobs in the construction industry .
The recast directive on the energy performance of buildings will also encourage a raising of standards in the national codes on energy efficiency in house building and will help consumers to reduce their utility bills .
Energy efficiency is the cheapest way to combat climate change .
I would like to highlight three elements of the recast directive which , from our point of view , represent substantial progress compared with the situation to date .
Firstly , national requirements of new builds and renovations will result in buildings that save considerably more energy .
This directive also covers small buildings with a useable area of less than 1 000 m ² as well as minor energy-relevant renovation work , and also the replacement of boilers and windows .
Secondly , the recast version means our citizens will be provided with better information .
Homeowners and tenants will be well-informed , with specific details of the energy consumption and potential energy savings of a building .
This should provide an incentive to the market to realise low-energy houses and carry out renovations on a broad front .
Thirdly , with effect from 2020 , all new builds must meet the extremely stringent near-zero energy building standard .
In addition , Member States should draw up national action plans to raise the standard of existing buildings closer to the level of near-zero energy buildings .
For all these reasons , the new directive is a successful achievement of European energy policy .
I would like to thank the Members of Parliament and you , Mrs Ţicău , for your good cooperation in recent months and also for the unusually quick adoption of the directive .
You have already emphasised that the recast version will only be able to realise its full energy-saving potential if it is transposed effectively and quickly and if there are also supporting instruments .
To this end , we need to make better use of existing financing instruments , such as the European Regional Development Fund , which allows 4 % of the budget to be used for energy efficiency measures - an opportunity that has barely been utilised by the Member States to date .
In addition , we would like to provide the Member States with financial support for their efforts to transform the building stock .
We are currently preparing - as announced previously in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy - the reallocation of at least EUR 150 million of unused funds from the European Economic Recovery Plan for projects in the area of renewable energy and energy efficiency .
I am sure that Parliament 's support today represents an important step .
I would like to thank you all for your good cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Ţicău , I would like to congratulate you on this report .
I believe it to be a great step in the right direction .
There are more than 160 million buildings in Europe , and these buildings need to be renovated in respect of their thermal efficiency in order to minimise energy consumption , thereby bringing about a corresponding reduction in overall energy consumption .
Forty per cent of energy is used for heating and cooling buildings .
We hope that renovation measures will allow us to achieve our goal of a 5 % reduction in total energy consumption by 2020 .
However , we are also concerned with creating new jobs .
There is no doubt that we need new training schemes for the tradesmen who will not only be renovating these existing buildings , but also building new ones .
We need small and medium-sized enterprises that specialise in this segment and we must make it possible for them to make a profit in this area and to pay higher net wages .
I believe that is the best way out of the crisis , because not only will it , of course , raise new tax revenue but , moreover , energy from fossil fuels will be replaced by renewable energy - thereby reducing fossil fuel consumption .
I believe that substituting fossil fuels in consumption and production is the way ahead and naturally will also result in a noticeable reduction in household expenses .
I also believe that these investments will pay off and that we should not continue with the levels of consumption that we have seen in recent decades .
We should take this opportunity to start investing again .
Investment is particularly essential in times of crisis , to enable us to overcome the crisis - and overcome it with as little bureaucracy as possible .
First of all , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Silvia Ţicău , for the immense work she has done in preparing this important report .
In my opinion , the agreement reached with the Council is very ambitious and represents a new qualitative leap throughout the entire sector .
Therefore , it is now very important for Member States to implement the provisions of the directive properly and on time .
The issue of the energy consumption of buildings is particularly relevant in the overall context of the internal energy market .
The buildings sector in the European Union is one of the sectors with the most opportunities for energy saving .
That is particularly true for the populations of the new European Union Member States , because those countries have the largest number of old and energy inefficient residential buildings , while inhabitants living in them and on the very lowest incomes are forced to pay the most for communal services .
The movement towards nearly zero energy cost in buildings means that the bar has been raised even higher for builders than hitherto planned when discussing passive house technologies .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to repeat that this is really very important and very ambitious , and hopefully it will also be put into practice .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mrs Ţicău , who has worked with tremendous dedication on this dossier .
We have had a big delay because of the legal adjustments that were necessary because of the Lisbon Treaty , and that has meant that there has been a lot more CO2 emitted than would have been if we had been able to do this sooner .
In this long gestation , it is easy to forget that some of the things in this recast were actually considered quite radical when they were first raised . In particular , the dropping of the 1 000 m2 threshold which was proposed initially by Parliament in its report on the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency , and also the step of bringing in near-zero energy buildings by 2021 .
Unfortunately , this new requirement for new buildings will not help us with the 20-20-20 targets , especially because , increasingly , we realise that we need to be looking at at least a 30 % greenhouse gas emission reduction .
To have any effect on meeting our climate change targets , it is existing buildings that we need to concentrate on and the energy efficiency requirements there .
I would suggest three key actions that we need to see in place if we are going to realise the potential for energy saving in existing buildings .
Firstly , it is very important that the Commission comes forward with a robust cost-optimal methodology for renovation .
The timetable is quite tight , but necessarily so because so much time has already been wasted , and it is going to be 2014 before the cost-optimal methodology will apply .
Secondly , all Member States need to consider adopting national annual targets for improving a certain percentage of their existing buildings .
If we had a European ' binding ' target on energy efficiency , I am sure that we would see that kind of action being taken in Member States very quickly , because they would realise that one of the easiest ways to achieve an energy efficiency target is by systematically upgrading existing buildings .
Thirdly , and vitally , Member States need to put in place upfront funding for energy-efficiency improvements and , despite all the work of the rapporteur and the shadows ' best efforts , we did not get as far on this in the recast as we would have wished from Parliament 's point of view .
Therefore , it is particularly important that we now get money for energy efficiency into the economic recovery programme , and I hope the Commission will not delay with its proposal on this .
Finally , given the comments made in the state-of-play document about the weakness of implementation of energy-efficiency legislation in the past , I would ask the Commission whether it can ensure that this directive is implemented fully and on time .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many congratulations to Mrs Ţicău and the whole team of shadow reporters .
This directive would not have turned out so successfully without a strong European Parliament .
In my two and a half minutes , I will talk less about the directive and more about what needs to be done in the future to deal with the weaknesses of the directive , particularly as regards the existing building stock .
What could be more appropriate at a time of crisis than to improve the way Europe 's resources are exploited and increase energy productivity ?
What we really need now from the Commission is a European buildings initiative with four central pillars .
Firstly , assistance for national governments with transposing the directive .
The last directive was not properly transposed .
In your Directorate-General , Mr Oettinger , you have one full-time official - and he will be leaving in July .
How are you going to ensure - in terms of personnel , among other things - that the directive is correctly transposed ?
Secondly , as you have mentioned , financing models .
What can be done in the Commission to improve the way that resources from the European Regional Development Fund are used for buildings ?
Perhaps you could give us a few details regarding the funds left over from the European Economic Recovery Plan that you mentioned .
Thirdly , we need greater labour productivity in construction , and for that we need more training .
Better trained workers will increase productivity , but naturally , will also raise issues in respect of the prevailing working and pay conditions in the European construction industry .
Consequently , we would also need an initiative from the Commission for social dialogue at European level between the construction industry and the trade unions .
Finally , in the area of research and development , there urgently needs to be a greater focus on buildings , on the building of low-cost net zero energy or near-zero energy housing and - most importantly of all - new ways of organising building renovation .
We will only be able to build or renovate more cheaply if the entire renovation process is better designed .
This is another area in which European research funds could be used to provide real and substantial assistance to both the national governments and the construction industry .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would also like to start by thanking Ms Ţicău and the other rapporteurs for the way that this directive has been negotiated .
It has been with great warmth amongst the groups and it is very encouraging to hear that the debate on the next steps has already started .
I do welcome this report .
As many have mentioned , 40 % of our energy is consumed in buildings .
We need more sustainable living , not only because of the carbon challenge but also because of the concerns we all share about rising energy prices and energy security .
Some Member States are already much more ambitious in their national codes for energy efficiency , and I hope that this directive will encourage others to follow suit .
Energy performance certificates help to raise awareness of where energy and costs can be saved , and encouraging new buildings and newly refurbished buildings to have smart meters give consumers more control over their energy-related decisions .
This is all good progress .
This recast was born because the original directive was being poorly implemented .
Going forward , Parliament and the Commission must always keep an eye on how Member States are implementing this one .
The Commission must help : please , facilitate the transfer of best practice among Member States and also ensure that minimum energy-performance standards are compatible whilst reflecting regional differences .
We all know that , to rise to the challenge of energy saving , it is important that consumers both in the public and private sectors acknowledge and see the benefits which directly engaging with energy-saving initiatives can bring both in environmental and economic terms , but I will give you a warning because there has been an example in my own Member State of gold-plating the directive , particularly in the requirements for energy performance certificates in public buildings , and this has added , in some cases , extra bureaucratic costs with little perceived energy saving and led to a loss of public support ; that is regrettable .
As a final point , all those who fear that the EU is facing an identity crisis at the moment should take heart from this report .
There has been a unity of purpose and conviction from the beginning of my involvement - and I know that that goes back many years before I joined this Parliament last summer .
Let us heed the lesson that the EU is strongest when we focus on core areas where value can be achieved by working together in a common interest .
Mr President , I would also like to begin by congratulating Mrs Ţicău on all the hard work and dedication she has put into such a significant report , and on the work that she has done towards improving the energy performance of buildings and in support of a more sustainable Europe .
As we know , energy use in the European Union is well above acceptable levels , and that is why it is so important to move forward with proposals of this nature .
It is high time that we had a policy that is ambitious in European terms , and that we added further measures to this ambitious policy , especially amidst the crisis situation that we are experiencing .
The construction sector is considered one of the sectors or markets with the greatest potential in terms of energy savings and other matters , which is why it is the sector of excellence for supporting public policies .
I would like to finish on this , Mr President .
We therefore anticipate taking advantage of the opportunity that is being given to invest in improving the energy efficiency of buildings and the potential to create millions of jobs in the next few years .
Moreover , it is not just about new buildings , but also the restoration and refurbishment of existing buildings that have deteriorated or become derelict .
So let us take the opportunity to use this legislation as an essential contribution to reviving the European economy ; we must start making the most of investment , which can and must be strategic , to recover from the crisis .
Let us also hope that there is investment from the Commission and that the Member States know how to make the most of it .
First , I would like to say how pleased I am that the European Union has seen the potential for significant energy savings in the way that buildings are operated .
Energy savings can be achieved relatively rapidly and efficiently by improving the heat insulation capabilities of building envelopes , even with the additional heating of older buildings .
However , heat losses related to the heating of buildings do not represent the only waste of energy in buildings .
From the perspective of energy consumption , water heating for personal hygiene and air-conditioning in enclosed spaces are a significant item in developed societies .
In these areas , however , energy saving methods will be rather more difficult and more complicated .
They will involve improving the efficiency of relatively complicated , sophisticated systems securing the regulation and exchange of energy between different media in the building itself .
Since most buildings are , from the perspective of unification , unique entities , the internal energy regime of every building must also be adequately planned and implemented on a more or less individual basis for the workplace or household in question .
Our objectives must therefore include a significant expansion of claims in relation to the complexity and difficulty of engineering and planning work aimed at correctly specifying intelligent energy solutions for individual buildings .
We must therefore , Commissioner , also look for ways to encourage people working in this area to become better trained .
Personally , I will be delighted if the aims of this directive are well implemented .
However , I think that will be difficult in some areas .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the construction sector is responsible for 40 % of the EU 's energy consumption and 35 % of its emissions .
This legislation stipulates that by 2020 , new buildings must be nearly zero energy and that renovated existing buildings must meet minimum energy performance requirements .
This legislation will therefore contribute to reduced energy dependency in Europe , decreased CO2 emissions , improved internal and external air quality , and increased well-being in cities .
The incentive to improve the energy performance of buildings also signifies a chance to reclassify our cities , contributing to tourism , job creation and sustainable economic growth in the EU .
However , reclassification requires increased public and private investment .
We are talking about direct public investment , with an immediate effect on job creation and the involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises .
A programme involving the reclassification of our cities will be a safe one that is well suited to our economic recovery .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Member States to use the Structural Funds to reclassify buildings in environmental and energy terms , with this financing used as a catalyst for private funding .
I also call on them to work together to find the appropriate financing model for renovating existing buildings .
( ET ) Mrs Ţicău 's report is one of the most significant energy and climate policy instruments that we have adopted in recent years .
I would like to offer my congratulations to everyone who was involved with this report , but particularly to the rapporteur , Mrs Ţicău .
I will not repeat what has been said before , but I will focus on two points .
First , the directive offers many new business opportunities to entrepreneurs .
In addition to new technologies for improving the energy efficiency of buildings , in the future , there will also be increased demand for environmentally friendly building materials , a reduction in the consumption of materials and waste in the building sector , the recycling of building waste , and the development of intelligent houses .
Therefore , European entrepreneurs , in cooperation with the European Union and the Member States , should invest today in technologies which will reduce the large effect that buildings have on the environment , because at the moment , buildings consume around 40 % of the European Union 's energy , emit 38 % of the European Union 's CO2 emissions and , in addition to this , the building sector is the most resource-heavy sector of the economy in the European Union .
Second , the directive offers only a partial answer to the question of who will pay for all this .
For example , the directive contains proposals saying that the European Commission should direct more of the resources in the European Union Structural Funds into financing the energy efficiency of buildings .
I consider it extremely important , when revising the current financial perspective , not to let the opportunity slip and to find resources to increase financing for the energy efficiency of buildings .
Energy saving is the cheapest way of producing energy , so let us use it .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the positive progress that this directive represents in the face of the urgent need to combat climate change .
2010 is the year of the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
The European Partnership for Energy and the Environment ( EPEE ) estimates that between 50 and 125 million Europeans suffer from energy poverty .
However , this new legislation concerns only new buildings and will affect only 2.7 million new homes per year , when there are 200 million old homes in the European Union .
The fact is , at least 150 million homes will have to be renovated by 2050 in order to attain factor 4 .
Commissioner , since 2007 , 4 % of the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) has been set aside to improve the energy performance of buildings , but has been used only to a very limited extent .
How , then , are you going to put pressure on the Member States to really use these funds , because if they go unused , they are liable to disappear from 2013 , when some of them will actually have to be increased ?
( LT ) As many of you have mentioned , energy saving is the most economical way to ensure energy security and limit the amount of carbon dioxide emissions .
I would also like to congratulate all of our colleagues , above all , the rapporteur and all our other fellow Members , for this successful review of the directive .
This area , the buildings sector , has great unused potential , not just in the area of energy saving , but in the creation of new jobs and the implementation of new technologies as well .
For example , in my country of Lithuania , over 80 % of the buildings were built more than 20 years ago and they are very uneconomical .
Therefore , the review of this directive on the energy performance of buildings is really very timely and necessary during the current crisis .
The agreement reached with the Council on the wording of the new directive is well balanced and fully reflects the principle of subsidiarity .
The directive provides for minimum requirements for buildings , both new and renovated , and will create suitable conditions to optimise the consumption of energy resources and save inhabitants ' and the state 's money .
At the same time , more stringent rules on building certification and the provision of information will encourage inhabitants to change their consumption habits .
Mr President , although it has been said several times , I would still like to underline again that the success of the directive will depend on its speedy implementation in the Member States .
To that end , provision must be made for effective financial support measures both at Member State and EU level .
Energy efficiency , one of the European Union 's priorities , should also become a policy priority for all Member States .
( RO ) The Energy Performance of Buildings Directive will have a direct influence on the new types of investment made in the construction sector .
Investment in new technologies , which will be aimed at cutting energy consumption , will have a significant impact on the national and regional labour market and improve the European Union 's energy security .
Financial instruments are required .
Europe 's citizens cannot bear the costs alone for modernising energy systems .
The maximum amount of resources which can be allocated for this from the European Regional Development Fund is not sufficient and must be increased to the highest possible level .
The Commission must provide additional support by setting up the Energy Efficiency Fund by 2014 , which could be cofinanced by the European Union , the European Investment Bank and Member States .
I encourage the European Commission to continue with the development of the Smart Cities Initiative and to examine the current mechanisms being used in Member States to spread best practice in the European Union and the exchange of knowledge and technical assistance in order to generate new financial resources for improving energy efficiency in housing .
( HU ) I congratulate Mrs Ţicău on her report and on the directive .
However , this directive is not worth the paper it is written on if there is no money for it .
I wish to draw Commissioner Oettinger 's attention to the fact that funding sources must be guaranteed in the budget for the period after 2013 and in the Cohesion Funds .
It is clear that in addition to European Union sources , we need funds from Member States , private capital and contributions from the population , in other words , a distinctive form of cofinancing .
Mr Marinescu has already mentioned that we need to identify the sorts of cutting-edge practices that certain Member States have introduced using direct subsidies , credit facilities or other methods .
In Hungary , 250 000 tower block apartments were renovated , since the condition of the old ones in the new Member States , as my Estonian and Latvian fellow members have already mentioned , is particularly dire .
In my view , this building renovation programme must be continued and extended to the poor inhabitants of rural areas as well , as my fellow Member from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has also stated .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , there are a few things that I think we should bear in mind in the forthcoming debate .
Firstly , the potential for energy savings in residential buildings in the coming years is disputed .
What can be done easily has , in part , already been done .
In contrast , renovations - particularly of listed buildings - could be very expensive .
There is little point in renovating a building so that it is fantastically energy efficient if it then stands empty because the rent has soared .
Even in the interests of protecting the climate , I do not believe that we should interfere with the ownership rights of citizens where renovations are concerned .
There must be no obligation to install solar panels when building a house , carrying out reroofing works , building an extension or replacing a heating system , such as is the case in the Marburg model .
A further point concerns zero energy buildings .
As we know , it is only possible for a household to satisfy its electricity requirements using photovoltaics if the electricity grid remains available for periods when there is less sun .
In other words , for the electricity grid operator , the costs will remain the same .
Combined heat and power facilities also involve expensive dual structures .
Even with optimal power management , many questions remain unanswered and dramatic price peaks could occur - quite apart from the fact that in most cases , we do not yet have the corresponding intelligent appliances .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome this report and , in particular , the excellent points and recommendations made by my fellow Members .
Without a doubt , it is clear that the majority of buildings and private houses which exist currently will still be there not only in 2020 , but in 2050 as well .
As such , we should focus on these buildings and houses immediately .
In my own country , there are many people who are currently unemployed building houses and so on .
However , thousands and thousands of houses are empty with no one living in them .
As such , there is no need to build new houses .
Therefore , as has been stated by my fellow Members , we should focus on the houses that are there currently .
I agree with the Commissioner - the governments should use the structural funds , and so on , to deal with this work immediately .
It is extremely important , and I also recommend that the plan be implemented .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Ţicău , for all her efforts on this report .
The construction sector offers great potential for energy savings .
It is vital to improve the energy performance of buildings in order to achieve the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
Energy certificates are required primarily for informing purchasers about a house 's energy performance .
Romania was intending to introduce energy certificates for property transactions starting this year , but the decision to approve the draft regulatory act has been postponed .
The main reasons for this were the insufficient number of energy auditors and the risk of increasing the price of old houses .
They will be introduced in Romania , according to government representatives , by 1 January 2011 at the latest .
The main benefit derived by ordinary citizens from the renovation of heating systems in residential buildings is that their maintenance costs will be reduced .
The Ministry of Regional Development and Tourism has this year allocated RON 150 million for this purpose .
( CS ) There can be no doubt that increased energy saving in buildings - thanks in part to this directive - makes a lot of sense politically .
It is a small piece in the mosaic of responsibility for sustainable living , while also contributing to the political independence of Europe from energy resources in third countries .
Like you , I hope we can actually reduce emissions in ten years and , at the same time , slow down our growing dependency on the energy resources of third countries , particularly oil and gas .
I warmly welcome this directive , which will provide a new impulse for innovation in the area of heating not just new , but also old buildings .
Buildings account for as much as a third of greenhouse gas emissions , so our objective naturally includes active financial assistance from Member States as well .
I also welcome the proposal from my colleague , Mr Marinescu , to set up a special fund .
The fund would , of course , support not only heating for blocks of flats , but also for all buildings in the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 2008 , the EU committed to a 20 % reduction in energy consumption by 2020 .
Improving the energy efficiency of buildings - with the goal of achieving near-zero energy houses - will not only reduce energy consumption .
This directive will also help us to overcome the crisis .
Its realisation requires experts and specialists , thereby creating jobs .
Moreover , in the long term , it will reduce the household expenses of European citizens .
Finally , I would like to mention the energy situation in the existing stock of houses and other buildings and the necessity of bringing about a corresponding improvement in their energy situation .
Mr President , honourable Members , we are in agreement as to the important role played by the building stock , the renovation of existing buildings and the construction of new buildings in achieving our common goals of energy efficiency and reducing CO2 emissions .
In other areas that we have to address - power stations , the energy mix in general or the automotive sector - there are relatively few players to approach : energy companies or the 12 to 15 car-producing enterprises of Europe .
This means that the number of partners to be won over is manageable .
In the area of buildings , there are a huge number of players .
Homeowners , tenants , users , the municipalities with their town planning and urban development in general , those drawing up regional building legislation - generally the provinces or national states ; in short , no other area is so important for reaching our percentage targets for energy and the climate as the construction sector , and no sector has so many millions of partners to bring on board - both horizontally and vertically .
That is why this directive is an important step , but no doubt it is not the last word on the matter .
I am pleased to have your suggestions and contributions , which we have been following closely .
Believe me when I say that I consider the enforcement of this directive to be just as important as its elaboration .
At present , the directive is on paper .
Its value will come with its transposition .
For that we need everyone on board - the Member States , but also the municipal administrations and the owners and users of our building stock .
We want our energy saving measures to be implemented not just in new builds , but also in renovation work .
In the coming weeks , we will be making a proposal for how the EUR 115 million or more can be used in specific terms in the near future .
We are working intensively on the preparations for this .
We want to present it as late as possible in order to know whether there is more than EUR 115 million available , but in good time to ensure that no funds are lost because of time constraints .
We would be happy to have further discussions about this programme for renewable energy and energy efficiency in July and September with Members who are interested .
We are currently in talks with Commissioner Hahn concerning how regional programmes can be oriented more towards energy goals in the current financial period - he has given his express support to this idea - and how we can use the forthcoming funding programmes to give greater priority to the subject of energy and buildings in the next financial period .
I need your help in this .
We have long been making preparations for the next financial period .
You are familiar with the main programmes in the budget of the European Union .
I suspect that the Member States will not want to give us more money .
In this time of crisis and budgetary consolidation , I suspect that we will have to make do with what we already have - this percentage of GDP .
This makes it all the more important to give priority to energy , energy research and energy saving programmes for the players on the ground and , as a supplement to this , also to infrastructure .
In the run-up to the next financial period , I hope to debate with you how we can link local , regional and national programmes for building renovation with our goals and , where appropriate , also with a supplementary European financing programme .
As I said , it is an important step - but not the last .
Consequently , I welcome your suggestions .
I am sure that you will keep a check on us to ensure that the directive can also be successfully implemented in practice .
I would like to thank all the Members of this House , particularly the lead rapporteur .
May I point out that this framework directive is being watched with interest in other regions of the world such as China and the US .
Europe is at least a significant step ahead of other continents in this respect .
I would first of all like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for the support they gave .
This is only the start of a process aimed at increasing energy efficiency in buildings , one which will involve the European Parliament as a permanent , ambitious partner and which will also require transparency when adopting delegated acts .
Admittedly , we have indeed made a clear differentiation between new and existing buildings , taking into account both the property type , which varies from one country to another , and the current stock of buildings .
I believe that Member States and the Commission must use the half-term review of the financial outlook , due to take place in 2010 , to review the operational programmes and allocate more funds to the energy efficiency of buildings .
Member States can use a rate of 4 % of the ERDF allocation and , where they see fit , a reduced VAT rate , but this must not be less than 5 % for work relating to energy efficiency in buildings .
I would like to stress that all the funds allocated to energy efficiency in buildings will feature in jobs and in taxes and charges paid locally , regionally or nationally , bearing in mind the local nature of this work .
Only if we increase the absorption level of the 4 % ERDF allocation earmarked for energy efficiency in buildings during the 2010-2013 period will we be able to ask later on for a significant increase in this rate for the 2014-2020 financial period .
I would suggest somewhere between 8 and 12 % .
In addition , I ask the European Commission to allow the EUR 115 million left over unspent from the European Economic Recovery Plan to be allocated to the Smart Cities Initiative .
I believe that , especially when planning the 2014-2020 financial period , energy efficiency must be our top priority , along with programmes targeted at rural areas .
The European Parliament has also requested at first reading for a fund to be created specifically for energy efficiency , starting in 2014 .
Commissioner , we will give you our support in creating this fund .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 18 May 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
With this package of legislative action , we are taking a quantum leap towards an environmentally friendly society .
After all , buildings are responsible for approximately 40 % of CO2 emissions .
In the next few years , we are going to gradually drive back these emissions to zero .
This is both great for the pockets of all consumers and , of course , good for employment , as investment in environmentally friendly buildings is labour-intensive .
Now , in the short term , we must pull out all the stops to accelerate the renovation of existing buildings in particular , and we must help private individuals to do this .
Special attention must be paid to the tenants of social housing in this connection .
Social housing associations must receive encouragement and a substantial boost to ensure that they renovate the older buildings in the short term , so that the most disadvantaged tenants , too , can derive the maximum benefit from them .
The energy performance of buildings is an area with strong potential for the European Union .
The fall in energy consumption facilitated by the measures introduced in this text will contribute to increasing the energy independence of the EU , and takes us towards a European energy efficiency policy .
The success of this policy also depends on the Member States , who must use financial measures such as reducing VAT , allocating the maximum authorised proportion of European funds to energy performance , and so on .
At the level of the citizens , these advances will also benefit European households , who will notice a reduction in their energy spending .
On average , this represents 33 % of a household 's income , and can be as much as 54 % for households with more modest incomes .
In practice , therefore , I would like the improvements in the energy performance of buildings mainly to benefit this last category of citizens .
We must be mindful of the costs incurred by introducing new norms .
If the costs of construction and renovation have repercussions for rents , this could make the benefits of the energy performance of buildings inaccessible to those who would need them most .
With regard to energy-efficient buildings , I consider it very important for us to address the question of energy-efficient buildings .
We need to treat this issue as a priority because Europe is seeing the emergence of an energy crisis .
The European Union has committed itself to reducing its energy consumption by 20 % by 2020 and to ensuring that 20 % of the energy used will come from renewable energy sources .
In addition , however , attention must also be paid to the question of energy efficiency , particularly in the construction industry , since this sector is one of the biggest energy consumers ( 40 % ) , as well one of the biggest emitters of carbon dioxide .
This focus on the construction sector is especially important in the countries of Central Europe , where the outmoded buildings inherited from the former regime means that we are wasteful in our use of available energy .
Modernising residential buildings offers particularly important opportunities .
Replacing doors and windows and fitting state-of-the-art insulation can help keep household energy spending down .
In Western Europe , the construction of energy-efficient buildings is already on the upswing , their popularity being due largely to state subsidies .
Unfortunately , in Central Europe , there is no system yet for providing greater incentives for investment in passive houses , even though such technology could help reduce the ever-increasing dependency on gas .
This is why I consider it important to support the report , which is why I have voted in favour .
The energy used by buildings represents almost one third of the total energy used in the European Union .
For precisely this reason , there is significant potential in this sector for reducing energy use - not only because of obligations undertaken concerning reductions in greenhouse gas emissions , but also because of the question of energy security .
Among the more important provisions of the directive we are working on is the concept of ' nearly zero energy buildings ' .
Let us recall that by the end of 2020 , all new buildings are to be nearly zero energy buildings , and this is to be achieved two years before that for the public sector , which should be leading by example .
However , two features of the directive under discussion deserve a positive response .
Firstly , the establishment by 2020 of the Energy Efficiency Fund , an instrument which will help increase private and public investment in projects intended to improve the energy efficiency of buildings .
This kind of structural support affords an opportunity for the achievement of our objectives .
Secondly , inclusion in the draft directive of a provision on the introduction of intelligent metering and active control systems ( smart metering ) that aim to save energy .
Introduction of these systems on a large scale can bring benefits for consumers in terms of price , efficiency of use and energy security .
Textile names and related labelling of textile products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Toine Manders , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on textile names and related labelling of textile products - C6-0048 / 2009 - .
I should like to start by thanking everyone for the enormously constructive cooperation we have enjoyed .
I hope that , after tomorrow 's vote , we shall be able to proceed on an equal footing , since Parliament is speaking almost with one voice to the Commission and the Council ; with the ultimate aim of reaching an agreement for the benefit of European consumers , European citizens .
In my opinion , the Commission 's proposal to cast the labelling of textile products in the form of a regulation is better than incorporating this into existing directives .
I refer , in this connection , to Mr Monti 's report , which states that the problems in Europe are actually caused by the transposition of directives , which then end up with 12 or 27 different levels .
I have always been an advocate of regulations , and I hope that the Commission will produce more proposals for regulations in future .
The objective of this regulation is to enable new textile fibres to be placed on the market more quickly .
This also enjoys broad support within the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , as we are seeking to optimise the internal market as far as possible .
There is something else we have sought to do , and this is also something that concerns the European public .
In this report , we have sought to simplify the labelling of clothing , which is also a textile product , for example , by introducing European standardisation .
We now know that this is no longer so easy , and so we have requested a study , an impact assessment , to look into whether less can also be more ; less consumer information , that is .
Consumers can consult a website or other source for additional information if required .
Labels must simply be shorter , so that manufacturers can target a single market and do not need to sew whole newspapers into items of clothing , thus confusing the consumer ; food labelling has already shown us how far this can go .
This is what we want to prevent .
We have made a number of proposals asking the Commission to allow simpler labels to be affixed to textile products .
The fact is that consumers are entitled to certain basic information , for example , ' what am I buying ? ' , ' what is it made of ? ' and ' where does it come from ? ' .
We believe that consumers are entitled to this information when they buy an item , and it should not be concealed .
Thus , we find ourselves once more in the area of unfair commercial practices .
Monitoring and enforcement are very difficult in this area , which is why we have made proposals in this regard .
Hence , we are talking about providing very simple information and , if consumers want to know more , they can obtain information on request ; if this goes well , the Commission will choose the best way to be of service to the consumer .
We have made a number of proposals .
If toys have a textile component in excess of 85 % , we consider that they must comply with this .
Some people say that this is all well and good but that we already have a directive on toy safety .
Yet that specifically concerns safety rather than consumer information about what the product is made of , which is something I can imagine consumers want to know .
Then , for example , there is an amendment along the following lines : consumers are entitled to know whether a product is made of animal-derived materials , and they need look no further : the manufacturer must indicate whether the product incorporates any animal products .
We are talking not about the fibre but about other materials , such as pieces of fur .
Finally , there is the famous ' Made in ' issue , on which the Commission made proposals back in 2005 .
We have actually copied these word for word and hope that , with the support of the Commission and Parliament , the Council will change its mind and see things in a positive light .
Therefore , I call on the Council to agree a compromise with the Commission and Parliament that will lead to an improvement in this regulation in the interests of consumers and of better information .
Mr President , before speaking , may I be allowed to join in the grief that this Chamber has already expressed for the death of the two European soldiers killed this morning in Afghanistan , following a terrorist attack .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has begun to revise standards on textile names , as part of the ' Better Regulation ' campaign .
The main aim of this proposal is to improve the existing legal framework , and to simplify the procedure for adopting new textile names .
The proposal therefore aims to promote innovation within the textile sector .
The aim of the new regulation is therefore to allow manufacturers , users and consumers quicker access to innovative products containing new fibres ; a subject close to the hearts of European consumers , sector enterprises - including both textile and clothing businesses - and also national administrations .
I would like firstly to thank the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for approving the report on 8 April .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and the shadow rapporteurs , for their in-depth and detailed work on this proposal , which has sparked such a lively and constructive debate on the labelling of textile products .
Since this is a proposal to simplify the law , the Commission strayed from the provisions laid down by the directive in its original text , which must now be replaced by the regulation under discussion .
This said , the Commission agrees with the vast majority of the amendments proposed in the report adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
We are aware that some amendments , especially those that propose widening the scope of the regulation , will be subject to Council discussion .
We will do our best to facilitate the debate between institutions , and will work hard to achieve acceptable compromises .
One of these amendments concerns the origin marking , the ' made in ' label , which was not covered by the Commission 's initial proposal : Parliament has always actively devoted great attention to this matter , which is of such great importance for consumers .
The amendments proposed in this area relate to the proposal tabled in 2005 by the Commission , concerning the origin marking of many important product categories , including textile products .
I will support these amendments , as I have already emphasised during a meeting with the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I will adopt the same approach for the amendment that proposes labelling non-textile parts of animal origin .
I would also like to make some observations about other amendments .
With regard to Amendment 19 , the Commission 's proposal had already established that traditional tailors were exempt from labelling .
Extending this exemption to all textile products offered to consumers as one-off products would , however , mean that an arguably excessive number of clothing products would be exempt from labelling .
This sector effectively represents one of the main lines of development for European clothing products .
Such products would thus be exempt from labelling , and the number of exemptions could risk becoming excessive .
Regarding Amendment 63 , which aims to remove toys from the list of products excluded from the obligation of labelling , I would like to remind you that the key issue as far as toys are concerned is safety .
The relevant standard is sufficiently detailed and was re-examined in depth in 2009 , with extended debates within the Council and the European Parliament .
Since the question of safety has already been dealt with in the ad hoc standard on toys , our worry is that this additional burden on manufacturers risks becoming disproportionate .
With regard to the request to examine other labelling options for textile and clothing products , I am committed to setting up a wide-ranging and open debate with interested parties on all the other issues that have been raised during discussions in the European Parliament and the Council .
I thank you for your attention , and will listen carefully to your comments during this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , textiles constitute one of the key sectors in our European market .
The proposal tabled by the European Commission is already an excellent starting point for improving and simplifying the regulatory framework that is currently in force within Member States , especially in terms of the transparency and flexibility of the law on technological developments in the textile industry .
The work that we have carried out in Parliament to date has certainly allowed us to broaden the original scope , introducing standards for other labelling requirements that we consider absolutely indispensable .
I would particularly like to bring your attention to standards relating to the indication of origin .
We have proposed two different labelling systems in this case : one obligatory system for products from third countries , as already provided for in the 2005 regulation , which is currently blocked by the Council as you know ; and one optional system for products made in Member States .
In general , the systems serve a twofold purpose , though the more important of the two is undoubtedly to state the product 's actual country of origin .
Consumers must be able to make an informed choice when buying textile products .
By using the proposed criteria for the attribution of origin , we intend to avoid labels that may contain false or misleading information , which would certainly be detrimental to consumers .
Moreover , with these new regulations , we are also aiming to protect small and medium-sized enterprises that have decided to keep their businesses within the Member States .
The decision to hold a plenary vote was determined by the European Parliament 's desire to take a strong stance on these issues , especially taking into account the political consensus that has been reached between the three largest groups .
I should really like to say that working with the rapporteur and the other shadow rapporteurs has been a truly excellent experience .
Despite our different political outlooks , we have managed to find real common ground that we hope represents the best way of protecting the interests of European citizens and of the European Union itself .
I therefore hope that tomorrow , we will have a united vote on this report , giving the Council a strong political signal for the tasks ahead of us in the second reading .
My sincere thanks to all of you for your cooperation .

Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Manders and our fellow Members for their very constructive cooperation in connection with this proposal .
This Textile Regulation is a sound proposal and a necessary one .
In fact , it makes perfect sense to harmonise the rules for how we approve new fibres for the internal market .
We in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament therefore support the proposal as a whole .
However , we also believe that a proposal should not benefit one side only .
It must not benefit industry alone .
It is also very important for us to focus on what is good for consumers .
Therefore , in our work on this proposal , we felt it was vital to ensure that consumers receive clear information on the fibres and textiles that they purchase .
We therefore also wanted it to contain a 100 % fibre composition list .
However , we did not want to stop there .
We are , of course , also in favour of a study being carried out of how we generally label textiles in the EU and we have been involved in putting forward proposals to this effect .
I believe that it is quite important for consumers to know the contents of what they are buying , where the clothing was produced , whether it contains substances that could cause an allergic reaction or whatever else they may need to know .
I believe that many of these things - including the conditions under which they are manufactured - are quite important to consumers and will be increasingly so in future .
It was therefore important for us to say that we believe it to be important for a more detailed investigation to be carried out into how we can create a proper labelling system for textiles that benefits consumers .
This is also one of the reasons why we have given this proposal such clear support .
Personally , I also believe that it is quite important for us to take a closer look at clothes sizes .
I believe that it could generate increased trade within the internal market if we could be certain that the clothes sizes specified are the same irrespective of the country in which the clothes are bought .
We Social Democrats fully support the proposal and believe that it could benefit the industry , but , most importantly , that it could benefit consumers , too .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we should congratulate Mr Manders on this resolution and report , which seeks to bring a little order to the growing clamour of the global market .
I am particularly interested in the issue of obligatory origin marking , which I am working on in the Committee on International Trade , my own Committee , as a shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , with the rapporteur Cristiana Muscardini , and which is anticipated in some small part by the Manders report .
In fact , in the global market within which we operate , regulations for obligatory origin marking exist in the United States , China , Australia , Mexico , Japan and many other countries .
This creates an imbalance that greatly affects both manufacturers and consumers on our continent , leading to anomalies that must be corrected .
This is even more true for textile products , which have a safety problem that we have already been reminded of ; but they also hint in some way at their country of origin , I should say in an almost poetic way , which is particularly significant .
Today , the situation we find ourselves in is shrouded in some confusion , because the origin marking is shown on some products because it suits the manufacturer , yet in other cases , it is not included because it does not suit the manufacturer ; in other cases , it is included but under the regulations of other countries , because the products are also exported to the United States and to Japan and so they are made with these markets also in mind .
We clearly need our own European standards on this subject .
To this end , the European Parliament is trying , both through the report by Mr Manders that we have just heard , and by means of the work we are doing in the Committee on International Trade , to weave our web , so to speak , in order to achieve greater clarity for consumers and manufacturers alike .
Mr President , I would particularly like to agree with the words of the previous speaker .
We , too , are pleased that the Committee on International Trade is working in this area .
I should also like to add my thanks to the rapporteur .
Nonetheless , ultimately , I do not share his position and we will not be able to support him tomorrow on certain points .
Allow me to reemphasise what the issue is here .
We would all like to see clear country-of-origin marking .
We all share the view that pressure must be brought to bear on the Council and we all find it regrettable that the Council has now been blocking clear country-of-origin marking for some years .
However , this directive is a directive , not a symbolic resolution in which something like that can be stated .
I myself , for example , have lent my support to a written declaration which expressly calls once again for action and I consider it important that we continue to work in this area .
This directive has a different aim and purpose , however , and that is to ensure transparency and offer consumers certainty in the naming of novel fibres and novel materials .
We now fear that if the scope of this directive is expanded , the directive will suffer exactly the same fate as the last attempt at introducing ' Made in ' origin marking - in other words , that it will once again be blocked by the Council .
We would find that regrettable , because we genuinely believe that action needs to be taken relatively quickly here .
We support all the other actions in the area of ' Made in ' origin marking - that is beyond question , we will always be allies in this - but we consider it wrong to misuse the present regulation to achieve this end .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I am speaking this evening on behalf of the shadow rapporteur for my group , Mrs McClarkin , who has also been much engaged in following this dossier .
I want to take us back , in line with what Mrs Rühle was saying .
I completely agree with her on how the question of country-of-origin marking is going to be handled .
In the proposals here , there have been some significant improvements about the straightforward core of the proposal : about how fibres are labelled , about how composition is labelled and about clarity of labelling .
However , I notice that the rapporteur conspicuously failed to mention that this is actually a crucial internal market directive as well as a consumer protection directive , with the whole objective of simplifying the legislation , making it easier to get new names recognised and to get new textiles on the market - something like 12 months more quickly - and also , in connection with the work we are about to do on standardisation , giving a significant improvement there by bringing regulations under the basis of the European Committee for Standardisation , all of which will achieve significant savings to the industry as well as improve consumer benefits .
The real question for the rapporteur is whether we want to put all those positive benefits at risk by attaching to this proposal an issue about country-of-origin marking , which - as Mrs Rühle quite rightly points out - has already been proposed by the Commission on a whole range of products .
I think that we should be very careful not to hold up the benefits .
I agree we should make the political point and we should also be asking for some of the other things that he is asking for , but I think there are a number of aspects here where he has exceeded his role as rapporteur for this committee and it has become rather a Christmas tree of some of his own ideas .
I hope that he will take that on board in the vote tomorrow so that we can deliver the benefits for consumers and for manufacturers .
Make some political statements , but let us not hold this up unnecessarily .
Mr President , if consumers are to be able to make the right choices and bring their might to bear , they must have access to information about products .
This report is a first step and means that textiles are to be labelled with their country of origin ; in other words , information on where the goods were manufactured .
As consumers , we have the right to know that .
Now we also have the opportunity to request that the Commission goes further in providing consumers with greater power .
I am thinking , among other things , of care instructions and health and safety warnings .
Those with allergies must not have to be exposed to goods containing traces of allergenic substances .
Our citizens often feel that the rules of the internal market give priority to companies and industry .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , me included , considers that it is high time that consumers ' requirements were put first .
This would benefit not only consumers , but also serious companies .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the report describes itself , and I quote , as ' essentially a technical exercise without major political implications ' .
The European Commission never wastes a good crisis .
Likewise , the European Parliament has also been adept in using technical reports to bring about a harmonised European superstate .
It follows that the UK Independence Party regards this report with suspicion .
However , the first part of the report brings three directives into a single regulation which would simplify .
Later , there is even a hint of a repeal .
Nevertheless , we strongly oppose the second part , in particular Amendment 58 , which intends new labelling requirements to be introduced at Union level .
I note especially the proposal for , and I quote , ' an EU-wide uniform size labelling system for clothing and footwear ' .
We have a completely effective system for sizing in the UK .
It is wholly different from the system which exists in most of continental Europe .
UK citizens know and understand it and it should not be changed for an EU-wide system .
Once again , a European Parliament rapporteur intends to use a straightforward technical exercise to advance the wholly undemocratic goal of a European superstate .
( DE ) Mr President , in the thousands of debates on globalisation that we have had in recent decades , we keep coming back to the point where those following the debate ask what they can do .
This always results in mention of the power of consumers .
However , in the area where they can exercise this power - namely when buying products - unnecessary obstacles are placed in their path .
There is a certain amount of standardisation in the area of textiles , but I feel that courage is lacking .
Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am surprised that I am the first to mention this .
Why have we not been much more ambitious as regards social labelling ?
Why do we still not have it ?
Why are we not using this ideal instrument to create transparency concerning where , how and under what conditions such products are actually being produced ?
Why are we constantly bemoaning the loss of jobs , yet not doing what is of most interest to consumers - namely allowing them to find out what they are actually buying by providing the evidence ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Manders , thank you very much for the good work that you have put into this regulation .
I would also like to give particular thanks to my shadow rapporteur , since although this is indeed a technical report - as has been mentioned a number of times - it has many wide-ranging consequences for our citizens .
After all , what we are concerned with here is allowing novel fibres to be placed on the market in the European Union .
That is something we want to make possible .
The European Commission is right in that .
Not just anyhow , however ; the fibres must be tested if citizens are genuinely to enjoy the consumer protection that we are always talking about .
It is important , for example , to test whether the fibres are allergenic .
They must also be clearly labelled , so that our citizens - who are always being described as responsible citizens - can also act accordingly .
In this context , I must contradict the Members who have said that we should leave out country-of-origin marking .
It is very important and absolutely right .
Many citizens want to know where the fibres and textiles come from .
What is their background ?
Their background includes the way in which they were manufactured .
It is deplorable , but in many states , child labour or even slave labour are still used .
There are citizens who want to know this information so that they can make a responsible choice when buying products .
It may not be the job of this regulation , but it is the job of us Members to remind the Council of this and exert pressure to ensure that the text on origin marking that has been on the table since 2005 is at last put to good use .
It is an opportunity to turn up this pressure and we should really seize it to achieve a good regulation about which our citizens say : yes , we can certainly live with that - that is the sort of thing we expect of our representatives in Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , if there is one industrial sector in Europe in which employment has been the victim of ruthless relocations , the free movement of capital , a strong euro , and dumping , it is the textile sector .
As far as production and employment are concerned , today , there remain only a few niches in the mid-range / high-end , luxury and high-technology sectors .
However , all that remains fragile and at the mercy of the counterfeiting and technological advances of emerging countries , which are too often financed by the capital of European firms .
That is why anything that can help to protect jobs and know-how in the European textile sector is positive .
Therefore , I am also in favour of the social labelling of textile goods in order to help consumers to choose goods on the basis of ethical criteria such as the health , safety , rights , welfare , working conditions and pay of workers .
I am also in favour of labelling as a means of combating counterfeiting , so long as we actually provide ourselves with the human resources to combat fraud .
We should then go further by establishing real Community preference .
However , we can have all the labelling measures in the world , but they will be of little use without the political will to redevelop a textile industry that creates jobs in Europe .
( DA ) Mr President , the textile industry is going through a period of dramatic change .
New fibres and fabrics are entering the market and it is difficult for consumers to understand what it is they are buying .
Unfortunately , a large proportion of the goods are produced in countries with no form of product control whatsoever .
For decades , we have informed consumers of the content of foods and medicines , but not of what is contained in the clothes that they wear .
Therefore , in this ' nano ' age , it is a good thing that we are starting to focus on this subject and I agree with both the Commission and the rapporteur that we need a uniform size labelling system for clothing and footwear .
The Internet opens up totally new opportunities for both traders and purchasers to find information on a particular product using an identification number .
However , it is particularly important to inform consumers about allergenic and hazardous substances .
In addition , care advice , the country of manufacture , flammability and the use of chemicals in manufacture are also important .
However , in the day-to-day handling of products , it is the use of language-independent symbols that is crucial for consumers .
( CS ) Fair competition for European trade and industry , in the same way as protection for European consumers , cannot be established in globalised commerce without defining certain standards of production , and also consumer information on producers .
This regulation will undoubtedly do better than the old directive in bringing further improvements to the area of textile labelling , reducing the marketing of new fibres by a year and , at the same time , abolishing consumer labels .
However , a number of conflicts persist between Parliament and the Council , for example , over combining the names of fibres with linguistically neutral symbols or the markings for non-textile animal constituents of textile products or problematic allergy tests , which is a pity .
I am pleased , however , that there is less of a dispute over country-of-origin labelling for products and their conditions of use .
These are mandatory for textiles imported from third countries , but no longer mandatory for textiles produced in Member States .
This is a good sign , and European producers and consumers who care about quality have been calling for it for years .
I hope we will soon extend this principle to products made from glass and porcelain and other commodities as well , and that we will manage to do so before European products completely disappear from our market under pressure from cheap low-quality products .
I would like to express my opposition to those who describe this as protectionism .
After all , information on where a substantial part of a product was produced , and under what conditions , is not worthy of concealment ; on the contrary , this information will give consumers a better orientation in the globalised marketplace .
It will reinforce the promotion of high-quality European brands , and will perhaps rightly inspire pride in citizens for what Europeans still manage to produce , despite competition from cheap labour .
The main added value which consumers expect is the hope that it will be easier to avoid purchasing hazardous products , of which there are still very many , despite improved controls .
I welcome the support of the Commission and I believe that a compromise will also be found with the Council .
Mr President , firstly , I want to congratulate the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , who displayed a positive and pro-consumer attitude to this subject at all stages of the committee .
I feel the work is again a demonstration of the ability of this House to be among the most flexible and consensus-building institutions of the European Union .
This is maybe the second or , possibly , third issue I have seen since joining the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , whereby this House can be more progressive than the Council and I welcome more examples of this coming to fruition in the future .
As for the issue itself , attempting to harmonise rules when it comes to textile labelling and designating names is a very positive example of how the internal market can help the consumer and the manufacturer .
This proposal is equally important for both the industry and the consumers .
It is important to remember this , and sometimes I think the consumer side is not getting as much attention as is necessary .
This proposal started off as mainly technical and non-political and was just a means to bring three directives together .
However , considering that we rarely revisit these types of issues as a House , it makes sense that we try and make any proposals on this as comprehensive as possible .
Consumers are entitled to accurate , relevant , understandable and comparable information on the composition of textile products .
They are also entitled to a complete - and I mean complete - list of the fibres that are in products ; this is necessary in the prevention of allergies , etc .
I personally feel it is very important that there is transparency in production methods and conditions and that there is accurate evidence of place of origin .
This will allow social decisions on purchasing choices to be made .
I believe this is becoming increasingly necessary in the world we live in , given child and slave labour , etc .
This is why I support many of the Commission 's ideas but also support the calls for a more general scheme for the labelling of textile products .
We should view this as an opportunity to have the best legislation which will deepen and enhance the internal market .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Manders on his work on this report , as well as thank the other fellow Members who worked with him on it .
In truth , it is only because this proposal simplifies and improves the legislative framework that is in force by bringing together all the existing legislation - three basic directives on naming and labelling textile products - that it is important .
However , in addition to that , this proposal will have a positive impact on private actors and on the public authorities , and will also allow newly developed fibres to be developed , so encouraging innovation in the textile and clothing sector .
This revision will also make the process of adding new fibres to the list of harmonised fibre names more transparent .
There no longer seem to be any doubts that this regulation will be to the advantage of the actors involved .
Consider the textile industry , which will benefit from reduced administrative costs and the possibility of bringing new fibres to the marketplace earlier .
For their part , the authorities in the Member States will not need to transpose the alterations to national legislation , which will enable them to significantly reduce their costs .
Moreover , consumers will receive a guarantee that named fibres meet specific characteristics , and will also benefit from the fact that new fibres will reach the market earlier .
The introduction of these fibres is important for European industry as a way of promoting innovation , which will mean that more information will reach consumers .
In the current context of a globalised world and emerging economies with ever-larger markets in which millions of products produced by millions of companies are in circulation , a commitment to innovation and the speed with which this innovation reaches consumers is absolutely crucial for companies , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The application of this regulation could see an increase in the competitiveness of SMEs .
This new regulation will definitely mean that these SMEs increase their market share and it will , in this way , contribute to employment in Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , there is an expression that says ' a man 's life hangs by a thread ' .
Just imagine if the thread is not strong , if it is not made from the right material ; that life would be lost .
I say that to illustrate how important thread and fabric are .
This is not just a technical issue .
We are not debating a technical report here .
I consider that the excellent report drafted by Mr Manders , and I thank him for that , has a political dimension , a dimension that affects the trader and the manufacturer : with this regulation , their work will be easier and quicker .
It has a political dimension which affects consumers and , by extension , the internal market ; a political dimension that raises ethical issues .
We need to know where a product comes from , where it was made .
The ' made in ' label is not a technical issue .
It is , I think , above all , a highly political issue .
When we know which country a product comes from , we have information on how it was manufactured , on the type of labour used there , on labour rights and if they are being respected .
We here , as citizens of the European Union , are not technocrats walking around with our eyes closed .
We are people who think , legislate and act on behalf of other people .
Thus , the ' made in ' issue is possibly a technocratic procedure with a serious political dimension and we must consolidate it .
I think that our contribution will play a major role here .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have always been very fond of Mrs Rühle , but this is the first time in six years that she has expressed my own thoughts on a subject .
I , too , fear that we are in the regrettable process of amalgamating two dossiers in a way which does no favours to the citizens of the European Union , to Parliament , the Commission or the Council .
We all agree that the labelling of textile products is a topic that is high on consumers ' agendas and that we need to find a solution urgently .
However , we really must take care not to mix up two different things here .
I have never known anything quite like this here in Parliament before : the Committee on International Trade is currently consulting on a draft regulation from the Commission , and then we slip exactly the same matter into another dossier .
I am speaking specifically about ' Made in ' origin marking .
I will not go into detail concerning all the matters on which we will be consulting in the Committee in the coming weeks and months in the context of the ' Made in ' regulation , such as what is the country of origin of a product that was designed in Italy , made with leather worked in Argentina and cotton from Turkmenistan which was woven into fabric in China , where the product is stitched together in Vietnam and then ironed and packed as a complete shirt back in Italy ?
Where does this product come from ?
Can we succeed in arriving at a rule for consumers ?
I am absolutely convinced that if we are able to do so , it will not be in the context of the regulation that we are debating today , but rather under the auspices of the project for which Mrs Muscardini is responsible .
I would be very grateful if the two matters could be rapidly disentangled again in the second reading .
I really feel that in mixing these matters up and linking them together , we are doing no favours to consumers , to Parliament , the Commission or the Council .
It would certainly please me if we could find a solution here that genuinely prevents the regulation from being blocked .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you to the rapporteur , and also to the shadow rapporteurs , and to Commissioner Tajani , or should I say Vice-President Tajani , for the precise and accurate answers you have given us on key points .
Eighteen years ago , the University of Barcelona carried out a study that concluded that the textile industry would have disappeared from Europe by the year 2000 .
It is now 2010 and this gloomy prophecy has not come true , and it has not come true for one simple reason : namely that the research and innovation developed in Europe and in countries that have maintained their manufacturing base - because they have not just acted as research centres , but as centres of applied research and industry - have ensured the production of new innovative fibres .
Hence , the need for these regulations instead of a directive , to guarantee flexibility , protect consumers where labelling is concerned , and also to vouch for the country of origin .
I believe , Vice-President Tajani , that it is worth imagining a future where we also have a European Monitoring Unit to protect health and safety , in other words , an authority to safeguard this originality .
I believe that we must all agree on this positive aspect that has emerged from this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we all agree on the approach of the proposal for a regulation under discussion today , especially the aspects concerned with cutting down on bureaucracy , with promoting a more innovative industry , with clarity and , above all , with the consumer - and I must emphasise this last aspect .
For this reason , I would like to emphasise the point about country of origin , because I believe it to be an indispensable feature : consumers today want to be informed , and surely country of origin is one of the most sensitive items of information that we can offer consumers .
If we look at any market in any European city , I believe we will see that people are interested in what they are buying : in knowing what they are buying , what the product is made from and where that product comes from .
It is definitely an extremely sensitive and important piece of information , and it is important because the European Union has become an added value , the European Union guarantees safety and protection for consumers .
We know , and consumers know , that countries outside the EU have - it pains us to say it , but we know it is true , and there is no point trying to hide it , ladies and gentlemen - less stringent rules , less stringent laws that are less sensitive to many of the aspects that many of my fellow Members have already reminded us about : working conditions , protection of minors , protection of women , protection of workers , but also awareness of standards , and of substances that are used .
All too often , newspaper stories have drawn our attention to cases of allergies in children and women .
We speak to doctors , we speak to paediatricians , we speak to gynaecologists , and we know that the use of products and substances that are hazardous to health is unfortunately widespread .
I would like to remind you of one more thing : this is not a matter of protectionism , rather it is a question of creating a level playing field in the global market , since so many of our partners have already adopted this type of labelling , including the United States , Canada and Japan .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened to the whole of the debate on the Textile Labelling Directive and the first thing I must state is that it is important to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) that consumers who want to have this information when purchasing textiles are indeed given it .
The proposal by the rapporteur to make greater recourse to technology and have only an identification number in the product itself - rather than a label that becomes increasingly long - with the information being accessible in other documents , possibly via the Internet , would certainly help those looking for very detailed information .
It would also help those who do not want this information , because they would no longer have to read all this information on the item of clothing itself .
Secondly , the study proposed by the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs - whom I would like to take this opportunity to thank expressly once again - raises a number of questions which are individually worth looking at , but which taken as a whole are likely to result in this proposal facing great opposition in the Council .
This is all the more regrettable since this proposal could be of particular importance to the European textile industry , as highly innovative fibres could provide us with an advantage in this fiercely competitive global market .
If this regulation does not come about , then we will all be disadvantaged somewhat .
We should not push aside the justified concerns adopted in the amendments in committee , but right now , we should concentrate instead on getting this proposal through in the Commission 's original version .
Perhaps we should return to the matters of origin marking and uniform sizing , as mentioned by Mr Caspary , at a later date .
I hope that we will be able to arrive at a solution in this dossier , and do so as early as possible in the second reading .
I also hope that we will settle the important matters in this second reading rather than spending too long looking at peripherals .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am keen to contribute to this debate because we are preparing to vote for what I believe to be an extremely important measure : it is important to rationalise the work of our enterprises , but especially to protect consumers .
Those who buy must know what they are buying , and those who seek quality must find quality !
However , it is also important to have an idea of the social sustainability of what we are buying .
Someone has already said this - but I want to stress it again because I think that this is a specific point that must emerge from this discussion in the European Parliament - I want to know whether a given product is made in a place where workers are protected ; I want to know whether that product involves the exploitation of children ; I want to know whether that product is the result of unfair competition .

So here we have a measure that I hope will soon be extended to other manufacturing and craft sectors , because I believe and conclude that this measure will bring Europe much closer to its citizens , and for this I thank the rapporteurs who have brought this measure into being , and the Commission and Commissioner Tajani for being a driving force behind it .
Mr President , much of this debate on textiles is echoed in debates we have about food , the origins of food and how we label food .
It is interesting that a pizza produced , for example , in Ireland could contain ingredients that come from 60 different countries .
It is very complex to get our labelling correct .
One of the issues which has been mentioned is consumer concerns about how things are produced , about workers ' welfare and environmental standards .
I watched a very disturbing report on CNN about the state of the Pearl River in China .
The denim capital of Europe is on the banks of that river , which is highly polluted because they export their cheap products to the EU , the US and other markets - and consumers buy them .
So , although we say consumers want information to make informed choices , many consumers seem to ignore the information that they have and make choices based on price .
I do think we need to talk more about sustainable production and sustainable consumption across all of our lines - food and , indeed , textiles .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in thanking the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and the shadow rapporteur , Mrs Comi , I would like , with all due respect , to disagree slightly with Mrs Rühle .
She says that it is mistaken to include ' made in ' standards as part of this regulation ; but where else should we put these standards that consumers and small businesses operating in Europe have been eagerly anticipating for years , too many years ?
According to her , the aim of this regulation is to open the market to new fibres , to innovation , to a faster coding system , but hide the country of origin , because the Europe of fear , the Europe of concealment , the Europe of obfuscation , the Europe that does not say where things are produced , must rightly speed up the marketing of new fibres , but must not tell consumers where textile products are made .
What is the sense of this dual track system ?
Why do we still need to keep alive the idea of a Europe that is bureaucratic , unclear and , even worse , incites fear , and evades clarity ?
We want ' made in ' standards and we want them soon for one simple reason - I am about to finish , Mr President - which is that , if a textile product has ' Made in Europe ' written on it , this means that that product , with that label , has not been created using solvents that are toxic or harmful to the environment , that it has not been made by children reduced to virtual slavery , or by exploited women , that it has not been created by exploited workers , with gruelling working days and without any guarantee of health and safety , benefits and salaries .
The statement ' Made in Europe ' is a guarantee for the consumer , and also a guarantee about how the product has been created .
We must be proud of this statement , and must ensure that it is introduced straight away .
This is why we support the proposal , just as it was tabled by the relevant committee , and we can already thank Commissioner Tajani for the significant reassurance he has given this Chamber on this point .
Mr President , I think it is good that we have a discussion on a topic which affects every citizen , because almost every citizen becomes a consumer and a purchaser of textile products .
The labelling is also very important .
I remember being bemused several times in my own country years ago to pick up a product and see written on it ' Deantús na hÉireann ' - ' Produce of Ireland ' , then you could peel off the label and underneath it was ' Made in China ' ; in other words , consumers had been conned .
Now we have come a long way since then , but we need to go further .
The points made particularly by Lara Comi regarding products from third countries are very important .
We have been far too stringent regarding our own countries , and not so with third countries .
This also refers to the agricultural sector , and the upcoming Mercosur proposals , in particular , bear that out .
So I welcome that .
Finally , the suggestion about having the same sizes right across the European Union is a very good one .
It will make it much easier for people to purchase and also create a sense of European union without creating the superstate that the good Earl is somewhat concerned about .
( PT ) Mr President , this discussion concerning the designation of origin on the labelling and packaging of textiles and clothing is very important in protecting consumer rights , but also in protecting the workforce and production of our countries ' textile and clothing industries .
We want to fight against social dumping and child labour , and protect social rights and the environment .
Labelling must allow consumers a clear choice and involvement in a future that is better for all , whether here in the European Union or in other countries .
It is through this process of clearly marking the origin and contents of products that we will be able to make more conscious choices ; it will contribute to a better future .

Mr President , I share the opinion of those who say that this proposal for a regulation has definite technical connotations , but it is also politically important : it is politically important in that it concerns the interests of European citizens , because we are simplifying standards , and this means making work easier for citizens , making work easier for all businesses that operate in the sector .
We are delivering a service to citizens because Parliament now overwhelmingly favours labelling and we are therefore making it possible for citizens to know what kind of product they are buying .
This means that we are guaranteeing their health , and inalienable rights - I agree with the ideas put forward by Mrs Gebhardt during her speech , but also with those of Mrs Figueiredo .
We are also committed to defending the European textile industry : we cannot forget that this sector has had many job losses , sometimes because of unfair competition .
It is our duty to defend the competitiveness of our businesses on the world market , and we must prevent dumping within the European Union .
Defending the textile sector means defending thousands and thousands of jobs and , at the same time , defending citizens ' rights .
By approving this text , we will be safeguarding a whole set of interests , interests which , to my mind , still respect the values of our European Union .

I believe that Mr Kelly is right , and I would like to offer some reassurance to Lord Dartmouth , even if he has left the Chamber , who voiced fears about a superstate .

I do not think that the European Union is the modern version of Hobbes 's Leviathan ; it is simply an institution that embodies principles of solidarity and of subsidiarity , defends human rights , and is committed to safeguarding the social market economy , and the market itself is an instrument for creating social policy ; so there is nothing here that is trying to limit anybody 's freedom , we are simply defending the rights of half a billion European citizens who live within our Union .

Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Manders report
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 22 , 23 , 26 , 29 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 46 , 52 and 61 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 8 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 36 , 40 , 45,47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 62 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 69 , 70 and 72 in principle .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 19 , 37 , 38 , 63 , 68 and 71 .
I am honoured that such a huge number of speakers are present on this Monday evening to discuss a technical report , and also that there is broad support for this report .
Some of my fellow Members have expressed criticism , saying that the scope of the report should not be abused , should not be broadened .
I understand this , but I should like to underline the words of my fellow Member , Mrs Gebhardt , in this connection .
In some situations , it is necessary to make use of the situation in order to bring something about , and I take the view that it is eminently possible to proceed like this .
It is important to have very broad support tomorrow , and I sense this support from many people 's reactions .
This will give this House an excellent point of departure , particularly for the negotiations with the Council , as I believe that , together with the Commission - and I thank the Commissioner for his clear position - Parliament will be able to create a situation tomorrow that will ultimately produce a successful conclusion to the negotiations with the Council .
The objective of this proposal is to create better legislation for the future , as people are buying more and more over the Internet , and so we need an internal market that works , one in which 500 million consumers can obtain the information they desire in a fair manner .
We are starting with textiles , and I hope that this is eventually extended to all products for sale on the internal market .
The intention is to provide not more information , but clear information with a single European basis ; and , if that succeeds , I shall be very pleased .
By way of conclusion , Mr President , I should just like to mention that I made a conscious decision not to reach agreement with the Council in a single reading .
I take the view that we should go down this ordinary path much more often and that Parliament , plenary , should pass judgment on the report tabled by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection before entering into negotiations with the Council and the Commission with a view to reaching a conclusion .
I think that it erodes democracy if we reach an agreement even before the discussion in plenary .
Thus , I hope that many will follow this example and that all dossiers will be dealt with ordinarily in a first and second reading .
I hope for a good result tomorrow , and with our point of departure - one of broad support - we shall be excellently placed to win the final against the Council , to put it in football terms .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 18 May 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The textile industry of the European Union has embarked upon a long process of restructuring and technological innovation in response to the significant economic challenges that this sector has had to face in recent years .
In my opinion , in allowing the harmonisation and standardisation of aspects of textile-product labelling , the report under discussion both facilitates the free movement of these products in the internal market and ensures a high and uniform level of protection for consumers within the European Union .
I therefore support the invitation addressed to the Commission to submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on any new labelling requirements within two years of implementing the new regulation .
This will serve the twofold aim of simplifying the labelling of textile products and of providing consumers with accurate and comparable information about the ownership , origin and size of textile products .
In achieving these objectives , I believe it is necessary to make sure that extending obligatory labelling does not involve an additional burden on business , in particular , for small and medium-sized enterprises .
At the moment , there are no satisfactory tests showing how allergenic or hazardous substances used in the manufacturing / processing of textile products affect human health .
I therefore urge the Commission to carry out a study to evaluate their effects .
Once again , ecological labelling promises something quite different to what it actually delivers - one only has to think of the ' Organic Cotton ' scandal or the recent bio-chemicals pantomime .
Firstly , yet another confusion of labels and marks is emerging in this organic market - which the EU could sensibly simplify once and for all , something which it usually loves doing ; and secondly , it is time that the EU accepted genetically modified cotton .
If we are still awaiting studies of the possible effects of harmful substances , then in the meantime , genetically modified cotton should at least be stated on the label .
It is also high time that the EU did something about ' radio-frequency identification ' .
We cannot have electronic labels being applied to textiles without the knowledge of those concerned whilst we are still waiting for the requisite labelling regulations .
If pedestrians are to be made visible by means of RFID clothing , it will be possible to monitor people 's every step .
In view of the pressure to conform to political correctness , people would soon have to be extremely careful as to the institutions they visited when wearing RFID clothing .
Perhaps in future , however , people will simply need to delete their RFID number from Google Street View .
Alternatively , the chips might set off security alerts at airports .
George Orwell could not have imagined it ; we have long overtaken his vision of a surveillance society .
New developments in public procurement ( short presentation )
The next item is the short presentation of the report by Heide Rühle , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on new developments in public procurement [ 2009 / 2175 ( INI ) ] - .
Mr President , I would like to include in my thanks all the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation and for the good results achieved in committee so far .
Allow me to reiterate and highlight the main points of my report .
Firstly , we need greater legal certainty for all those involved - contracting authorities and contractors - with a view to better regulation .
My report stresses the particularly great significance that public procurement has in times of crisis .
However , my report also criticises the fact that the complex interaction of European legislation and national transposition has not resulted in a simplification and debureaucratisation of public procurement , as was , in fact , the aim of the 2004 revision , but rather in more work , high external costs for legal advice and protracted procedures .
Unfortunately , this is at the expense of innovation and quality .
Numerous studies show this to be the case .
Far too often , the lack of legal clarity results in the cheapest offer being selected , rather than the best tender .
Whilst the Commission now provides assistance in the area of green procurement , there is no such assistance in the areas of socially responsible procurement , fair trade or the promotion of innovation through procurement .
The Commission has some urgent reworking to do here .
Better coordination within the Commission is also urgently needed .
The European Court of Justice has removed a number of legal uncertainties in recent judgments and strengthened the role of public procurers , for example , by indicating that the scope of the directives should not be extended into areas such as urban planning .
These judgments do not give contracting authorities a blank cheque , but rather provide them with a clear framework .
This , too , was something I sought to reiterate in my report .
One final point remains : the matter of the service concessions , on which opinions differed greatly within the committee .
My position on the matter has not changed .
The service concessions were deliberately removed from the directives on procurement in order to ensure greater flexibility in these areas and to take account of cultural differences .
This position is also supported by all the stakeholders that I have spoken to , whether they be municipal umbrella organisations , public enterprises - particularly in the water industry , industrial associations , trade unions or , not least , NGOs .
That is also something that I wanted clearly reiterated in my report .
I have one further point to mention that is also very important to me : public procurement must not result in the institutions selected losing their democratic rights .
If we find that many municipalities are now including fair trade as an important criterion in public procurement decisions - whether when buying coffee or for other products - then I think it is important to bolster this .
In this event , it would be very important for the Commission to help the municipalities and , if they make a mistake , to be there to advise them .
Instead , the Commission has instituted new legal proceedings against the Netherlands in respect of precisely such mistakes .
I consider this sort of thing counterproductive because it runs counter to the political decisions made by the political bodies .
I notice that several speakers would like to express their opinions .
Remember that you each have one minute .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur and thanking her for her in-depth work and receptiveness .
It was a pleasure to work with her on this report .
I believe that the result of this work is a balanced report of which the focal point is the increase in legal certainty .
Therefore , the aim now is not to propose more legislation at any price but to make the existing legislation more accessible and intelligible .
One specific point to be raised - Mrs Rühle has already raised it - is that of service concessions .
This is a sensitive point that has also caused some controversy within the Commission .
I should like to insist once again that , insofar as we know that the Commission intends to propose new items of legislation to us on this subject , it should do so by bearing in mind the need to improve the functioning of the single market .
At this moment in time , nothing else could justify major legislative initiatives on this matter .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group would actually have liked to support Mrs Rühle 's report , because it contains a great many very positive elements .
Unfortunately , there are three points that we consider lacking or that we are unable to accept as they stand in the report .
Firstly , Mrs Rühle was unable to accept that we genuinely have need of a legal framework for services in the general economic interest , and secondly , she also failed to state clearly that it is a matter of greater legal certainty in the area of social services in particular .
This is a shortcoming of the report that we naturally find very regrettable .
One point that we are absolutely unable to accept is the rejection of service concessions .
We cannot simply say that it is something we do not want .
The Court of Justice has already ruled on all this .
It is highly unpolitical .
It is very important that we say quite clearly what we want if we know that the European Commission is preparing a legal text .
It is important that we call upon the European Commission actually to go along with the very positive position taken by the Court of Justice on this matter , thereby also ensuring legal certainty .
That is our demand and consequently , we have submitted an alternative resolution .
We ask our fellow Members to support this alternative resolution .
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for all her efforts on this report .
I totally concur with the need to simplify European public procurement legislation and increase transparency .
I am concerned by the large number of disputes over public procurement in numerous Member States .
For example , in Romania , the particularly complex legislative framework leads to procedural errors , while the misapplication of public procurement regulations can impede the use of the Structural Funds .
This is why we need a simpler , clearer legislative framework to facilitate matters on both sides .
I would also like to comment on the problem of the lowest price .
I agree that a public procurement contract should not be awarded simply on the basis of offering the lowest price .
I also agree with the rapporteur that the tender 's quality / price ratio and economic benefit must be the most important factors , not only the price .
The legislative review must therefore take into account this fact and introduce far greater flexibility for public procurers .
However , we must do this with great caution because , if we fail to establish clear criteria , we will open up a real Pandora 's Box , with the risk of us triggering legal uncertainty again and even corruption .
Mr President , as the shadow rapporteur for my group , but also as the chairman of the committee responsible , I want also to join in thanks to Heide Rühle for what is a really important report .
Indeed , it is a shame that under the rather strange rules of this Parliament , such an important report about a key element of the single market and indeed public policy is confined only to one-minute interventions .
I think it is welcome that Mr Tajani is here because I want to say to him that public procurement is a key instrument for encouraging innovative enterprise across the European Union .
Mr Barnier , we know , is now going to have a look at strategy and I hope will pick up many of these things .
But the core of the problem , colleagues , is that we have a regime which , as this report says , is confusing and complex and indeed which many public authorities regard as a bureaucratic imposition instead of an opportunity .
We can use public procurement to drive forward areas like small and medium-sized enterprises , Commissioner , and opportunities for innovation and green products and services - and , indeed , for supporting the whole of the innovation agenda .
That is what we have to achieve , but it will need a concerted effort by all arms of the Commission to deliver the recommendations in this report .
( SK ) Public procurement appears to be an effective way of purchasing goods and services for the public sector , making it possible to achieve reasonable prices while reducing the suspicion of corruption .
In future , however , it would be good to work on simplifying the mechanisms of the public procurement process , and also to try and shorten the time it takes to make decisions .
In my opinion , we should support the basic principle of that aim .
However , experience shows that it is also a good thing to publish contracts on the Internet , as this makes it possible to familiarise the broader public with these contracts and to convince them of the advantages of the contracts .
Experience bears this out particularly in local authorities , where handling the assets of the community was very often under the watchful eye of citizens , and when all contracts began to be published on the Internet , people were more satisfied and trusted the local authorities more .
( CS ) I believe that this report on public procurement , which was adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection with an absolute majority , will provide a good guideline for the work of the Commission in revising the directive .
Our aim is to make public procurement much more accessible to small and medium-sized businesses , and for tenders to be less bureaucratic and , at the same time , easier to monitor .
The greatest volume of public procurement from EU funds relates to buildings , where there is often a suspicion - and sometimes more than that - of corruption .
I am sorry that we will not be voting in this report on my proposal for the Commission to set up a public portal where it would be possible to monitor price differences between the successful contracts and the actual costs of construction following implementation .
The portal should monitor and thereby also detect suspicious price differences , for example , relating to the construction of one kilometre of motorway between Member States .
I firmly believe that access to genuinely open public procurement will only open up for SMEs once corruption has been rooted out .
( RO ) The public procurement market at EU level is worth 16 % of the EU 's GDP .
The internal market assumes that any European company can access acquisitions made in any Member State .
The Services Directive guarantees that any European company can provide services in any other Member State , including via electronic means .
The internal market needs to ensure interoperability between e-Government systems , therefore , also between digital signature systems and tender systems operated electronically .
I welcome the PEPPOL pilot project launched by the Commission for online public procurement , as well as the decision about the list of accredited certification service providers and the European plan for setting up a digital signature validation service .
I wish to draw attention to the fact that in 2005 , Member State governments committed to carrying out 50 % of public procurement transactions in Europe electronically by 2015 .
Romania implemented the online public procurement system back in 2002 , which led to a reduction in public expenditure , a greater degree of transparency and an increase in access to the public procurement market for SMEs .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Rühle and the shadow rapporteurs for this sterling report .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is happy with a great deal of what is contained in this report .
We have also agreed to compromise on one or two points , because you can never have everything in a House such as this .
Overall , the report provides a good basis for further discussion with the European Commission on a number of topics .
Mrs Rühle has already addressed the question of how one can enable the contracting bodies , institutions and authorities to take social criteria into consideration in procurement without compromising the principles of the internal market .
Secondly - and this has been addressed by Mr Engel - how can we design the service concessions so as to comply with the internal market in the long term ?
I completely agree with Mr Engel and Mrs Rühle that we can only accept new legislation on the proviso that it offers a clear and recognisable advantage for the internal market .
In view of this , we have achieved a good compromise and naturally , I would be pleased if , ultimately , the Social Democrats were also able to support it .
( RO ) Against the backdrop of the global economic and financial crisis , my country 's government has had to reduce the salaries of state employees , pensions and unemployment benefit , as well as cut subsidies .
Bearing in mind these particularly tough measures , public procurement must be carried out in the most transparent and quickest way possible so as to ensure that public money is spent properly and effectively .
In addition , the use of online tender systems must be encouraged , which will help eradicate corruption and fraud in the public procurement system .
Current administrative procedures , the confusing and complicated legal system , along with the need to clarify the process for appeals relating to the awarding of procurement contracts , have blocked the progress of some important contracts .
Following consultations with the IMF , the Romanian Government amended its public procurement act , which is due to come into force by 1 June .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and financial markets crisis has shown the key role of public procurement , which is aimed at developing large-scale works , at stimulating innovation and , of course , at encouraging internal and external competition at European level .
We consider it essential to simplify standards and achieve greater legal certainty .
This would definitely increase transparency over the composition and the work of the consultative committee on public procurement , for which the Commission is responsible .
We welcome the part played by an institutionalised public-private partnership in facilitating access for the small and medium-sized enterprises that form the basis of our economy .
We need to step up our efforts to prevent discrimination , which often hits small and medium-sized businesses within Europe .
I congratulate my fellow Members for the work they have carried out , and they can count on my support tomorrow .
Mr President , I think , in finding reasons for the economic recession we find ourselves in , the finger is pointed - and rightly so - at bankers , builders , regulators , speculators , etc .
I think , however , the area of public procurement has led to a lot of the problems as well , where there was an element of ' jobs for the boys ' , a lack of transparency and a lack of integrity .
The contracts went inevitably to the same people all the time who , of course , time and time again , went over time and over budget but were never penalised .
I welcome these new developments that will allow us to have the greatest possible transparency in the process .
However , we also need to ensure that those who are sitting in judgment on these contracts have the greatest expertise and the greatest independence and are not appointees of the parties in power .
Finally I want to say that simplification is , of course , vital , because there is no point in having too much time and too much money taken up in a very important but , after all , a preliminary exercise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission and , in particular , Commissioner Barnier , for whom I am standing in this evening , have monitored very closely the preparation of Parliament 's own-initiative report on new developments in public procurement and the debate concerning the amendments .
As Mrs Ticǎu , Mrs Comi and Mr Harbour said , good discipline in the field of public procurement is fundamental to ensuring that best use is made of public money for the welfare of the citizens and of small and medium-sized enterprises , especially in the current tight budgetary situation .
The comments made in the report will be duly taken into account in the preparation of new initiatives .
Work has already begun on some initiatives , which are in response to those comments .
The Commission services have begun an ex post evaluation of the public procurement directives .
A communication to clarify the way in which to use public procurement to promote sustainable development , social inclusion and innovation is currently being drafted .
An analysis of the case-law of the Court is also under way on public-public cooperation , and it will enable us to define the scope of public-public cooperation that is included or not within the scope of European public procurement law .
As regards a possible initiative on concessions , the Commission assumes the burden of proof and is working on an impact study , which will be finalised in 2010 .
This evaluation is a prerequisite for any legislative initiative on the matter .
If it reveals that the current legal framework is curbing economic development or the development of a new , better quality service of general interest , then we will undoubtedly have to remedy it by ensuring greater transparency , legal certainty and clarity with regard to the applicable rules .
At international level , we are doing everything we can to open up the public procurement markets of the world 's major economies .
In order to ensure the competitiveness of European industry , reciprocity is at the heart of all our negotiations .
We want to work in close cooperation with Parliament , and we invite you to maintain a constructive and open approach to the discussion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 18 May 2010 ) .
The EU Policy Coherence for Development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus concept ' ( short presentation )
The next item is the short presentation of the report by Franziska Keller , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on EU policy coherence for development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus ' concept .
Mr President , Policy Coherence for Development means not giving with one hand and taking away with the other .
It makes no sense , for example , to provide funding to support agriculture in developing countries if , at the same time , we destroy the local markets through direct or indirect export subsidies .
Similarly , we may be continuing with great efforts to promote health provision yet , at the same time , we are preventing the trade in generic medicines or pushing up the prices of medicines to prohibitive levels by extending patent protection .
Agrofuels may possibly reduce CO2 emissions in the EU a little , but result in deforestation and land grabbing in developing countries , thereby leading to more climate change - which is precisely what we wanted to avoid , not to mention the displacement of indigenous populations and the loss of biodiversity and farm land for growing food .
At the moment , we - that is , the EU per se - are not particularly coherent .
The EU has long recognised in theory that political measures must not be contradictory .
Policy Coherence for Development is laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Article 208 states : ' The Union shall take account of the objectives of development cooperation in the policies that it implements which are likely to affect developing countries . '
Let us be judged by this requirement .
This year , we are reviewing the progress made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
It is obvious that we will not be able to keep our promises unless our policies are coherent .
We - all of us that adopt and transpose legislation - need to be aware of this responsibility .
Before we decide on a measure , we need to assess the consequences , so that we can recognise the negative effects that European legislation may have on developing countries .
We need expertise in the Council , the Commission and in Parliament that can recognise incoherent aspects .
The Commission 's work programme on policy coherence is a good step in this direction .
It is now a matter of how this plan is implemented .
Policy Coherence for Development means giving greater consideration to the interests of local people in our reform of fisheries policy and not allowing these interests to be subsumed by the interests of European fisheries concerns .
It means that we must dry up streams of money that flow from developing countries into tax havens .
It means that we cannot adopt ACTA if there remains a suspicion that this agreement could disrupt the supply of medicines or technologies in developing countries .
So far , the Commission has not been able to eliminate this suspicion .
Policy coherence also means that development policy must remain a strong , independent policy area in the creation of the European External Action Service and that the field of competence of the Commissioner for Development must be expanded , not restricted .
It also includes allowing municipalities to take fair trade , for example , into consideration as a procurement criterion , as proposed by Mrs Rühle .
In many cases , we Members of Parliament need to keep a close eye on the Commission and the Council to ensure that policies are coherent .
In many cases , however , it is up to us - the Members of Parliament - to provide coherence for development .
We need the committees to be more joined up and we need a permanent rapporteur .
The report - which was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Development - contains many good proposals and takes us a good step forward .
I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs , the ombudsman and all the NGOs for their cooperation and assistance , and I hope that our joint report will be able to be adopted in plenary tomorrow .
Mr President , I hate to strike a note of discontent about the report at this early stage in the debate , but I should like to refer in particular to recital I and paragraphs 44 and 45 .
There is much that I welcome in this report , but I believe that the content of those paragraphs is partly based on a historical view of agriculture policy and certainly not based on the real situation on the ground at the moment .
Before I deal in detail with that in the moments I have , let me just say that paragraph 15 is a very key paragraph in the report and perhaps should have been dealt with in more detail .
It states that only four per cent of overseas development aid is dedicated to agriculture .
That is quite a shocking figure and it is a figure that I mentioned in a report I drew up in the previous mandate of this Parliament .
I think there is , perhaps unfortunately , an attack on European farmers in this report .
I do not think that is appropriate .
I will certainly not be supporting this report on that basis , and I regret that situation .
I would urge colleagues to note those paragraphs carefully .
( ES ) Mr President , the report that we are debating today , Mrs Keller 's report , highlights a matter crucial to the effectiveness of development policies .
Coherence always lends effectiveness ; when it comes to developing countries , incoherence is tantamount to ineffectiveness , and also to injustice .
I am talking about development policy , not just official development assistance .
Coherence means that all sectoral policies - trade policy , agricultural policy , all external actions - must come together in one single policy ; a policy which is coherent with the global objectives we are pursuing .
Only in this way can we create greater synergies and only in this way can we capitalise on the benefits of global public goods .
This is why I supported and continue to support , in Mrs Keller 's report , the demand for Parliament to appoint a speaker to evaluate and monitor the development policies on which this House expresses a view .
( PT ) The European Union 's policies and actions in several areas frequently contradict stated development aid objectives .
The liberalisation and deregulation of world trade - which the European Union has been advocating and pursuing - threatens the weakest production systems of developing countries .
We must not ignore the fact that a significant proportion of the resources directed to these countries as public development aid ends up returning to the countries of origin in the form of the acquisition of goods and services .
We cannot ignore the serious constraint that the enormous foreign debt represents ; it has already been paid several times over , making its cancellation imperative .
It is unacceptable that various developing countries are being blackmailed by making their public aid dependent on signing up to the so-called ' Economic Partnership Agreements ' , despite the resistance of many of these countries and the concerns they have expressed .
Instead of being imposed , the European Development Fund 's priorities must be revised , taking into account the opinion , the priorities and the real needs of developing countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission and , in particular , Commissioner Piebalgs , for whom I am standing in , congratulate the rapporteur on her motion for a resolution on policy coherence for development , which is excellent and exhaustive .
The Commission fully shares her view on the importance of this ambitious task and fully supports the various proposals contained in the resolution to enhance the European Parliament 's work on the matter .
This resolution comes at just the right time .
As you know , the Commission has proposed a 12-point action plan to support the Millennium Development Goals .
Policy coherence for development is one of the priorities of this plan , which is currently being discussed in the Council .
The main areas of concern appearing in Parliament 's motions for resolutions coincide to a large extent with the priorities listed in the Commission 's work programmes on future policy coherence for development , even though we do not agree with all the comments contained in the resolution .
These two documents constitute a solid foundation for the EU institutions to make progress and to work on ensuring the greatest possible coherence of EU policies with the development goals .
Policy coherence is not just about recording any negative impact that EU policies may have on the development goals .
It is also about combining our efforts with those of our partners in order to come up with winning solutions that will refocus EU policies on development goals .
That is why the Commission has adopted a new and improved approach to policy coherence for development .
This approach links all the EU policies on the matter to five international challenges .
It does not limit the scope of our efforts .
It links the evaluation of policies to real strategic objectives .
Furthermore , the work programme is based on objectives and indicators , and impact studies will more often than not be used to assess the coherence of policies .
I have one thing to say about official development assistance : the Commission 's position on the matter is very clear .
The European Union and the Member States must fulfil their commitments in this area .
To that end , the Commission has proposed to establish a responsibility mechanism within the Union .
This proposal is currently being examined by the Member States .
At the same time , public financial resources other than official development assistance are going to be provided to developing countries , in order to help them , among other things , to combat climate change .
Therefore , we must endeavour to find a way of monitoring those resources and ensuring that they are used for development purposes .
If we are to make our policies more coherent , we must involve our partners .
Article 12 of the Cotonou Agreement provides for a means of communication , a forum to enable the ACP countries to voice their concerns regarding EU policies .
That option must be used far more systematically .
We shall therefore strengthen our dialogue on policy coherence for development within other international bodies such as the Asia-Europe conference on development , which is currently taking place , and the United Nations high-level meeting on the Millennium Development Goals , which will take place in September .
I have one final comment to make : if we examine the various strategic areas concerned - trade , agriculture , fisheries and others - we cannot fail to see that only a joint and cooperative effort by all the major economic powers , and not just by the European Union , will help to create an environment that is favourable to development .
Now and in the future , policy coherence for development must be a high priority at European and international level .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 18 May 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to go into more detail concerning recital I and paragraphs 44 and 45 of the present report , the wording of which is highly unfortunate and does not reflect the actual situation .
Firstly , it must be made clear that export restitution is a European Union instrument of market control that is used very cautiously by the European Commission and applied only in a few exceptional cases .
Export restitutions , which were designed as a kind of safety net , cannot therefore be held responsible for major damage to the agricultural sector in developing countries - as suggested in the recital .
Moreover , it must be pointed out that the EU is the world 's biggest importer of agricultural produce from developing countries .
The EU is thus not weakening development and the establishment of a viable agricultural sector in developing countries ; quite the contrary .
The EU undoubtedly has a great responsibility in the area of international trade in the agricultural sector , particularly in respect of developing countries .
That is not in question and the Union is fully aware of it .
In view of this , I must protest against blanket judgments that have nothing to do with a differentiated and objective approach .
I object to recital I as well as to paragraphs 44 and 45 , and thus also to the report as a whole .
in writing . - I support this resolution on Policy Coherence for Development .
As the Lisbon Treaty clearly states , the European Union has to take account of development cooperation objectives when implementing policies that might impact developing countries .
At a time when multiple crises seriously threaten the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals , it is all the more important to ensure that our development policies are not undermined by action in other policy fields .
While the eradication of poverty is the primary development policy objective of the EU , many policy initiatives undercut this purpose .
EU agricultural export subsidies gravely undermine food security elsewhere , and we have yet to assess the ecological and social impact of our fisheries agreements with developing countries .
Policy Coherence for Development cannot be sidelined when negotiating bilateral and regional trade agreements , and has a key role to play if we are to ensure that the outcome of the Doha Round is not detrimental to development .
European Investment Bank external lending to developing countries must be focused on investments which contribute to eradicating poverty , and has to turn away from tax haven-based companies .
Human rights , labour and environmental standards and tax governance must guide EU negotiations with developing countries .
Penalties for serious infringements against the social rules in road transport ( short presentation )
The next item is the short presentation of the report by Hella Ranner , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on penalties for serious infringements against the social rules in road transport .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank all the members of the committee for their constructive cooperation .
This report concerns an important matter .
It affects everyone who travels on Europe 's roads .
It concerns compliance with driving hours and rest periods in goods transport , which needs to be considerably improved .
Our discussions in committee - along with the many discussions held with a wide range of stakeholders from all sides , as well as discussions with representatives of Member States - showed that it is imperative that the implementation of the rules on driving hours and rest periods is urgently improved .
The rules on tachographs also need to be improved .
In May 2009 , the Commission submitted a report analysing the implementation of the social rules relating to road transport in the Member States .
It has to be said that the results were sobering .
The penalty for the same offence in different Member States varied from EUR 500 to EUR 5 000 .
In consequence , as far as is possible - which is mainly in border areas - drivers naturally flee to states where the penalties are lower .
This situation cannot continue .
Differences in the frequency of checks also result in great uncertainty among drivers and undertakings .
Not only are there differences in the level of fines , but there is also wide variation in the types of sanctions available and in how individual offences are categorised .
This situation cannot continue , because the aim of such rules is not just road safety and the protection of employees , but also - and this should not be forgotten - fair competition .
In times of crisis , undertakings come under increasing pressure .
There is pressure on prices .
The safety of all those on the roads and , of course , not least of those drivers directly involved , must therefore be absolutely ensured .
As we are all aware , this can only be achieved if we have an effective penal system .
The penalties must be clear , transparent and , above all , comparable .
If we want the regulation on driving hours and rest periods to be successful , then the regulations also have to be sensibly transposed in the Member States - and that is the most important point in this report .
In any event , we need more frequent and better controls as well as information on the rules , not just for drivers from our Member States but also for drivers from third countries .
Naturally , they are not always familiar with our systems .
It is therefore essential to bring about an exchange of information , and this be based in the Commission .
An agency with general competence for road transport could be responsible for this .
In this context , I consider it irrelevant which office deals with bringing together checks and results .
One thing is clear , however : such an office must exist .
Article 83 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon allows us to intervene in the rules of the individual Member States and to check whether the legal provisions are being harmonised accordingly .
There was no question in the committee - it was entirely undisputed - that it is in all our interests , and the interests of our safety , to utilise this possibility .
There is one further significant factor to mention before I conclude my comments .
If we want drivers to comply with rest periods , then we must provide them with the necessary infrastructure .
In many Member States , there are not really sufficient safe parking areas .
It is up to the Member States to provide these , because only then can the rules genuinely have the desired effect .
I very much hope that the Commission will continue to take this problem seriously and I am convinced that Parliament must and indeed will go along with this .
This report must not be the end of this work .
Perhaps it is only the beginning .
It is a matter of genuinely joining forces to achieve better control and harmonisation , and I expect the Commission to submit a report within the coming year on the possible harmonisation measures , including those under the new rule in the Treaty of Lisbon .
( EL ) Mr President , I really must congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report .
It is a fact that penalties , the types of penalties , fines and how they are classified - and that is what I wish to emphasise - differ hugely from one Member State to another .
That is precisely why the report places a great deal of emphasis and the rapporteur quite rightly states at the end of her report that we need specific harmonisation measures from the Commission .
In Greece , accidents are many and often , there are a lot of infringements and , obviously , if we do not manage to coordinate legislation at European level , if we do not manage to harmonise practices and to ultimately ensure that controls are carried out in a more specific and coordinated manner at European level , then unfortunately , we shall not be able to limit this massive problem .
For Greece in particular , this is a very sensitive issue , which is why we believe that this report will constitute an excellent starting point for further action .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first to thank - both personally and on behalf of my colleague , Mr Kallas , for whom I am standing in - Mrs Ranner for her report on a particularly important aspect of the social rules in road transport .
The Commission 's initial report underlined the very significant differences between the penalties applicable in the Member States for serious infringements against the social rules in road transport .
The penalties vary with regard to their type and category of seriousness and with regard to the level of fines .
For example , a driver who exceeds the maximum daily driving time risks a fine , which can be 10 times higher in Spain than in Greece .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's decision to follow up the report it drafted .
Parliament is emphasising just how unsatisfactory the current situation is , insofar as drivers and hauliers may wrongly believe that committing an infringement is less serious in one Member State than it is in another .
Clearly , this is potentially detrimental to road safety and to competition .
Parliament 's report therefore makes a valuable contribution to the Commission 's efforts to coordinate the harmonised implementation of the rules in force .
Parliament 's report suggests , among other things , setting minimum and maximum penalties for each infringement against the social rules and stresses that Article 83 of the Treaty of Lisbon provides for the possibility of establishing minimum rules with regard to penalties , as the rapporteur said .
The Commission will shortly scrutinise the extent to which and the way in which these new provisions of the treaty can be used to improve the implementation of the social rules in road transport .
I am grateful to you for this particularly constructive report , and I can assure you that the issues raised and the suggestions made by the European Parliament will be scrutinised by the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 18 May 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Today 's discussion has made us aware of the significant variations in the penalties for serious infringements of social rules in road transport as provided for in the legislation of the 27 EU Member States .
Therefore , I think it is a particularly valuable idea to prepare a multilingual brochure which would give drivers and undertakings clear information about social rules in different Member States .
The brochure should contain a list of estimates of penalties which can be imposed on a driver for infringement of a particular rule .
Another interesting point is the use of RDS-TMC technology instead of GPS to keep drivers informed in real time about penalties in force in the country in which the driver is currently located .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting :
( The sitting was closed at 21.40 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.05 )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Amending budget no 1 / 2010 : Section I - Parliament - Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the year 2011 - Section I - Parliament ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Maňka , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on Draft Amending budget no 1 / 2010 of the European Union for the financial year 2010 , Section I - European Parliament , and
the report by Mrs Trüpel , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2011 .
Many procedures are now more direct and more transparent , due to the fact that the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force .
Powers are more clearly defined .
The European Parliament has greater power , and the European Union has boosted its standing both externally and internally .
For the first time in the history of democracy , the citizens of a number of countries have the right to influence events on a supranational level .
In view of the size and diversity of Europe , we must take care that all citizens , including those who are not very wealthy and do not belong to large established organisations , have recourse to all democratic means .
Utilisation of these democratic means must not be dependent on the possession of large financial resources .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has a specific financial impact on some European institutions .
During the budget procedure for 2010 , it was agreed that we would preferentially use an available reserve in Heading 5 for financing additional costs arising directly from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today , therefore , after adopting the original budget for 2010 , we are addressing the corresponding additional expenditure via an amending budget .
Following the submission of applications for additional resources , we took every effort to locate reserves and distribute existing resources as far as possible .
The Treaty of Lisbon has a direct or indirect effect on all of the European Parliament 's services .
The amending budget of the European Parliament , which we are debating today , will secure the additional financial and human resources to enable Parliament to fulfil its new codecision-making role on an equal footing to that of the Council .
The net financial impact of the amending budget of the European Parliament is lower than the original demand for budgetary resources .
In the conciliation proceedings with the Presidency of the European Parliament , we managed to find EUR 4 million .
There was a further reduction in demand for resources as a result of the timing , as we approved the budget a month later than we originally expected .
Most companies and institutions , not only in Europe but throughout the world , are taking advantage of the global economic crisis to improve their efficiency and competitiveness .
This is the challenge for us , the European Parliament , just as it is for other European institutions .
The Secretary-General of the European Parliament now has further savings and efficiency improvements at his disposal , and not just for this year .
The detailed functional audit at the INLO Directorate-General and in the security service unit , which we agreed on when approving the budget in December , may bring significant and sustainable savings for future budget periods as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's budget for 2011 is the first real budget for our Chamber since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
That means that Parliament has more competences , we have more duties , we have more responsibility , we have more legislative duties - in other words , we need more working capacity and that means we need a bigger budget .
At the same time - and this is very important to me - we have to be aware that we are in the midst of the economic and financial crisis and the euro stability crisis .
In Germany the debt cutbacks will kick in in 2011 , high levels of cutbacks are needed in Greece and in all heavily indebted public budgets .
We thus need to find a very responsible position for how we approach the increases in Parliament 's budget in these difficult economic times .
As rapporteur for the 2011 budget , I will reflect the majority position , although I will also set out my own green position .
Twenty per cent for Parliament 's budget , based on the administrative budget , was an upper limit that was laid down between the institutions in 1988 .
The majority in the Committee on Budgets believe , however , that that cannot apply to the same degree to 2011 , as the reality has changed .
We have enlargement , we have more competences and we have more duties , so the 20 % figure must not necessarily be regarded as fixed .
Despite that , it has become clear that we are aiming to stick to the area around 20 % for reasons of self-discipline and responsibility .
The Bureau has proposed a figure of 20.46 % - in other words , EUR 39 million above the figure for 2010 .
After some debate - and taking account of the conflict of aims - we have now agreed that we will only spend 20.32 % - in other words , an additional EUR 20 million .
There is consensus that we need more staff for enlargement , more staff for the library , IT and studies , that we need to give clearer priority to environmental protection here in Parliament and that it would be very positive for there to be more bikes available in Strasbourg so that less use would need to be made of the transport service .
Where is there controversy , however ?
There is controversy on the question of whether there should be more money in 2011 - EUR 1 500 - for assistants .
I repeat that that is for assistants , not for Members of this House .
That would total EUR 13.2 million .
The majority in the Committee voted to place these increases for assistants in the reserve on the basis of the argument that this should be better evaluated and decided later in the year .
I would like to make the green position on this point clear , which is that we need to be sensitive to the general debt problems and my group therefore believes that we should waive this increase of EUR 1 500 for the next year .
We should not change the Members ' statute at this point - we should instead undertake to take fewer business flights for short trips so that we actually apply environmental protection - which we repeatedly call for politically - to our own behaviour and our own Parliament .
It is therefore very pleasing that we have succeeded in improving our own environmental protection data , one example being a 12.9 % drop in CO2 emissions in 2008 .
We have reduced energy consumption by 0.8 % .
We would like to see a job-funded pass for local public transport , in other words , we want to prove ourselves to be responsible from both a financial and an environmental policy point of view .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is advocating budgetary stringency , transparency and sustainability .
We therefore welcome the work of the administration in specifying fixed and variable expenditure , as well as the fact that a medium-term strategy regarding buildings policy has been tabled .
Nevertheless , we believe that these documents can be improved in the future , and we would remind you that we are advocating a long-term buildings strategy .
We are ambitious regarding budgetary stringency , so we want progress to be made towards a zero-based budget , in which each item of expenditure is supported by documentary evidence .
To the same end , we also propose that progress be made in carrying out a cost-benefit analysis of variable expenditure .
We would argue that there is a potential saving and we therefore support - indeed we are ourselves suggesting this - reductions in some budgetary items .
Excellence in lawmaking is Parliament 's principle goal .
We all know that not having the appropriate legislation or having bad legislation always leads to high costs ; costs which , in the final analysis , are always borne by the European public .
To achieve this aspiration of excellence in lawmaking in the face of the new competences resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we support the possibility of recruiting new human resources ; we want these to be of a high standard ; indeed , we demand it .
I would also remind you that we are going to have 18 new Members and that these too must be in a position to properly exercise their mandate .
The times we live in are very demanding and European institutions play an essential role ; it is a crucial role , in which they must not fail , and they therefore need to have sufficient means at their disposal .
We are well aware that there can always be strong doses of populism and demagoguery surrounding budgetary issues , and we repudiate these .
There are even those who insinuate that MEPs ' allowances are increasing , which is not true .
What we are seeking is for Parliament to have allowances sufficient for it to have the dignity that we all advocate , and achievement of the goal that the European public expects , indeed demands , of us : excellence in lawmaking .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , it is always controversial when you discuss your own budget , and we have seen that in our discussions on the amending budget and in our own budget for 2011 .
However , I am pleased that most of the issues have now been resolved for 2011 within the Committee on Budgets itself .
Indeed , I believe there are now very few differences between the Committee on Budgets and the Bureau , apart from maybe three or four issues .
One , of course , is the 20 % threshold .
Another is the buildings reserve , another is the posts which have now been put into reserve and another is the second tranche of EUR 1 500 per Member per month for the assistants ' allowance .
These two tranches of EUR 1 500 per Member are controversial and would be difficult at any time , but are , of course , even more controversial in difficult economic times . This is even though we all recognise that the Lisbon Treaty has given us more responsibilities .
It is because of this that a compromise has been reached to put the funding for the second tranche of EUR 1 500 into a reserve and it will remain there until the full costings of this proposal are established .
I think the other controversial issue for us which is outstanding is the office-holders allowance .
The compromise reached here was to reduce the figure allocated for office holders down from EUR 1.2 million to EUR 400 000 and , of course , documented evidence of receipts must be provided when any claims are made .
I think that is an important principle and one we would all want to support .
Colleagues themselves will decide whether these two compromises are acceptable to them or not .
I believe the majority of the S & D Group will find those compromises acceptable to them .
One thing , however , has also become clear in our discussions on the 2011 budget , and that is if we are to fund extra responsibilities in the future because of the Lisbon Treaty , we must also find efficiency savings elsewhere .
For the 2011 budget , some attempts at making these savings have been made .
Indeed , the overall increase has come down from 6.5 % to around 5.8 % .
That is welcome , but I believe we need to do much more in the future .
I hope that in the future , the Bureau will come forward with recommendations and proposals , not only about spending , but also about ways in which we can make efficiency savings in the future .
I would hope those savings would include changes in the way we do things , rather than just making cuts .
I believe it is important in the future that if the Bureau does come forward - and I hope it will - with efficiency savings proposals , that it is discussed with Members at an early stage .
This will give the European Parliament the chance to shape the budget , but also to shape our priorities and to identify savings ourselves , but in the meantime , we should continue to work to ensure that our budget for 2011 is acceptable to Members , to this Parliament and , of course , to the public as well .
Madam President , we have had an interesting debate on Parliament 's own budget for this year and next year .
I would like to start by giving particular thanks to Mrs Trüpel , who has done a good job on the preparation of next year 's budget .
It is probably more balanced than was originally intended .
The Treaty of Lisbon brings with it new requirements of the European Parliament and , with that in mind , it is logical for Parliament to expect some increased costs , because there will be an increase in our activities .
At the same time , it is absolutely astonishing that we have been entirely incapable of reorganising our own activities in order to meet the new requirements .
That is an area in which we need to improve .
In the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , we have been critical of the cost increases originally proposed by the Bureau which have , in fact , now been partly cut , as has been said .
Nonetheless , I would like to say that the ALDE Group does not accept , and will not vote in favour of , a further EUR 1 500 per month increase in allowances for each Member so that they can employ further assistants .
We also oppose the idea that the chairs of the committees should be given an entertainment allowance .
It is obvious that the two big political groups have now found a point of contact in this matter , but we in the ALDE Group will fight for our views in this Chamber .
It is important that the European Parliament shows that we really are interested in the level of costs to which we give rise .
I cannot really understand the logic that was presented here earlier according to which it is a matter not of cost increases , but rather of being able to perform our duties properly .
That is not what it is about at all .
In the final event , it is only about cost increases .
By extension , it is also good to remember that the greater the number of assistants employed in Parliament , the greater will be our requirements in terms of our buildings and it will become very expensive in the long term .
We in the ALDE Group are highly critical of some of these proposals and will vote accordingly when the House votes .
Madam President , I would like to start with the magic word ' balance ' once again , which Mr Haglund has just mentioned .
I actually believe that , as we now discuss the 2011 budget , we must take as our starting point the question ' How can we find a proper and responsible balance ? '
Mr Fernandes spoke of popularism in relation to Parliament 's considered idea of being very responsible and self-disciplined in the 2011 budget .
I completely disagree with him in this regard .
I do not believe that it is popularism for us to together come to the considered conclusion that , in the light of the many cutbacks that we are demanding of other countries , we too need to examine very closely how we in Parliament must act with self-discipline .
On the contrary , I believe that to be precisely the political responsibility of the European Parliament in the current circumstances .
In the cutbacks that are being demanded of Greece and public budgets in general , we must have the courage , on the one hand , to legitimise the increases that we do need in order to do our work responsibly and yet , at the same time , to find a limit where we say : under present conditions , we also require a certain delimitation , as that is simply a part of the political landscape .
This must be signalled according to the maxim ' We have understood ! '
That is important from a political point of view , and I therefore once again call on all the groups to consider what signal we will be giving the public with the 2011 budget .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , in Romania , civil servants are facing a 25 % cut in their salaries , in Spain , public sector employees will see 5 % to 15 % of their wages disappear , and in Portugal - not to mention Greece - governments are making huge efforts to save on human resources .
In the UK , the new government has already indicated that there is a need for a major package of financial savings this year .
Does anybody in this Parliament think that now is the time for the European Parliament to spend more on anything - to increase spending , have more staff for groups , library , committees , IT staff and an additional EUR 1 500 in assistants ' allowances ?
We are debating the second tranche of the EUR 1 500 ; I say that even the first is absolutely unnecessary .
It should not be a question of putting the second into reserve ; we should eliminate both because this is not the time to do this .
We are all aware of increased competences , but more competences do not necessarily require more spending .
It requires more efficient spending , more accountability and more responsibility .
I completely agree with Mrs Trüpel , who said that there are ways to make additional savings .
We do not need a fleet of cars here in Strasbourg .
We have free public transportation .
I use the tram every day .
Instead of using business class tickets , we can use economy class in order to make savings .
I , for one , as a matter of principle , have never flown business class when coming here from Budapest .
All in all , while the discussion between the Bureau and Committee on Budgets was very useful in this respect , I think that a tremendous amount of further opportunities exist where we can make savings .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , once again , I am appalled to see how the Members of this Parliament continue to demand budget increases while people in the Member countries are struggling to live through the present crisis .
But today I will refer to the ethics of this House .
In the present situation , is it acceptable that , while they demand power to control national budgets , the European institutions want to increase their own administrative budgets , as is the case with this Parliament ?
Is it acceptable that the EU institutions go to the Court of Justice over the Council 's decision to moderate the increase in salaries of EU civil servants ?
Is it ethically acceptable for Parliament to rush out its approval of the Council 's 2008 accounts in exchange for the latter 's approval of Parliament 's budget increases ?
Let me explain : the Budgetary Control Committee has voted unanimously against approving the Council 's 2008 accounts due to a lack of transparency .
Coincidentally , the Council has failed to approve budget increases for Parliament .
I guess that we will see Parliament voting in favour of approving the Council 's accounts this week , and shortly afterwards the Council will be approving extra budget for the Parliament .
These votes , ladies and gentlemen of Europe , the ones for Parliament 's budget and the Council 's discharge , are representative of the ethics of the institutions that aim to govern all of us .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon brought with it changes , including , and indeed specifically relating to , the importance of the European Parliament .
I have already pointed out once that my ' Yes ' to the amendment of the parliamentary budget is a conditional one .
Of course , the European Parliament should strive for legislative excellence .
Of course , strengthening Parliament 's role means that it has more obligations , more responsibility and more work .
That said , in times of crisis like those we are in at present - the worst economic crisis in 60 years - I would point out that , as MEPs , we , too , and indeed we , specifically , should exercise particular care with the money entrusted to us .
The Council and the European Parliament are supposed to and must work together to a greater extent , and this cooperation requires a willingness to act as partners .

( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs , Mrs Trüpel and Mr Maňka , for their excellent work in preparing the decisions which we are discussing today .
We must acknowledge that this was anything but an easy task , as witnessed by today 's debate .
On the one hand , we must be paragons of thrift and efficiency when it comes to spending European taxpayers ' money .
On the other hand , however , we must give Parliament the opportunity to fulfil all its duties and responsibilities which these same taxpayers have entrusted to it through the Treaty of Lisbon .
The fact is that the new European Union treaty imposes the most changes and new duties actually on our institution .
One of the most serious issues causing much debate was the extent to which the European Parliament is taking into account the tough economic situation in Europe and showing leadership in terms of restricting expenditure and increasing its effectiveness .
The parliamentary decisions which we are discussing today are relevant to the economic situation .
A minimum 5.5 % increase in expenditure allows us to increase the European Parliament 's staff by taking on 18 new employees .
We need the administration to provide specialist support for areas which have significantly increased , where the European Parliament 's decisions are crucial .
We offer MEPs the opportunity to have more contact with their voters , to undergo specialist training in more areas and to fulfil their new duties , which were entrusted to them by the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are paragons of thrift as we are accommodating all the new functions as part of an overspend of just 0.28 % on the agreement reached many years ago so that the European Parliament 's expenditure does not exceed 20 % of the European budget 's administrative costs .
At the same time , we must state very clearly that the old agreement needs to be renegotiated in future so that it reflects , to a large extent , the changes in the institutions ' functions and , in particular , the increase in the role and , accordingly , the expectations of the European Parliament .
Fellow Members , we still have reserves available .
In future , we must increase our efforts to make Parliament work more efficiently , for instance , by relying not on buildings but on new technologies , by setting an example in terms of institutional and environmental standards and by analysing closely the impact of every expense and not allowing the budget to grow automatically , as is usually the case with any bureaucracy .
We must not forget that we are accountable to our voters , who are going through difficult times at the moment , for every action we take .
( DE ) Madam President , in times of crisis , in particular , politicians must be able to separate their rational and emotional sides , especially when it comes to budgetary matters and money .
I have the feeling that the Treaty of Lisbon and the associated budgetary issues are a little bit like the weather forecast - you never know exactly how things will look in the morning .
The forecast says rain , so you take the umbrella , and in the end it maybe spits a little , but there is definitely no real rain .
It is the same with the Treaty of Lisbon : we do not know how Parliament 's workload will be changed by the Treaty .
I have to wonder how it was possible for Members to have worked in the committees and the presidiums in the past in such a way that there will be no change as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The discussion about the EUR 1 500 increase in the secretarial allowance is symbolic for the issue of whether we are able to slim down our structures , save funds and make our working processes more efficient .
Taking these three points into account would be of greater benefit to us than ever increasingly talking about the area of funding .
Above all , it is only over the next year that we will see what impact the Treaty of Lisbon has really had on our work .
( PL ) There is no doubt that the European Parliament , which has more responsibilities and a greater role to play following ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon , quite naturally must have greater financial resources to be able to fulfil this role .
The previous speaker is right .
We do not know how much , in practice , that role will increase , but we do know that it will increase .
In relation to this , quite naturally , our voters ' and taxpayers ' expectations of us are greater , too .
This , too , is why the request for an increase in funding , for example , for Members ' assistants , is unquestionably justified both financially and politically .
We are aware that at the moment , there is a huge crisis in Greece and generally in the countries of southern Europe , which is obviously also a problem of a political nature , but when cutting costs , we must not amputate certain functions of the European Parliament .
I am profoundly convinced that the budget of the European Parliament should be significantly increased .
( NL ) Madam President , Parliament 's draft budget for 2011 is EUR 1.7 billion .


That is equivalent to EUR 2.3 million per MEP per year , EUR 200 000 per month and a staggering EUR 6 400 per MEP per day ; and there are 736 MEPs in this House .
Madam President , EUR 6 400 is a huge amount of money .
I can think of a hundred things it would be better spent on than this puppetry .
Most importantly , however , citizens themselves must be able to take such decisions .
Let us shut up shop in Brussels , Luxembourg and , primarily , Strasbourg today .
Let us simply clear everyone out of the buildings , lock the door , throw away the key and give that EUR 1.7 billion back to the citizens who have earned it with their own blood , sweat and tears .
Each Member of this House should have to get up and go to bed every day with the thought that he or she will cost , or has cost , the taxpayer EUR 6 400 that day .
Each Member must also see it as his or her duty to bring that amount down every day , as everything that is spent on nonsense here is taxpayers ' money that has been produced by citizens through enormously hard work .
That is what should happen , but it does not .
In this House , more is always better .
Via handshakes , like-knows-like , shadowy deals in back rooms , tens of millions are added to the budget .
The elite decides , and the public coughs up .
Everyone should think about this at night before going to sleep , and I would call on everyone to do so tonight : to ask him or herself , ' have I cost EUR 6 400 ? '
If they do not do so , they should be deeply ashamed , as they are worth nothing as MEPs .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say to Mr van der Stoep : I am worth my money , and I am standing by that position .
If you are not worth yours , then you have my sympathy .
All I can say is that we are doing ourselves no favours if we create working conditions for ourselves in this House that effectively make it impossible for us to work .
I support the increase in the secretarial allowance - indeed for both levels - and I believe that this is highly justifiable .
Anyone who works in this House needs staff .
Those who do not want to work should not prevent those who want and have to work from doing so .
No one will be forced to use the increase in the secretarial allowance - you can use it , you do not have to do so .
If MEPs do not use the allowance , then all the better for the taxpayers , who will then get the money back .
I , in turn , can only speak for myself when I say that I am worth the money and that the same applies to my staff .
However , we must put under the microscope activities that were undertaken in the past on the basis of a surplus in this budget .
We must examine whether we thus want to and are able to continue these activities .
I am also thinking , in this regard , above all , about the web TV service .
I think that we have to take action , that we cannot leave everything as it is .
Apart from that , we have undertaken many reforms with the Bureau and we should also allow these reforms to bite .
The Committee on Budgetary Control will do everything in its power to point out where things are not working .
Madam President , across Europe , governments and public institutions are facing up to the need for cuts , but this Parliament continues to live in a fairytale world .
I hear fine words about the need for savings and efficiency , but the budget of over EUR 1.7 billion in 2011 is an increase of nearly 6 % .
This is totally unacceptable .
We should be talking about massive savings , not increases .
There are many ways in which this could be done .
For a start , we should be cutting unnecessary waste and expenditure .
This House should demand that Council end the Strasbourg circus and save annual costs of over EUR 200 million .
A further EUR 50 million would be saved every year by closing the European Parliament offices in each of our countries .
We must streamline the bureaucracy : the number of officials employed by Parliament has increased by 14 % to 6 000 in just three years .
Any other organisation in straitened times would meet new priorities with compensating reductions elsewhere .
We seem to think that we live in a different world .
We need to take the necessary steps to bring about real changes and real cuts in Parliament 's budget .
( NL ) I should like to come back to the idea of twice adding EUR 1 500 per month to the secretarial assistance allowance .
It is true that Lisbon gives us many additional tasks , so I shall certainly not be opposing the idea of more staff for the parliamentary committees given additional tasks by Lisbon , such as the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Nor shall I be opposing more staff for the groups , to enable them to better support that kind of task , but let us be honest , ladies and gentlemen : it is crazy , and also incorrect , to give each individual MEP EUR 1 500 more this year and a further EUR 1 500 on top next year .
I myself have worked in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for 10 years , and I continue to do so .
That committee has very many legislative tasks under the codecision , or ordinary legislative , procedure .
I have always managed with three assistants , and I assume that those MEPs currently working or about to work in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs can also manage with three assistants .
Your suggestion , Mrs Gräßle - that extra staff should be given to those wanting to work but not to those not wanting to - is populism of the highest order .
I would like to thank everyone who expressed an opinion .
I am pleased that you all want to perform your legislative work as well as possible , and to make the best possible use of resources .
Each one of us has his or her own opinion as to where and how we might improve things .
Today 's debate bears witness to this .
I would like to say to Mr Bokros that there is a way to achieve savings through objective methods .
This way was blocked one year ago by Members of your political group , among others .
Since January , I have been the head of a regional authority in my own country .
After taking up this post , the first step was an independent external study of all the processes in my institution .
This audit will eliminate duplication and reduce administrative costs by more than 15 % .
If we want to analyse spare capacity and reorganise existing resources to the greatest possible extent , an objective and independent external study is the best solution .
Those who had the courage to take this step achieved the best use of resources and managed to reduce their administrative costs markedly .
In the coming days , we will be debating and voting on the 2010 amending budget of the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
These institutions are clearly expanding their activities , with greater powers and a greater workload .
I would also like to make a request to the Council for us to be able to finalise these budgets as soon as possible , so that both institutions can carry out their responsibilities in a responsible and efficient manner in the new or expanded areas introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you have all heard how controversial the debate about this 2011 budget is .
No wonder , either , given that , in fact , it concerns real increases and cuts but also - as always in politics - symbolic issues .
As rapporteur , I would like to put the following on the record .
You have seen the full spectrum of viewpoints here , from Mrs Gräßle from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which is very settled in favouring these increases - including the EUR 1 500 - in order to safeguard its ability to work , to other Members , who have said ' We do not need this ' or ' We need to evaluate much more precisely how the increases can be justified and provide ourselves with an overview , including of the individual committees and working areas of this House ' .
As rapporteur , I would like to point out that the majority of the Committee on Budgets decided to place the additional money in the reserve - it has thus not yet been agreed by the Committee on Budgets - and to demand a precise evaluation .
All of that therefore still has to be done .
We need to get this evaluation on the table , and then in the autumn we will once again have to very seriously get to grips with these results so that we will be able to further negotiate with the Council in October under the new budget procedure and also so that we can find a majority position internally here in Parliament .
In the current state of affairs , it is important to point out that there is controversy , there are very different opinions and there is a majority opinion according to which we need to look at the figures very closely once again .
My thanks for your advice , and I hope that we all demonstrate prudence as we move forwards .
Thank you , Mrs Trüpel .
However , this ends the joint debate on the budget .
Thank you for your speeches .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the report by Mr Maňka will take place tomorrow , and the vote on the report by Mrs Trüpel will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The amending budget is the outcome of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament has come up against new challenges and will need resources if it is to meet its new responsibilities and challenges with success .
I should like to emphasise that European citizens want Parliament to perform its duties impeccably and , in order to safeguard this , it is important for its members , its committees and its political groups to have the necessary resources .
Furthermore , we believe that financial discipline and spending cuts are needed now more than ever , and European citizens quite rightly expect them of us , which is why we have prepared a budget that guarantees financial austerity and transparency .
We have also insisted on the need for long-term policy planning for European Parliament buildings , in a bid to safeguard satisfactory financial support both now and in coming years .
We are sure that these measures will help to put us in a position to address the concerns , expectations and demands of the citizens of Europe .
To close , I should like to congratulate Vladimir Maňka on his excellent report .
European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 ( amendment of Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC ) .
Migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1104 / 2008 ) - Migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( amendment of Decision 2008 / 839 / JHA ) - The establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Tavares , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC establishing the European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 as part of the General programme ' Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows ' and repealing Council Decision 2004 / 904 / EC - C7-0123 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1104 / 2008 on migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) - C7-0244 / 2009 - 2009 / 0136 ( NLE ) ) ,
the report by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Decision 2008 / 839 / JHA on migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) - 2010 / 0006 ( NLE ) ) , and
the report by Mr Tavares , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by reminding you that Parliament has already criticised the enormous delays in implementing the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) .
On 22 October 2009 , we adopted a resolution on the SIS II and the Visa Information System .
The European Parliament once again expressed deep concern at the delays in commencing operations and requested information from the Commission and the Council on the results of the technical tests , demanding full transparency regarding the implementation process for the SIS II .
The SIS II should have become operational in 2007 .
We are now in 2010 and no one is able to give a firm answer on when it will be concluded .
As regards the package of proposals that we are considering , four fundamental questions arise .
First , when is this migration to take place ?
Before the SIS II can become operational it must be personally tested to check whether the system is capable of functioning in accordance with the technical and operational requirements set out in the respective legal instruments .
Only after all these tests have been successfully concluded can migration from the first generation Schengen Information System to the SIS II take place .
Second , have these tests been concluded ?
No .
Faced with enormous delays to the project , and because of all the problems and difficulties encountered , the Council decided to carry out two ' milestone ' tests : the first in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the second in summer 2010 .
However , the first test had to be postponed until late January because the prerequisites had not been met .
The test took place between 21 and 24 January 2010 : apparently the system worked for the first 25 hours , but was notoriously unstable throughout the rest of the test .
This test was carried out again between 2 and 5 March , and the final assessment and validation of the second set of tests took place on 6 April .
Although the test conditions were not fully respected by the Member States or the contracted company , and despite the fact that the limited number of transfers did not comply with the required response times , the great majority of Member States concluded that the deviations were insignificant and that the tests ' major objectives had been met .
The new general timetable and budgetary plan are to be adopted at the next Council meeting in June , or in October 2010 at the latest .
It was also thought essential that the following conditions be met before the system becomes operational .
The Milestone II test must be successfully carried out and the operating conditions must be fully met .
The overall test for which there is provision in Article 55 of the Regulation must also be successfully carried out , and the safety of the network completely ensured .
Third question : why is it so urgent for these initiatives to be adopted ?
Although the conditions necessary in order to go ahead with the migration have not all been met , nor is a time foreseeable when that will be the case , the mandate that was granted to the Commission to develop the SIS II will expire again on 30 June 2010 .
We therefore have to amend the sunset clauses in the migration instruments adopted in 2008 in order to prevent them from expiring .
For my fourth and final question , what aspects of the proposals have I sought to amend ?
First , the insertion of a sunset clause , which the Commission had not proposed .
We propose that it be set for 31 December 2013 .
Given the considerable delays , it is also essential that it be set out in the legal basis that the solution used , whatever it may be , must be based on the available technology , must follow a reasonable timetable and must be acceptable in terms of cost effectiveness .
The Global Programme Management Board must also be created , and its management of the SIS II formally integrated .
I am absolutely convinced that if this body had existed from the start , we would have managed to be better coordinated , we would have known more , and we would have been more effective .
Finally , I consider it crucial that the migration process be submitted to parliamentary scrutiny .
Parliament is not just responsible for the legal basis : as budgetary authority , it also ensures the supervision of actions financed by the Union budget .
That is why I , alongside my fellow Member , Mr Alvaro , have tabled an amendment to place funds in reserve .
I have also tabled an amendment alongside my fellow Members Mr Alvaro , Mrs Ludford , Mr Enciu and Mrs Hohlmeir to request an audit by the European Court of Auditors .
I would like to thank everyone for being extremely cooperative .
I am unable to give the floor to Mr Tavares right now because he has had some slight transport problems thanks to a certain volcano .
As soon as he joins us , I will give him the floor .
Madam President , SIS II is a tale of attempts , failures and new attempts that has gone on for years .
These attempts , failures and new attempts have thus far gobbled up a total of EUR 90 million - 90 million which , in many people 's eyes , has been completely wasted .


From a budgetary point of view , I can endorse Mr Coelho 's every sentence , every word and every effort .
We are working very closely and very well together on this .
We all have a common interest in SIS II working .
Sometimes , however , you have to admit - as with many things in life - when things are not working , and you have to consider alternatives .
We , as the European Parliament , are not prepared to give up this project already and we will support Commissioner Malmström , who has accepted this difficult inheritance , in any way we can .
It must be clear , however - and we have established this in the Committee on Budgets and are also recommending it to the plenary - that contributions for SIS II be placed in the reserve , so that we can have more control over the use of these funds .
Personally , I expect that there is a plan B for the case where we admit , one day , that we are not able to achieve what we wanted to achieve .
In the absence of Mr Tavares , I give the floor to Commissioner Malmström .


Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Coelho and Mr Alvaro for their contributions , and thank you for the very constructive cooperation we have had on this extremely complicated file that I inherited .
It is very complicated , but I am determined to work together with you in order to get this right in a transparent way and to see the project completed .
The vote tomorrow is very timely for the SIS II project .
The Council has confirmed that the Milestone I test was successful and that the development of SIS II should continue on the basis of current technical solutions .
The legislative proposals before you contained three substantial elements : Mr Coelho made reference to them , and that will change the development of the project .
First , as Mr Coelho said , the initial expiry date of the instruments - 30 June this year - has become unrealistic and will therefore be changed .
This will allow the SIS II project to continue in the light of technical requirements and a global schedule which are currently being redefined with the Member States ' experts .
It will be available for the Council on 3 and 4 June .
The rapporteur calls for a specific deadline for SIS II development .
I am sorry to tell you that the Commission is not yet in a position to take up that proposal .
The Commission 's experts , together with all Member States , are in the process of finalising the adaptation of requirements and the new global schedule .
Once this is done , the Commission will make appropriate suggestions in the light of the new global schedule to be presented at the next Justice and Home Affairs Council in two weeks .
Secondly , the Global Programme Management Board is a group of technical experts advising on SIS II development and that should be formalised .
The global management board has already proven to be a very good tool of cooperation and technical analysis between the Commission and Member State experts .
The proposal will make sure that this will continue whilst streamlining the board 's role , composition and procedures .
For this reason - it is a purely technical body - it is not appropriate to open the board to MEPs and other parliamentary officials .
We will continue to move forward on SIS II in a transparent way with the European Parliament , but we must keep a clear distinction between the technical work and political transparency .
But in this spirit , the Commission is open to providing full technical information to the Members of this House by making available the reports of the board to Parliament , in line with what Mr Coelho suggests .
Thirdly , the necessary legal flexibility to carry out the development through an alternative technical scenario would be foreseen and I believe that we all agree on the rationale of this .
As regards the budgetary aspects of continuing SIS II development , the Commission shares the rapporteur 's aim to make the most efficient use of taxpayers ' money .
In this context , the report asks to reserve Parliament 's right to put funds for SIS II development for 2011 in the budgetary reserve .
This is , of course , entirely within the discretion of the budgetary authority .
From the point of view of budgetary implementation , I would only ask Mr Alvaro if there could be some sort of clear and efficient de-blocking procedure for the case when we would need the money .
I would like to thank the LIBE committee , Mr Coelho and the Budgetary Control Committee rapporteur , Mr Alvaro , for their excellent cooperation on this file .
I am sorry that Mr Tavares is not yet here .
We would have had an opportunity to discuss the EU resettlement programme - an extremely important subject - with him .
As you know , a large majority of refugees worldwide are hosted in countries in Asia , Africa and the Middle East .
Many of these refugees find themselves in Catch-22 situations : they cannot return to their country of origin , nor can they integrate locally in the country of first asylum , since many of these countries are themselves victims of conflict or poverty .
For these groups of refugees , resettlement can be the only solution .
Through resettlement , the Member States of the European Union can demonstrate tangible solidarity with these often over-burdened countries of first asylum , at the same time protecting some of the most vulnerable refugees under sustainable and humane conditions .
Today , resettlement is carried out , but there is no structural coordination at EU level .
The Commission believes that the EU can play a bigger part and be more active on resettlement by strengthening the Union 's role globally and showing solidarity with the most affected regions .
The proposal tabled in September 2009 aims to improve the situation .
We are very satisfied by the very positive response that Parliament and the Council have given to the proposal .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Tavares for his sterling work on this , and I welcome the strong political consensus among the different groups on this matter .
The idea in the proposal is that the EU , in partnership with the UNHCR , will contribute to more strategic use of resettlement on the basis of an annual decision on the common priorities for resettlement .
By pooling the national quotas , the EU can help to alleviate some of the most difficult conflicts in the world and in refugee situations .
The programme leaves to each Member State the final choice as regards the number of refugees to be resettled , although it will enable them to coordinate and mutualise experiences and best practices .
Through the annual exercise , the EU will be able to be more reactive to evolving challenges and global refugee needs in order to render more efficient the Member States ' use of the European Refugee Fund .
The programme will also help in a more targeted and practical cooperation project through the Asylum Support Office , working with both national administrations and civil society organisations .
I fully support the rapporteur 's idea of creating a specialised unit in the office to be established in Malta .
The Joint EU resettlement programme is being discussed at a crucial time : since 2007 , five Member States - in addition to those which already had the programmes - have decided to start national resettlement programmes .
Several other Member States have resettled Iraqi refugees over the past year in response to a commitment agreed at EU level in 2008 .
It is crucial that we maintain this positive momentum and that the adoption of the proposal is not delayed .
We regret , however , that certain divergences and procedural issues are hampering the rapid adoption of this proposal .
This proposal is of great political significance .
The Commission 's decision to establish annual priorities for resettlement is an implementing decision , and forms part of the financial management of the European Refugee Fund .
With respect to the ' delegated acts ' procedures , we are concerned that the procedure would be considerably delayed , making management of the fund very difficult .
This is a first step towards a common approach ; there will , of course , be a review of the experience , and there are plans to bring forward more ambitious initiatives as part of the Stockholm Programme .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your update .
Although Mr Tavares is not with us , I want to thank him for the cooperation which we have enjoyed to date and to express on behalf of our political group our positive position on the resettlement programme .
We are talking about a single asylum area and the integrated refugee management policy that we need .
Of course , the financing instrument to support this endeavour is the European Refugee Fund which , it is true , we have not sufficiently exhausted to date and there are margins for us to do bigger and better things .
The European response to global resettlement requirements has been adequate to date .
I would remind you that the Member States participate on a voluntary basis and , so far , together with the two countries which took part in this particular resettlement , only 12 of the 27 Member States are participating in this endeavour and , to date , the figures from it have not been particularly encouraging .
In 2009 , 6 896 refugees arrived in Europe under the resettlement programme , which accounts for just 8.2 % of the total .
We therefore certainly need better coordination and what we are trying to do , through this report and the consultation we held , was to give incentives , to explain to the Member States , that we have every reason to proceed with the application and implementation of this programme .
Of course , protection for human rights and our real solidarity with third countries are a top priority objective .
However , we must understand that another argument why all the Member States have reason to participate in this programme is because , through this programme , we can send all those who need it a message that they have every reason to opt for legal channels in their efforts to reach Europe , to reach European territory , for a better future .
Illegal immigration could also be addressed indirectly through the resettlement programme , given that , if there are such programmes , refugees will not opt for illegal channels and will wait to be integrated into such programmes .
Finally , I wish to say that we tabled an amendment on the internal resettlement of refugees , which was not accepted .
At some point , Commissioner , we expect an initiative from the Commission on this issue .
Dublin II has put a burden on certain countries and it is very important that we push forward with the resettlement programme , with the help of the European Refugee Fund .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Malmström for being here .
I would like to express my support for the report and for the spirit of the work done by Mr Tavares , because his work with the non-governmental organisations , with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees , and the observance of comparative law from outside the European Union is very important .
These experiences are fundamental , and having been a member of a local council , I also believe that all the councils in Europe should make a commitment on this issue .
This is because , although we are going through a crisis , the deepest crisis has been the refugee crisis , which has been a crisis of collective amnesia .
In Europe , and in rich countries , we have forgotten that the wars that cause refugees are wars for which we are responsible , for which our countries and governments are responsible .
We need to overcome this collective amnesia .
I agree with what Mrs Malmström said about making a commitment and , of course , we need to make a commitment .
A commission from Parliament has visited the Iraqi Palestinians .
Of course they have : we need to make a commitment to these refugees .
I would , however , say the following to Mrs Malmström , with all due respect : the differences need to be overcome between Parliament - she herself was a Member - and the Commission regarding delegated acts .
I would not like this report , which today appears to be generally well received , to end up being blocked because the Commission and Parliament do not agree on delegated acts .
Madam President , Commissioner , what we all discussed on this subject was that we simply must convince more Member States to take part in this programme .
I believe there is much to be achieved in this regard by explaining the programme and also highlighting its benefits , as those who take part have thus far always said that they will continue to do so and that they welcome the programme .
It is very important to make clear which people this relates to .
It relates to people who do not , themselves , have the power to come to Europe .
These are women , children and the sick , who find themselves in refugee camps outside the EU and need our help .
I think it is very positive that we will be deciding to make a larger proportion of the European Refugee Fund available in future .
At the same time , I also believe that it is very important that this money , if it is paid to the national Parliaments , the nation states , in other words , must not just disappear into the budget , but it really must be used in order to build a durable structure , that the money , in fact , even has to be passed on to the local authorities and to the towns and cities where the integration actually takes place , where the nursery places and housing are provided .
It is a very important point that the towns and cities and the local authorities , as our allies , must be involved in this discussion .
The Member States are perhaps more inclined to reject this in the short term than the local authorities on the ground .
In the predictability that this brings with it , I see an important element connecting us - the EU - and those on the ground bringing about the integration .
All together , this could certainly give a boost to the resettlement programme , something that I think is very positive .
Above all , there is one thing that needs to be stated very clearly , which is that the citizens cannot be left behind - people and associations must be found who ease the path of people who want to start a new life locally and who show them how their new town works or where the nearest swimming pool is .
We need a cross-society consensus that we want to take part in a resettlement programme , that it is a good solution , and that people will actually bring about integration on the ground .

Madam President , I would have preferred to hear from the rapporteur , Mr Tavares , but never mind ; now he has finally joined us in this debate , and that is the main thing .
I think that the work that he has managed to do to reach a consensus on the use of the European Refugee Fund , whose job it is to fund and encourage the Member States to develop their refugee resettlement programme , is exceptionally positive work , which Commissioner Malmström is strongly encouraging , and I am delighted to see that .
We must nevertheless bear in mind a few figures , which will allow us to put the scope of this fund into perspective .
If we were to allocate the entire European Refugee Fund - something that I do not want because it would inevitably be detrimental to the funding of the conditions of reception of refugees and asylum seekers in Europe - we would barely be able to resettle 20 000 refugees in Europe , a number far removed from the request of the UNHCR , which has established that there are more than 470 000 refugees worldwide in need of resettlement , that is , people who genuinely have specific needs , vulnerabilities , weaknesses , and who cannot possibly return to their country of origin .
We must therefore be sensible .
To me , the second precaution we must take - because we have experienced this in my country , France - concerns the media coverage of the resettlement of some refugees as a tree of charity hiding a forest of malpractice , because at the same time , this country , France , has just been condemned by the United Nations Committee against Torture for returning asylum seekers to third countries where they risk facing inhumane or degrading treatment .
I believe - and this is my final point - that these are the precautions that we must bear in mind .
Madam President , I would like to speak about the Schengen Information System .
Today , we have to examine the legal framework within which migration from SIS I to SIS II can take place .
I would say that the warning lights are all flashing red on the subject .
Commissioner , the least we can say is that the tests have been inconclusive in this regard .
Nevertheless , despite the opposition of three of the larger Member States - France , Germany and Austria - the Commission is persisting .
As you know , we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left are just as persistent , I would say , when it comes to our reservations about the issues of storage and the risks that this involves in terms of data protection .
I think we are living in a rather surreal period when the abuses and the risks linked to every aspect of security are increasingly being denounced by experts , who know what they are talking about .
We must take precautions in the area of data protection for all citizens , whoever they may be .
We must have a minimum commitment on file connection risks .
We in France are well aware of the abuses that can result from file connection .
Commissioner , under the current circumstances , the GUE / NGL Group cannot support such a migration .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , Britain is not signed up to Schengen , so technically this proposal should not apply to the UK .
The old Labour government did not opt in , and the new Lib-Dem / Con coalition government must stay opted out .
Such a scheme would merely encourage more refugees , genuine or not , to come to the European Union .
Imagine if Turkey joins the European Union : we can expect not just 72 million Turks to have automatic right of entry to European countries and Britain , but floods of refugees from places such as Iran and Iraq might cross the border into Turkey and then seek resettlement in Europe !
Britain does not have to join this scheme , but watching our new government grapple with such issues will be interesting .
One half of it , the Conservative Party , pretends to be Eurosceptic , whatever that means , while the other half , the Liberal Democratic Party , is unreservedly Europhile .
However , our new Prime Minister , Mr Cameron , can solve such problems at a stroke as I described here yesterday .
The increase in the numbers of Members of this place requires a complete re-ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr Cameron can simply choose not to re-ratify it , or he can belatedly uphold his cast-iron guarantee and give the British people the referendum on the Lisbon Treaty that they were denied .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are refugees in the world who can neither return to their countries because the situation is too unstable , nor stay in a transit country because it has not signed the Geneva Conventions and they cannot , for example , work in that country .
The numbers are relatively limited : 200 000 per annum , and the problem has already been solved for some of these refugees - whose only option is to be given a new life in a third country - by actors on the international stage that resettle refugees : 80 000 by the USA and some by Canada , Australia , Brazil and Chile .
Who is missing from that list ?
Europe is missing , that is who .
During the Swedish Presidency , the Council judiciously admitted that it was necessary to greatly increase the number of refugees being resettled in Europe , going so far as to talk about 100 000 .
The Commission has also judiciously reviewed some statements by the European Refugee Fund to make possible a more vigorous and robust policy for resettlement of refugees .
I currently have two reports in the name of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs : one codecision and one own-initiative .
We have four new additions to correct the policies that are currently in place in the codecision ; two of these , however , are procedural .
The first new addition is a dual approach .
The Commission 's proposal on which we are working mainly argues for regional priorities and then , within the regional ones , priorities that I would call ' humanitarian ' .
We saw fit to maintain these priorities but give them autonomy .
In other words , we think that Europe must have intervention strategies in terms of resettling refugees , which are very important from a foreign policy point of view .
These strategies must sometimes allow for intervention in certain areas of the world , open doors to a given country , or establish trust relationships in certain areas of the world .
They must , however , give the Member States freedom to respond to situations in the rest of the world that are priority in humanitarian terms .
What situations are priorities ?
Victims of torture , women and children who are victims of sexual violence , or people who need to be resettled for serious health reasons , for example .
The second new feature is modulation .
This aims to move from only 10 Member States that currently resettle refugees at European level , so that we can try to ensure that the other 27 Member States will start resettling them .
To achieve this , we proposed increasing the sum to be assigned per refugee to the new Member States in the first year , decreasing it a little in the second and making it the same as the other Member States that resettle refugees from the third year onwards ; this was conditional on the increased amount for the first years , which are the years in which it costs most to start a new resettlement programme , being used to develop a sustainable resettlement programme .
The other two new features are procedural .
One gives the Commission the opportunity to start an emergency procedure to resettle refugees from a given area of the world - where there was a humanitarian disaster or a crisis situation - because the procedure that we had was being carried out on an annual basis and , clearly , disasters and humanitarian crises do not follow a timetable .
The fourth new feature was that of the delegated acts , and here I must tell you very clearly , Mrs Malmström , that Parliament can take care of timetable arguments and procedural arguments very efficiently , and we promise to not take long to respond to delegated acts .
We also promise that the prior consultation and debate that we proposed with , for example , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development , can prevent any differences of opinion between Parliament and the Commission regarding the regions that are resettlement priorities .
What we cannot accept is the Commission , as guardian of the treaties , telling us that delegated acts to which it has no legal objection must not be adopted within the framework of this decision , which is so important in foreign-policy and humanitarian terms , simply because the acts seem bureaucratic to the Commission when we say that they are not .
What is happening is that , from our point of view and that of the legal service , this decision is part of the delegated acts , and , as such , we believe that it falls to the Commission to argue for the adoption of the delegated acts here , as guardian of the treaties , and not raise objections that are , currently , merely procedural .
Above all , we believe that none of these issues must prevent us from achieving our common goal : that of resettling more refugees in the European Union .
( MT ) Madam President , this resettlement programme which is being set up is filling a significant , long-standing void .
I am , in fact , astonished at how this programme has not existed on a European level before .
There are countries which have already set an example , such as the United States , which already operate very efficient resettlement programmes , having garnered considerable experience in this area .
We can learn a lot from them .
These kinds of programmes are important because they demonstrate the European Union 's willingness to show its human side with refugees worldwide .
However , their other important objective is to curb the influx of illegal immigrants towards the European Union , including those who require protection .
Therefore , if the resettlement programme that is to be set up today can be used to resettle international protection seekers in Libya , then these people will doubtlessly have little reason to cross the Mediterranean Sea and risk their lives in the process .
In this way , we would be helping both them as well as those European Union countries which are shouldering a disproportionate burden .
It goes without saying that this programme must be used in conjunction with another programme , one intended to help European Union countries who are carrying a disproportionate burden due to the current immigration flow .
We need to prove to these countries that we are willing to establish a programme that will allow the transfer of people who are granted international protection to other European countries .
Thus far , this is still a pilot project , one that concerns Malta .
However , I would like to see this project manifest itself permanently , and to see it extended to the other European Union countries that require it .
( RO ) As rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament for the SIS issue , I am going to speak about this very matter .
First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho for the huge effort he has invested in this and , in particular , for the consistency he has shown in finalising these two reports .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Malmström because , since she has taken up her post , the Commission has started to show some transparency .
What has caused , and continues to cause , us concern is the failure to meet the deadlines for implementing SIS II .
Parliament has expressed its position on several occasions on the delays , especially regarding the Commission 's inability to set a precise date for launching its operation .
The fact that we do not know for sure even now whether the tests carried out have been successful or not only serves to raise serious doubts about how the project is being managed .
Given that it is the European Parliament 's duty to monitor the way in which Community money is spent , the proposal to keep in reserve the funds due to be allocated to the development of SIS II during the 2011 budget year is a normal safety measure to take .
Parliament must be continually consulted on and informed about the progress of the SIS II project , which cannot be compromised due to a lack of political will or management ability .
It must meet current requirements , support data protection and comply with the cost / benefit principle , with its deployment taking place within the exact timeframes specified for its implementation .
Madam President , I shall also speak on the Schengen Information System .
First of all , I would like to thank Mr Coelho for his excellent work , and I would like to stress that my group - from the very beginning - was quite cautious in accepting SIS II , due to many implications concerning data protection .
Now it seems that the long SIS II saga is far from being finished .
We see time delays and cost overruns ; we do not have any positive results .
We do not even have a consensus about the evaluation of test results - as Austria , Germany and France do not see them as being successful .
In our opinion , the approach taken by the rapporteur is absolutely right .
We have to be honest and admit that the current project might fail , and we have to discuss the alternatives .
We should also carefully examine the reasons behind this failure ; if we need to invest an additional EUR 30 million , Parliament should have all the information necessary for an informed consent .
We must also maintain a sunset clause .
We cannot continue investing money into a lifelong project .
Of course , certain flexibility should be there , but we must have clear criteria for evaluation and to react quickly if , again , something goes wrong .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all , let me say that I believe - and I am referring to the Schengen Information System here - that the EU should not be operating a wish-based policy , but a policy based on the reality .
When it comes to the Schengen Information System , that means that we must take account of the fact that the tests - what have been called the ' first milestone ' - have failed .
After eight years of tinkering , we know that the aim of the measure proposed by the Commission - the migration from SIS 1 + to SIS II - is unachievable by the Member States , both on technical and legal grounds .
That is not my evaluation - it is the evaluation of the Federal Republic of Germany .
That is the position back in my home country , and it is a position , by the way , that I fully share .
EUR 90 million has so far been squandered on this scheme , and the Commission would like to spend more .
We do not want an extension of the deadline to 2013 ; we want to make that very plain .
Instead , we want to abandon this system and start the search for an alternative .
Secondly , the German Left Party is fundamentally critical of SIS II - I want to point that out , too , at this juncture - as access to the system is being dramatically extended , for example , to the secret services .
In Germany , there is a requirement that the secret services and the police are separated .
Thus , any mixing of the secret services ' and the police 's data will mean that the whole system will be brought before the German Federal Constitutional Court .
That is something that I needed to mention , at least from the German point of view .
We also oppose SIS II because it involves the collection of vast quantities of data and the gathering and recording of biometric data .
That is neither purposive nor proportionate .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of defining a framework of consistent strategies with a will to express real solidarity between Member States represents a step forwards in the coordination of Community policies on migratory flows .
Yet this measure also represents part of a wider process , whose aim is the international protection of refugees .
If civil society can usefully be involved in this process , this measure seems to be closely related to the imminent activation of the European Asylum Support Office .
We must immediately establish a list of priorities and aims to be achieved , with a time schedule and specific incentive measures .
We must also allocate specific finance to increase the number of members , currently only ten , participating in the programme .
Neither must we forget the need for health protection to supplement the social protection offered to people who are often worn out by their state of extreme weakness .
A computerised database will also allow the traceability of every process implemented to protect the family unit while they are in the process of resettling .
In this context , collaboration with Member States may be decisive in ensuring that procedures are streamlined and flexible .
We want a fairer and more realistic European Union that takes into account the efforts of southern European Member States in particular .
With third countries , it is crucial for the European Union to take responsibility for defining cooperation agreements , as Italy did recently with Libya and Niger .
We believe that this is the way , the only possible way , to move on from a form of solidarity which , hitherto , has all too often been just a façade , to proper solidarity between European Union Member States in the overall management of migratory flows .

( SK ) First , I would like to thank Mr Tavares for his work in the area of refugee policy , and at this point , I would also like to express my disappointment that less than half of all European Union Member States have official resettlement programmes for refugees from third countries .
Moreover , as has been said here many times , these programmes are not sufficiently coordinated , and as a result of the low level of coordination and cooperation between Member States of the Union , the costs associated with resettlement are also high , which naturally makes this idea rather unattractive .
I firmly believe , however , that given sufficient political will , we Europeans will be capable of creating an effective , fair and unified resettlement programme .
To this end , it will be essential to create not only the programme itself , but also a special fund for the resettlement of refugees in the Union .
This package would finance the creation of national resettlement programmes where they do not exist already , as well as coordination of activities at the central level .
In my opinion , the ideal coordinator appears to be the European Asylum Support Office .

Madam President , I wish to thank everyone who has been working very hard on the seemingly never-ending story of SIS II : Mr Coelho and those in the field .
The issue of recurring delays and cost overruns is very worrying and , if not this , what else could be more telling about Mr Barroso 's management skills in his first Commission ?
I believe that we should take these lessons which can be learnt here today and project them into the creation of a new IT agency , which could be situated in Tallinn .
This would be a win-win situation : while the French colleagues could keep the servers in Strasbourg , the new programming work would be done in Tallinn by competent specialists with low management costs , thus avoiding a monopoly and embracing the idea of EU integration , and also giving a guarantee of data protection .
Finally , I would like to express my confidence in Commissioner Malmström 's ability to resolve these complicated issues .
( ES ) Madam President , I will explain my position succinctly .
I would first like to congratulate Mr Coelho .
The process was supposed to be completed before 30 September , so the regulatory instruments need to be amended before they expire .
Secondly , there is no proposal from the Commission setting a deadline or removing the expiry clauses from the original proposals .
Thirdly , a precautionary period should be established for migration which , if necessary , could be extended through comitology .
Fourthly , the process is not subject to control by Parliament , which I think is a very bad thing .
Fifthly , we do not know the results of the tests of the second generation Schengen Information System , and Parliament must be informed .
Sixthly , based on what I have said , I support the rapporteur 's proposals and the warning that the Court of Auditors will intervene if the project fails .
Regarding the reports by Mr Tavares on the European Refugee Fund and resettlement , I would also like to congratulate Mr Tavares .
The main problem is a lack of solidarity within the Union .
We need to be cautious about financial aid for Member States that take in refugees for the first time , particularly due to comparative injustice .
These measures , which I support in principle , Mr Tavares , require a detailed prior financial study .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in many respects , it is essential that we vote in favour , tomorrow , of amending the European Refugee Fund , and it is on this subject that I will focus my speech , at the same time as congratulating Mr Coelho and Mr Tavares on their deliberations and their work .


The vote on the ERF will shed light on the need for the Member States of the European Union to play their full part in resettlement in order to fill a double gap that exists in terms of the number of countries committed to the programme and the reception capacity of each country .
Let us recall that here , we are talking about refugees who are often barely tolerated in the countries that have received them and whose living conditions can sometimes take a tragic turn if solutions are not found quickly .
Thanks to these new means , we can actually provide these particularly vulnerable people with greater security , so long as - and I stress this - each of the Member States involved with the ERF uses the funds concerned correctly and transparently , which is something that I know you are very concerned about , Commissioner Malmström .
It will be difficult to take up the challenge when we know the lukewarm reception that the Member States have reserved for this new measure , and here too , Commissioner , I would like to underline your determination .
Finally , I would like to stress the fact that the integration of refugees is one of the keys to the success of this enterprise .
The more we prepare for and explain the arrival of refugees , the greater the chances are that it will be accepted and will take place under the best conditions , and the more the Member States - we hope - will prove their commitment to resettlement .
That is why our Parliament must vote overwhelmingly in favour of these amendments to the European Refugee Fund .
( DE ) Madam President , in many Member States , including my home state of Austria , people no longer know where new asylum seekers can go , and the population quite rightly resists the idea of new reception centres .
How can it be that , despite this , the resettlement of refugees in the EU is being promoted ?
The plan to allow into the EU asylum seekers who have already fled to a bordering third country such as Ukraine because the standard of living here is higher is thus completely incomprehensible .
Especially in such times of economic crisis , it is all you can do to shake your head when it comes to proposals like this .
The entire EU asylum concept is a disaster , as far as I am concerned .
According to the concept , an asylum seeker who is first picked up in Romania can then be sent back there for appraisal and for an asylum process .
The idea of granting basic welfare provision to asylum seekers at the same high social security level as to nationals of the Member State in question is unrealistic and unaffordable .
The EU should grant the protection of asylum to everyone who really needs it , to those who really are in need , but it should not open the floodgates to economic migrants .
What we need is greater protection of the external borders , quick , unbureaucratic procedures and , of course , a consistent repatriation strategy .
( RO ) The basic principle underlying the European Union 's involvement in asylum matters is to ensure a higher level of cooperation and solidarity between Member States .
This cannot be achieved within individual countries .
The adoption of a common European Union initiative is dictated by the increased strategic use of resettlement .
A sound , well-targeted programme is required , which will be effective and of good quality .
This programme will provide a suitable framework for ensuring that Member States will participate in the refugee resettlement process .
The efforts made by Member States to admit refugees must be supported and encouraged with additional financial incentives .
These measures will enable us to show greater solidarity from the EU in relation to the global refugee issue .
We will also encourage the participation of a significant number of Member States in this process .
( RO ) I would first of all like to begin with a comment for my fellow Member from the left .
I believe that the converse example is also valid : when an Englishman or Irishman commits a crime in my country , it should be possible to send him back .
The process for implementing the second-generation Schengen Information System has been delayed and it seems that this will not take place before the end of 2011 .
As a result , I would like to ask the Commission about what repercussions this has on the timetable for the countries not yet included in the Schengen area , but which are due to join .
It is unacceptable that , at the moment , the Commission cannot give an exact date for the launch of SIS II 's operation , thereby raising considerable doubts about the management of this project .
The additional costs and the need for new investment , if the migration to SIS II is going to end up failing and be included in the SIS 1 + RE emergency plan , mean that much tighter budget control is required , especially for the new agency responsible for regulating and coordinating the implementation of SIS , VIS and Eurodac .
( DA ) Madam President , a year ago , all of the Members of the European Parliament were in the midst of an election campaign and were seeking either to gain or regain our mandates , and I know that in many countries , the issue of the Schengen area in particular played an incredibly important role in the election campaign .
There is a great deal of dissatisfaction among our electorate , the citizens of Europe , about the way in which the EU deals with these issues : the lack of internal border controls , the severely deficient external border controls , the utterly inadequate control of immigration and the spectre that is lying in wait for us in just under a year 's time with regard to whether the Commission will give its approval for Bulgaria and Romania to also join Schengen .
I hear people saying that we must show solidarity , but , quite honestly , who is it we are to show solidarity with ?
Who is it that needs to show solidarity ?
When we see a massive exploitation of the system that both the EU and our Member States have set up , it is perhaps time that we also showed a little solidarity with the citizens , who are living with the failed policy that the Commission and its Member States have pursued .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , creating a common European asylum policy and resettlement policy means ensuring human rights and , at the same time , restricting illegal immigration .
Thank you , therefore , to the speakers and to Commissioner Malmström , as we now have a valuable tool , especially for countries with a Mediterranean coastline : countries such as Italy which , up until now , have not been able to rely either on real solidarity between Member States or on a fair division of responsibilities .
These policies must be supported by an appropriate budget , but also by reliable checks on the programmes implemented , with suitable follow-ups and the identification of good practices .
My last words on the subject of human rights : we must give priority to those who are most vulnerable , minors , women who are victims of trafficking , of exploitation and of violence , including victims of genital mutilation , but I know that Commissioner Malmström has this properly in hand .
( DE ) Madam President , at present , the European Union does seem to have access to unbelievable financial resources .
After the EUR 750 billion support package we are now , once again , to spend enormous sums on the migration issue , but not , for example , on repatriation measures or even on securing borders - the supposedly secure Schengen borders , in any case , are as holey as a Swiss cheese .
No , EUR 6 000 per person is to be provided for the voluntary acceptance of refugees from third countries .
If the EU really has the necessary loose change lying around , it should , I beg , support European families - then , perhaps , we would have a rising birth rate .
The argument that we need immigration to counter the lack of children would then finally be superfluous .
Instead of just opening up the floodgates to immigration , the Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees should finally be accurately applied and it , of course , does not apply to the army of economic migrants .
If we do want to spend many millions , then they could be spent on the border protection agency FRONTEX , rather than the money pit that is the Schengen Information System .
( SK ) I would like to talk about the Schengen Information System .
We know that this system has taken relatively long to develop and has cost a lot of money , in addition to which the implementation costs are constantly rising and the results of trials are not known .
Perhaps it would be appropriate to conduct an audit of the work carried out so far on this system , to consider whether the system is viable and whether we know how to bring it to completion in such a way that it will be useful for Europe , and then decide how to proceed further .
As far as the resettlement programme is concerned , I agree that it is necessary to draw up a legislative standard which would restrict illegal immigration into the European Union , and which would establish the conditions for legitimate migration .
However , perhaps we should draw on the experience of our colleagues from developing countries , who say that not all migration , not all the journeys their countrymen make into the European Union , are about the security restrictions faced by these people , but are for economic reasons .
( DE ) Madam President , I would actually just like to get a couple of comments about the Maňka report off my chest .
I agreed this earlier on with your colleague .
I want to express very clearly my opposition to the increase in the secretarial allowance , especially to the envisaged amount of EUR 1 500 .
Furthermore , I also oppose any increase in the staffing of this House and , should it be decided after a further evaluation that an additional EUR 1 500 per month for the secretarial allowance is to be made available , that would simply be to mock the taxpayers .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Ehrenhauser , I think you are speaking on the wrong subject .
This is the joint debate on the Schengen Agreement .
I am sorry that you did not get to speak about the Maňka report , but I am afraid we have to move on now .
( PL ) Above all , I would like to congratulate Mr Coelho on two more successful reports .
Secondly , there can be no turning back from SIS II today .
If we want to think about a secure system , SIS II must be introduced , and this is why I think we need to continue these measures and support the Commission on this .
I will remind everyone that the new visa code stipulates that biometric data must be shown in the system .
SIS 1 + does not give this guarantee .
SIS II will enable rapid verification of data in future .
So in this area of security , we must not stop work on SIS II .
Of course , we might wish that this work could be more effective and more successful .
I will remind everyone that not so long ago , we also adopted measures which make it easy to travel throughout the Schengen Area with a long-term visa .
In relation to this , work on SIS II must be continued .
We want to support the Commission on this , in the hope that its work will proceed faster and be more effective , and we should wish the Commission success in this regard . Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all Members for their support and comments on these two different , but very important , subjects .
Starting with the SIS II , this has of course - and I am the first to recognise this - been a long saga , as somebody said .
It is a complex dossier and very difficult .
Probably there were things that could have been done better in the past , but since I took up office , I have really tried to deal with this in a very transparent and thorough way .
The Commission has followed , to the letter , the roadmap outlined by the Council , and the Council agreed on conclusions at the last meeting .
Some Member States were sceptical , but they did agree on the conclusion that the Milestone 1 test was successful .
Right now , we are working with the different experts in order to assess and to define the final requirements of Member States to meet their operational needs and to define a more concrete timetable and way forward .
I will make this proposal on 3 and 4 June to the Ministers for discussion and there will be a further assessment of this after the summer .
We will , of course , be transparent and work with the European Parliament and the rapporteur all the time .
To answer the question on the new Member States , the accession of Bulgaria and Romania will be done via SIS I for all .
Arrangements for Bulgaria and Romania are being made for that in the meantime .
We are preparing for a - hopefully successful - Milestone 2 test on SIS later this autumn .
Until that is successfully complete , we have contacts and ways open in order to maintain the contingency plan for the future .
We hope it will not be needed but we have made that preparation as well .
In the meantime , let me thank all Members , especially Mr Coelho , for your support and assure you of the maximum transparency and engagement on the part of the Commission with the European Parliament on this dossier .
On the issue of resettlement , I fully agree with Mr Busuttil , who said that he was surprised that this did not exist before .
It is , of course , a very good initiative to pool the resources of the Member States and to encourage further engagement on the global scene in order to alleviate pressure in refugee camps following a crisis or a very difficult situation .
We can inspire Member States to make more intelligent use of the funds and to coordinate this with UNHCR .
This is , of course , something that could really reinforce our role on the global scene , but also make a real difference for these people who are caught in a very difficult situation .
UNHCR estimates there was a need for resettlement , last year alone , for 747 000 people .
As Mr Flautre said , what we can do is a help but the needs are enormous .
I think there is broad agreement on the aim and the purpose of this fund and I hope we can find a solution to the procedural issues very soon so the proposal can be adopted without delay .
Several Members made reference to internal solidarity .
This is , of course , related , but is a slightly different subject .
I recognise the need for this as well .
The Commission has already made proposals in this regard .
We have proposed a temporary suspension mechanism in the Dublin Regulation and we have established the European Support Office that will open in Malta later this year .
We have the Malta pilot project and are evaluating this .
I agree that we should try to find ways to make it more permanent and to involve more Member States .
This is , of course , subject to the willingness of Member States to contribute , but the Commission will look at this and we will also look at a general intra-EU solidarity mechanism and present that next year .
So we can come back to this discussion , which is slightly different from the EU resettlement programme but nevertheless very important .


Thank you very much to Mr Coelho , Mr Tavares and Mr Alvaro for your work on these two very important dossiers .
I am looking forward to working with you to conclude them as soon as possible .
Many thanks for the positive comments by various fellow Members .
Mrs Malmström , I wanted you to know that Parliament is aware that you inherited this process and we have faith in your abilities and your intelligence , to bring it to the best possible conclusion .
We also appreciate the efforts you have made towards transparency , which my fellow member , Mr Enciu , did a very good job of highlighting , as a matter of fact .
As regards the deadline , we are giving off the wrong signals if the new migration instruments do not have a deadline .
After all the delays , indefinitely extending the Commission 's mandate does not make any sense .
I understand that the Commission is in no position to bind itself to the target suggested by Parliament , but we will set it and , if for any reason , the process has not been completed by that point , you can come back to Parliament to request an extension and explain why it is needed .
Extending the Commission 's mandate without any deadline is a terrible signal after these delays , both to the European institutions and to the European public .
I agree with your idea that the Global Programme Management Board must not be an assembly .
I therefore understand the Commission 's reservations about limiting access to its work : I could not agree more .
Parliament 's proposal was the result of a less favourable draft of the Commission 's original proposal , because the Commission , at the same time as limiting the composition of the Global Programme Management Board , was allowing any other official of the Commission , the Council or the Member States to participate .
This raises a legitimate question : why can officials of the Commission and the Member States participate and not those of Parliament ?
If we restrict this body to its functions , I believe that we will all be in agreement , especially with the guarantees that the Commissioner has given regarding greater transparency .
Madam President , my thanks to the Members who have taken part in the debate and to the Commissioner .
I believe that if there is any agreement about what is wanted in relation to the issue of refugee resettlement , it is because we understand that for once , in the debate on immigration - and we all know how difficult that is in Europe , along with the debate on asylum and refugees - what we have is a problem that we can solve .
We can resolve it for ourselves and for the refugees , because anyone who has visited refugee camps knows that there are children there losing one , two , three years of study that they could be undertaking in Europe .
I think that gives us the right degree of urgency for this debate .
I also hope that the procedural issues will be rapidly overcome , in accordance with what is written in the treaties , because we all know that what we have is not enough and we all know that just assigning part of the budget is still not a true refugee resettlement programme .
It is , in fact , at this type of subject that we aimed the own-initiative report that we are also discussing here today and which is about quality : quality is of vital importance in the integration of refugees and requires a multilateral approach involving non-governmental organisations , local actors and local authorities .
This approach must also resolve many of the bureaucratic issues with coordination that we have today .
If the process for these children , who are in refugee camps and are not yet studying and who would have the right to be resettled , is taking a long time , we are told by actors in the border agencies of several Member States that it is because it takes a long time for Member States to coordinate to validate transit documentation , for example , which can be done mainly using an instrument which , in the own-initiative report , we suggested should be implemented by the European Asylum Support Office ( EASO ) .
The EASO is a resettlement unit with a reduced number of officials , but with people who work permanently in resettlement , who know how to exchange best practices , who know how to introduce the new Member States to resettlement mechanisms , and who know how to coordinate even with the European External Action Service to facilitate resettlement processes .
When we have already decided that those people will be resettled , there is no reason for us to delay in tackling red tape and bureaucracy , before we can really deal with integrating them on European soil .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon today .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
We are voting today on the adoption of a joint EU resettlement programme for asylum seekers from problematic third countries in the EU .
However , there is another debate which needs to be held .
For over ten years , Europe has seen an influx of large numbers of refugees and waves of immigration .
The south of Europe has been left to shoulder the entire burden of European humanitarianism and it reached its limits some time ago .
While Europe - quite rightly - has a fund ready for third countries , there is no provision for the Member States .
If nothing else , the rapporteur 's report recognises the problem .
Other reports , such as the report on the establishment of the European Asylum Support Office , constitute - at least on paper - an obligation to support states whose asylum and reception systems are under particular pressure , due to their geographical position .
One expressly stated objective is to support the development of a solidarity mechanism , such as the transportation of persons entitled to international protection within the EU .
Let us hope that Europe gradually discovers solidarity .
We must bear in mind that any delay here will harm our innocent fellow men .
In relation to the matter of the Schengen Information System , I would again like to point out the fact that the state authorities in the Czech Republic , as well as local authorities and individual politicians , including MEPs , constantly face complaints from Czech citizens over the gratuitous and humiliating police checks and inspections they are often subjected to when travelling to Germany , both in the vicinity of the state boundary and in the wider German border regions .
This approach taken by German police and customs authorities , carried out with great frequency and dexterity , has a significant negative impact , not only on Czech-German relations but , above all , on the attitude of Czech citizens to European integration .
Following the accession of the Czech Republic to the Schengen Information System , Czech citizens were told they had free and unhindered movement within the territory of the EU , including Germany , just as the Schengen System anticipates and guarantees .
In my opinion , the behaviour of the German state authorities towards persons travelling from the Czech Republic is unfounded in a clear majority of cases and contrary to the declared free movement of persons .
Specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 247 / 2006 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Alves , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 247 / 2006 laying down specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union - C7-0255 / 2009 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to point out the fact that we are debating the first report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development that is subject to the ordinary legislative procedure as set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is an historic moment and , if this House votes in the way I am suggesting , it will get this new period of shared competences regarding agriculture in the European Union off to the best possible start .
It does so precisely by colegislating with its outermost regions , in a practical demonstration of the will to build a Union that is strengthened by cohesion , in a spirit of active solidarity , in respect for the specificities and differences of its parts , as the only viable path towards building our common European project .
It also does so by introducing basic regulations to make the sugar sector in the Azores - and I particularly welcome this , as that is my home region - more viable , as it is hundreds of years old .
Furthermore , it contributes to the healthy diversification of agriculture in a region which , as we know , makes an irreplaceable contribution to Portugal 's milk sector .
We must consolidate it and make it sustainable .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Cioloş and the Commission 's high officials , with whom we worked and negotiated , for the openness and flexibility they showed .
The Spanish Presidency has given everything towards making our shared desire of reaching an agreement at first reading become a reality .
I would , obviously , also extend my thanks to our shadows in the other political groups , as well as to the excellent officials of the secretariat of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whose collaboration allowed us to achieve a result that I consider very positive .
I would also stress the decisive contribution of the Agricultural Association of the Azores , as well as of the regional government and the government of the Republic ; they were heavily involved and played a significant role in finding a solution for the sugar of the Azores .
The proposal for a Council regulation was tabled on 2 October in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , at a time in which there was no prospect of the Treaty of Lisbon entering into force , which continued to await ratification by the Member States .
In this context , the initial idea of the Commission and the Council was for the proposal to be adopted under the simplified process without any amendments , to become effective from 1 January 2010 .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and despite the fact that the opinion that the proposal should continue to follow the simplified process predominated in the other political groups and the Council - because they thought that the proposal did not need amendments and should enter into force quickly - at the time , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and I understand that Parliament needed to express its opinion then in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , and take up its role of colegislator .
We did it at the right time , because new possibilities have opened up as a result , first with the contribution of the Committee on Regional Development and the opinion of Mr Teixeira - whom I would like to congratulate and thank , by the way , for the help he has always provided throughout the process - and then with my report introducing the new possibilities for sugar in the Azores , as well as the contribution and support of my colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Finally , I would like to say in this first speech that we failed to get the amendments proposed by the Committee on Regional Development and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and supported by me , accepted in the commitment obtained in trialogue .
It was essential to obtain a commitment at first reading , thus safeguarding the improvements already obtained and the need to enter into force quickly , in order not to compromise its retroactivity from January this year .
However , as the Commission is already preparing a review document for the POSEI , we will surely soon have another opportunity to debate them .
We have changed the name on the screen , as you have seen .
Unfortunately , the Commissioner in question was not able to be with us on time , which I find regrettable , as there is no ash cloud at the moment and as it is already 11.00 .
Maybe at some point , the Commission could discuss the fact that the competent Commissioners should be here .
That , too , is a subject for the framework agreement .
I am sure that Mrs Malmström will be a wonderful representative .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you for your understanding .
I would like to apologise on behalf of my colleague , Mr Cioloş , who is delayed and who is trying to get here as soon as possible to discuss with you .
He has asked me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Alves , and the shadow rapporteurs of the European Parliament for the excellent work which has been achieved in the adoption of this proposal .
The adoption is important because it is the first text adopted in the ordinary legislative procedure concerning agriculture and rural development following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
A very good cooperation has been established between Parliament , the Council and the Commission during these months , and that has created the conditions for a fast adoption in first reading of this proposal .
With this first experience of the ordinary legislative procedure , my colleague , Commissioner Cioloş , and his services have learned a lot , and this has set an excellent precedent for future work .
The adoption of this regulation is very important for the outermost regions as it imposes technical simplifications and it also imposes derogations to the benefit of several sectors : the milk sector in the Canary Islands , Madeira and Réunion , the sugar sector for the Azores and the wine sector for Madeira and the Azores .
Concerning the Azores , I consider that the current circumstances justify an additional and joint effort from all of us - the public , regional governments , national governments and the European Union - in order to facilitate a diversification of the agricultural activities in this region .
The diversification must indeed be one of the major priorities of the outermost regions to which the treaty has acknowledged a particular status due to their specific handicaps .
The diversification must allow an indigenous development that would create stability and well-being in these regions .
For this reason , following the assurance received from the Portuguese authorities , who committed themselves to support the sugar beet sector in the Azores , I can give my agreement for the extension of a derogation which has already been granted in the past for the benefit of the sugar industry in the Azores .
I will listen to your comments to this text and I will try , to the best of my abilities , to answer your questions on behalf of my colleague .

Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , my fellow Member , Mr Alves , on his work , especially the capacity that he demonstrated for incorporating the various contributions that he received and which are nothing more than respect for the interests of the various outermost regions covered .
In my function as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I welcome the fact that all the amendments proposed were fully accepted by the rapporteur and that the Committee on Regional Development voted in favour of all of them .
These are proposals that aim objectively to improve and correct aspects of the regulation in force that are inadequate and anachronistic .
Of these aspects , I would stress the fact that the maximum amounts for export and despatch of any processed products that have benefited from POSEI grants are currently calculated on the basis of the average between 1989 and 1991 .
Assuming that the report is adopted , I hope that the Commission and Council will be able to read Parliament 's position and not use a possible future review of the regulations of the POSEI scheme as an excuse to not accept this House 's positions and the proposed amendments , which are of the greatest importance for the affected regions .
Owing to their permanent natural handicaps , the outermost regions need the European Union to have a specific look at the best conditions for them to carry out their economic activities .
In the case of regions like the Azores , that are highly dependent on agriculture , particular attention to that sector is needed .
It is in this context that we welcome this report on specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions .
The version voted on by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development was quite satisfactory ; the version that has emerged from the trialogue inexorably penalises working conditions in the sugar sector , whose export allowance is touching on the merely symbolic .
At a time in which the diversification of agriculture is gaining acceptance as one of the ways to minimise the sector 's recurrent crises , it is regrettable that this report does not express the confidence and encouragement that sugar beet production and the associated industry in São Miguel needed .
I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur for the objectives mentioned for agriculture in the outermost regions .
The agricultural support scheme for the EU 's outermost regions provides an important mechanism for continuing agriculture and maintaining the rural landscape .
I support the current exercise of reviewing the delimitation of these areas in order to remove any inconsistencies in delimiting them .
I believe that the application of uniform criteria will simplify the implementation of the payment scheme for outermost regions at European Union level , provide greater transparency and ensure uniform treatment for the beneficiaries of these support schemes .
We all know what a key role agriculture plays in the local economy .
In this respect , I think that it is appropriate to have measures in place in the European Union 's outermost regions which are aimed at boosting the agricultural sector 's competitiveness and promoting diversification .
I support and completely agree with the basic objectives of the scheme for the outermost regions , which I regard as being relevant and which have proven to be an effective instrument for continuing agriculture in these areas .
Mr President , firstly I wish to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Alves , for his excellent work on this report .
Our group fully supports this compromise , because it is very important and obvious that the economic and social development of the EU 's outermost regions is greatly determined by their periphery , difficult climate and geography and economic dependence on a short range of goods and services .
It is very important , especially now in a time of crisis , that we focus attention on the balanced development of the regions of Europe and on achieving regional and social cohesion .
We and the European Union must ensure that we are selfsufficient in agriculture everywhere in Europe .
This is vital for security and biodiversity .
The measures proposed in this report should now be put into actual practice , thereby producing permanent and , above all , longterm results everywhere in Europe , including Europe 's peripheral regions .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur for a very good job of work .
My group was also able to support the agreement in trialogue and I think it has found a good compromise .
I believe the outermost regions of Europe should be given the required support that they need where possible in order to compensate for their location and the difficulties that entails .
These regions have permanent handicaps and we need to recognise this .
The economic crisis and the crisis in the dairy sector have affected these regions disproportionately in relation to most of the rest of Europe , and that is why these regions deserve some special attention .
I am particularly sympathetic to the situation in the Azores , where the dairy sector is very important and has had serious difficulties .
Allowing the Azores to export relatively small quantities of sugar to the EU has to be a good decision for the economic future of that particular region .
Mr President , justifying the prolongation of the re-exporting of sugar using the models that are currently being proposed , with the gradual abolition of the system of milk quotas , is dangerous and unacceptable .
This abolition - against which we have fought and will continue to fight , supporting the struggle of the milk producers - will have very serious consequences for a productive sector that is fundamental to the economy of the Azores .
Contrary to what is being suggested , it will not be possible to mitigate these consequences using the measures that are being proposed relating to the sugar-processing industry ; all the more so when its gradual abolition is also being suggested .
What will be left when these five years are up ?
On the other hand , it is important to take into account that the process of reconverting vines is significantly behind schedule , not least in the case of Madeira , and could even be compromised if the incentives are not strengthened .
The restrictions and constraints that affect the outermost regions are permanent .
For this reason , the practical effect of acknowledgement of the specificity of these regions must be a set of permanent aid measures , not unconnected and time-limited ones .
It is important to maintain Union aid to the agricultural sector in the outermost regions ; even more so in the current socio-economic climate .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are dealing with a reform that is simple but extremely important for the outermost regions .
This is especially the case at a time when the crisis is affecting everyone , but is affecting these regions in a fundamental way , as they have permanent structural handicaps that mean that they need these changes .
I am going to talk about the Canary Islands .
In the case of the Canary Islands , the most important change is regarding supplies of milk-based preparations intended for industrial processing .
We are talking about skimmed milk powder with vegetable fat , which is a traditional product for local consumers that has been sold in the Canary Islands for more than 40 years .
After a great deal of effort and despite many difficulties , a local industry was established that generates employment and obvious added value .
I would like to highlight this because , in the current times , particularly on our islands , which have extremely high unemployment , supporting a small industry that creates jobs is not only a necessity but an obligation .
The proposal is to maintain the supply of this product , which is used for local consumption in small quantities of 800 tonnes per year .
This would eliminate the transitional nature of the measure , which is of little importance in the global context , and therefore give stability to this industry .
As I said before , the outermost regions have significant handicaps , but they must be considered an opportunity for Europe .
The different association agreements that are being worked on and debated at the moment , such as the free trade agreements with Colombia and Peru and others on which negotiations are beginning , such as with Mercosur , are a clear threat to our agricultural sector .
I am thinking about numerous products : tomatoes , bananas , and the livestock sector .
I have said this many times : these agreements must achieve a balance , whereby everyone surrenders a little ground , so we all win .
However , in no way must one product or one specific sector be forced to bear the cost of the agreements .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Alves , and thank the Commission and the Council who , along with Parliament , have succeeded in reaching an agreement in this first trialogue on agriculture .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when this text came before the Committee on Regional Development , I managed to introduce the idea of an extension of the exemption authorising the production of reconstituted milk in Martinique and Guadeloupe , following the example of the sustainable growth model which proved its worth in Madeira .
Unfortunately , there was no consensus on this position at the last trialogue .
This is regrettable for two reasons .
Firstly , in terms of substance , dairy production in the French overseas departments would offer multiple unmissable opportunities : the strengthening of the cattle industry , self-sufficiency in a basic foodstuff and the creation of jobs .
Secondly , in terms of content , our Parliament as a whole was unable to reach a decision on my proposal since it wanted to pass this text at first reading via an informal procedure that I oppose .
Be that as it may , our work on this POSEI regulation will continue very soon during the mid-term review of this regulation .
At that point , I will again request an exemption in the other French overseas departments .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that the report on specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union has been so amicably discussed in the House .
In the last electoral term , I was the shadow rapporteur for reform of the sugar market .
At that time , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development visited the island of Réunion where I visited a small agricultural holding that grows sugar cane .
Without our support , this small agricultural holding could not stay in existence .
As someone from the continental mainland , I also observed that these farmers in the outermost regions of the Union do face a special set of circumstances .
It is necessary for us to ensure , through certain rules on exceptions , that we offer these farmers in all these regions that are in the European Union future prospects and ensure that they are able to guarantee food security - at least for the most part - in these areas .
It is up to us all to help ensure that agriculture - including through these rules on exceptions - has future prospects and that the security of supply for the local population is safeguarded .
The way the report has now been drawn up provides good conditions for achieving these goals .
My heartfelt thanks go to all those who have been involved .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the outermost areas are distinguished by socio-economic and structural particularities determined by their distance from the markets , their isolation , their small area , their topography , their difficult climate and their economic dependency on certain products .
There are three particularly important agricultural sectors : sugar beets , dairy products and wine production .
The economic system of these areas depends on correct running of the production systems for each of the above sectors , but it will take a lot of work to restore the balances that have failed over time , and to ensure the derogations needed to apply the appropriate market instruments .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is with great concern that we learn of the negotiations in progress with Mercosur countries .
If these are not backed by appropriate compensatory measures , this agreement could greatly endanger not only the outermost areas but also many sectors of European agriculture .
( FR ) Mr President , I must say that the compromise on sugar , such as was negotiated in the trialogue , falls short of what we had proposed in the Committee on Regional Development and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and I deeply regret this .
However , as far as Réunion Island is concerned , this text is important for the farmers , who are waiting for the swift implementation of the exemption given on milk .
For them , it will guarantee the sustainability of the industry .
However , I would have preferred the safeguards recommended in committee to have been kept .
Still on milk , I agree with our fellow Member , Mr Tirolien .
We would have liked a study to have been conducted for Martinique and Guadeloupe in order to keep an industry in these regions .
However , these questions will quite clearly be back on the table during the POSEI negotiations , and we will have the opportunity to talk about them again .
( DE ) Mr President , for years , we have been observing a phenomenon that seems to leave the European Union powerless , namely an enormous rate of farms going under which undermines EU states ' self-sufficiency .
Clearly , those worst hit by this are those in disadvantaged areas , such as the outermost regions , but also farmers in mountainous regions like we have in Austria .
Unfortunately , that is a consequence of the common agricultural policy , a policy that has been subject to many years of criticism , is constantly being reformed and yet still does not function properly .
We have reached a turning point , however .
In crisis situations - be they brought about by the depreciating euro or simply by the fact that a volcano in Iceland has paralysed air traffic and with it the supply of easily perishable goods - the Member States have to rely on themselves .
We saw that most recently from the last time that Russia turned off the gas .
When things get difficult , everything depends on a country 's self-sufficiency , and that needs to be maintained within the EU , in those countries and regions with disadvantaged areas , and in the outermost regions .
I believe that can only be done if agriculture is , to a certain extent , re-nationalised .
( PT ) Mr President , in this debate on the specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions , I would like to start by complimenting the rapporteur and everyone who has worked on this subject .
I would also like to say that the amendments , which are often technical and specific , do not lead to significant changes .
However , to call attention to the issue of sugar and sugar production in the Azores is to also call attention to a deeper problem .
The outermost regions such as the Azores , which I recently had the opportunity to visit , have a very strong link to the agricultural sector .
Specifically , in the Azores , the issue of milk quotas is very important .
Milk production and how it is regulated are extraordinarily relevant for hundreds of producers and many of the people of the Azores and for that very reason , I want right now , here in the Chamber , to call attention to the need for solutions to be found that have the specific situation of these regions in mind .
Mr President , I am happy to see a report on helping agriculture in the outermost regions of Europe .
There is no doubt that geographical location , distance from markets and other such factors create many difficulties .
The economic crisis has also had an impact .
Price volatility has been very significant and had a detrimental , and indeed destabilising , effect on farming , not only in the outermost regions , but in all areas of Europe .
However , I just want to address one very particular point to the Commission today , and that is that the Commission must be careful in its own actions not to disadvantage the European farmer and the European agricultural industry .
In Northern Ireland , the dairy and beef industry has been greatly affected by imports .
This has resulted in price volatility and great financial losses for farmers .
Last week , I attended the Royal Agricultural Show in Northern Ireland .
This is the largest show of its kind in the province , and farmer after farmer expressed very grave concerns at the attitude of the Commission in reopening the Mercosur trade talks .
Surely the Commission , and we in this Parliament , must be very careful not to sacrifice Europe 's industry in order to have so-called ' gains ' in other areas .
Mr President , I welcome proposals to help the outermost regions .
Firstly , agriculture is primarily an industry that puts food on the table - without which we all would die - but also these regions without agriculture would die as well , both economically and by probably becoming denuded of people .
So I welcome any proposals to help them .
I also want to add my voice to those who expressed concern about the Mercosur proposals .
These could do enormous damage to the outermost regions , and indeed every region .
I think that it is time that the European Union got stronger and fairer with its own farmers .
We were never meant to be the policeman for the farmers within the Union and the fairy godmother for the farmers in the rest of the world .
That is what is happening here : there would be less stringent rules , less transparency and less accountability for food coming into the European Union than for food that is produced within it , and that would be unfair to the outermost regions and to all regions .
Mr President , please excuse me for being late , but I was very keen to be present for this debate since it is my first one and it is about the first decision taken in codecision in the area of agriculture .
I would like once again to greet and thank Mr Alves and all of Parliament 's services for the very cooperative and effective way they have worked with the Commission and with the Council to reach this decision .
We wanted a swift decision precisely so that the measures provided for in this report can be applied quickly in the regions concerned .
Some decisions will even be applied retroactively .
That is why - and I am also answering Mr Tirolien here - we have not introduced other amendments .
In fact , as with some other proposals , we would have needed additional justifications and analysis , so as to establish the way in which they should be introduced .
We preferred to move quickly , and I had several discussions with Mr Alves on this subject .
I am therefore delighted to see the support that this proposal enjoys and I hope that we will be able to work in the same way with Parliament on other subjects in the future .
Moreover , I am sure that we will be able to do so .
As Commissioner for Agriculture , I can also assure all the speakers that negotiations with the Mercosur have been mentioned several times .
I can assure you , as I did during debates within Commission bodies on the reopening of these negotiations , that I will check very carefully that these negotiations continue in the interest of European agriculture .
We must , of course , consider these negotiations more comprehensively , without limiting them to agriculture , but I can assure you that , during the coming months and years of these negotiations , I will ensure that the European agricultural model , which is based on quality , diversity and land use , is preserved either through the results of these negotiations or through the measures that will be taken following these negotiations .
The question was also asked as to why we should apply degressivity , why we do not opt for quantities such as those applied thus far to the Azores for sugar .
In the latter case , we specifically agreed with the Portuguese authorities and with the local Azorian authorities to establish an economic instrument that enables the sector in question to cope with competition by means of economic investment measures .
I am delighted with the support that I have observed and the commitments that have been made by the Portuguese Government to support the sector in this move and I hope that , in this way , we will be able to offer an alternative to the producers of the Azores .
Mr Mölzer stated that the common agricultural policy was not robust enough , that it was not functioning well and that we needed renationalisation .
I would like to put a simple request to you : look at what farmers receive in income today , look at what part of this income is support from the CAP , and ask yourselves how farmers could cope today if we did not have the common agricultural policy .
That does not mean that the CAP should not be adapted .
It must be substantially adapted in order to take account of precisely these changes that European agriculture faces .
I can assure you that every effort will be made in the reform of the CAP in 2013 to take better account of current realities .
Of course , that will be limited to the resources that the Council and Parliament make available to this policy .
I hope that these resources will be directly related to the ambitions that Europeans and Europe have for their agriculture .
I do not think that renationalisation is a solution because , in my opinion , the Member States would not have the means to assure the adoption of specific measures in these outermost regions if we did not have the common agricultural policy and a Community approach .
I will therefore conclude here with the hope that , when it comes to the recasting of the POSEI regulation , we will be able to make progress on some points that were raised today and that , in general , in all the decisions concerning the common agricultural policy , we will be able to work as effectively as we did for this regulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this last speech , I would stress the importance of updating Regulation ( EC ) No 247 / 2006 .
The change that has occurred since it was adopted in 2006 - both in the field of legislation and in that of its application , as well as to the situation itself - has necessitated the introduction of amendments so that an updated version of it can continue to be an important instrument in the adaptation of certain Union agricultural policies relating to the specificities of the outermost regions , as set out in Articles 349 and 107 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Allow me to briefly enumerate the improvements achieved .
In the Canary Islands , the derogation allowing milk-based preparations that are considered ' a traditional product for the local consumers ' is to be temporarily prolonged .
In Réunion , it will now be possible to produce UHT milk reconstituted from milk powder below the limits set by the World Trade Organisation , with the obligation to set the level of integrated powered milk also disappearing .
In Madeira , this same exception is being renewed using these models , and wine produced from direct-producer hybrid vines can be consumed in the region .
In the Azores , the derogation for re-exporting sugar is being brought back and extended , both in amount and in time limit ; the region is also benefiting from the provisions on wine already mentioned for Madeira .
These are measures to be applied retroactively from 1 January 2010 which do not represent any obstacle to free competition in our single market and constitute important contributions to the economies of these regions , whose natural frailties make them more vulnerable at a time of profound crisis .
Lastly , I would like to mention that , apart from the opportunity given to agricultural diversification , the adoption of this report means that the ban on re-exporting certain products has been lifted .
It is also important to remember that thanks to its adoption , we will be contributing decisively to restructuring and maintaining several dozen jobs in the Azores , as well as the technical know-how linked to activity in the agro-industrial sugar sector , at a time of extremely tough economic crisis .
I am delighted to inform Mr Alves and everyone that in 8 or 10 days time , a large-scale conference is going to be held on the outermost regions , sponsored by the Spanish Presidency .
The President of Parliament has appointed me to speak along with Mr Durão Barroso , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero and the President of the government of the Canary Islands at the opening of the conference .
I am definitely going to use the result of this debate and Mr Alves 's report as major sources of inspiration for the speech that I have to make then .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Union 's island and outermost regions are facing a number of problems at the moment .
This is why specific measures are required to promote their future social and economic development .
I welcome the additional measures proposed by Parliament and the Commission , intended to improve the state of agriculture in the outermost regions , especially against the backdrop of the problems facing the Azores and Madeira .
Milk is the Azores ' main agricultural product .
However , given that a number of European Union Member States have faced a milk crisis recently , it is necessary to change these islands ' agricultural profile .
I agree on this point with the rapporteur , who expresses the view that sugar beet is the best alternative to milk production , in terms of both economic efficiency and environmental protection .
I wish to emphasise that sending the maximum volumes of sugar beet to Europe must still be encouraged .
In conclusion , I wish to stress that , in the current economic crisis , the post-2013 financial framework must have solidarity as its main foundation and also still aim to achieve high standards of territorial and social cohesion .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 and resumed at 12.05 )

1 .
Request for consultation of the European Economic and Social Committee - Towards a European road safety area : strategic guidelines for road safety up to 2020 ( vote )
2 .
Establishment of a European Asylum Support Office (
3 .
The energy performance of buildings ( recast ) (
4 .
European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 ( amendment of Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC ) (
5 .
Migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1104 / 2008 ) (
6 .
Migration from the Schengen Information System ( SIS 1 + ) to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) ( amendment of Decision 2008 / 839 / JHA ) (
7 .
The establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme (
8 .
Key competences for a changing world : implementation of the education and training 2010 work programme (
9 .
Deontological questions related to companies ' management (
Before the vote :
Madam President , in anticipation of your calling the next vote on the Lehne report on deontology , may I please ask why this vote is being taken ?
It was due for debate last night under catch-the-eye .
That was cancelled , so here we are voting on something which has not been debated , although it does not say so .
For your information , Madam President , when this came before the Employment Committee a short while ago , nobody on that committee knew what deontology meant until I tried to explain it to them - not even the Chair !
I think it is highly improper , therefore , to take a vote on this unknown , undebated motion .
I can tell you that it was debated in the Committee on Legal Affairs , from whence it comes , and it has been through all the proper procedures , so I intend to proceed with the vote .
10 .
An EU Strategy for Youth - Investing and Empowering (
Before the vote :
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , these are critical times for the whole of Europe .
A future for Europe - which is what I want to talk about - means , above all , future generations .
Optimism about the future of Europe means young people with opportunities , skills and qualifications .
This report , and every other initiative on this issue , will have no value in the future unless all of us , especially those of us who are directly elected by the citizens of Europe , highlight in every policy , in every pillar of our action , the priority and emphasis which we need to give to young people .
In these difficult times , both in Greece and in other countries , we believe that we can achieve this .
We can achieve it with real effort together with young people who , if they have the wherewithal , if they have the opportunity , will take the future in their hands and lead us to a better tomorrow .
My thanks to the shadow rapporteurs from all the groups for their cooperation and the unanimity which we achieved .
( Applause )
11 .
Equal treatment between self-employed men and women (
12 .
Textile names and related labelling of textile products (
13 .
Macro-financial assistance for Ukraine (
Before the vote :

rapporteur . - Madam President , this is just a brief explanation of what we are going to vote on .
In November last year , here in Strasbourg , when we were discussing the approval of four previous macro-financial assistance proposals regarding other countries , the Commission promised us that , under the Lisbon Treaty and until the adoption of a framework regulation for macro-financial assistance , all future individual proposals for such assistance would be subject to codecision by Parliament and the Council .
Now , only six months later , you have in front of you not only a proposal for a codecided decision , but also a first-reading agreement with the Council .
In trying to reach that agreement , we were operating under a very tight timetable .
Therefore , I would like to express my recognition and gratitude to the Spanish Presidency , the Council and the Commission , as well as to the shadow rapporteurs on the Committee on International Trade and everybody involved , for their positive and constructive approach .
Under the proposed decision , Ukraine could get a loan of up to EUR 500 million in order to finance its balance of payments deficit and meet external financing needs .
This loan would supplement IMF support and the EU assistance of EUR 110 million that was agreed back in 2002 but has not yet been disbursed .
During our informal trialogue negotiations , Parliament insisted on keeping references to certain disbursement conditions that were important for us , such as the efficiency , transparency and accountability of the assistance .
We also insisted on the importance of Parliament being kept duly informed about the actual implementation of the assistance .
( Applause )
In protecting our institutional prerogatives , we also resisted demands to introduce a management committee procedure for implementing measures so that finally an advisory committee ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
14 .
Specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union (
15 .
Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the year 2011 - Section I - Parliament (
Before the vote :
( DE ) Madam President , it is a little unusual , but I must inform my own group that our voting list for the Trüpel report is not correct in the form that we have laid it down .
There has been a misunderstanding .
We reject all the amendments , except our own .
Ms Haug , thank you for that .
It looks as though the leadership of your group is well aware of the situation .
16 .
Simplification of the CAP (
17 .
New developments in public procurement (
18 .
The EU Policy Coherence for Development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus concept ' (
Before the vote on paragraph 34 :
Madam President , I propose that after the words ' introduction of an international financial transaction tax ' , three words be added : ' at global level ' .
It seems to me this will make more sense .
Thank you very much .
19 .
Penalties for serious infringements against the social rules in road transport (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) I voted against the Tavares report , as the introduction of a joint resettlement programme is the umpteenth step towards a completely uniform European asylum policy .
One does not need to be a clairvoyant to be able to predict even now that a uniform policy such as this will lead to a large increase in the number of asylum seekers in the Member States .
The recital in the report stating that the introduction of a joint resettlement programme would make illegal immigration less attractive is particularly disagreeable .
This hypocritical pseudo-argument resurfaces time and again when votes are held in this House on texts concerning immigration or asylum .
It pulls the wool over people 's eyes .
In countries such as Belgium , illegal immigration usually occurs when people go underground following their asylum procedure and are subsequently rewarded with regularisation .
This kind of thing must be combated , and a joint resettlement programme by no means offers a solution .
( CS ) We have passed a directive that will undoubtedly open up further opportunities for research into the energy efficiency of buildings and will contribute to savings in relation to the heating of buildings .
It is mainly old buildings that are a problem , of course , and not just blocks of flats .
Yesterday , my colleague , Marian-Jean Marinescu , mentioned a special fund .
The provision of additional resources in a time of crisis is questionable .
It is therefore necessary to make better use of current resources - which amount to 4 % for the period 2010 to 2014 .
( CS ) I wanted to speak again about the report on the refugee fund , and that is why I have come forward .
I would like to say that the voting equipment showed that I abstained .
I would like to declare here , however , that I support shared responsibility for more dignified conditions for legitimate asylum seekers and that I was in favour .
On the other hand , we must fight more effectively against illegal migration .
Now to the Schengen item , if I may .
Today , we have approved further steps for launching version two of the Schengen Information System , which reinforces security guarantees for all Europeans living in a unified space without barriers .
However , the actions of the German and Austrian police cast a dark shadow over the idea of Schengen and European solidarity , when numerous Czech citizens are forced to undergo unnecessary , intimate and degrading checks at internal borders .
I raised this problem , along with other issues , two years ago in a question to the European Commission , but the situation has not yet been resolved satisfactorily .
It amounts to a clear breach of the rules , and in the case of Czech citizens , including businessmen and workers , it restricts free movement , which is one of the basic freedoms guaranteed by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
( IT ) A migratory policy , Mr President , that seeks to be fair and realistic , necessarily requires the adoption of shared European regulations on asylum and must also make provision for a resettlement programme that is effective , solid and sustainable .
At this point , I feel I must emphasise that resettlement pursues not only a humanitarian aim , but also the political and economic goal of relieving third countries of the burden of accepting large numbers of refugees , and the equally great burden of sharing costs and financial responsibilities .
We believe , however , that one budget line and one form of financial support are not enough and so we urge Member States to promote the creation of further private financing mechanisms , encouraging public-private partnerships with NGOs and other social partners , such as religious and ethnic organisations , in order to help promote voluntary work in this sector .
Where new financial perspectives are concerned , we think it would be a good idea , for example , to make provision for a specific ad hoc financial allocation , perhaps by means of a new fund set up for this purpose .
Finally , we propose a firm commitment from all those involved to offering refugees , especially the most vulnerable , access to appropriate housing , education and language courses , health care , psychological services , as well as access to the job market , which is essential to ensure that they become properly integrated .
( CS ) I am pleased that the report of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has received such broad support in today 's vote .
I realise it is primarily the responsibility of the Member States to secure social conditions for female entrepreneurs that are on a par with those enjoyed by female employees .
Nevertheless , this report provides clear outlines which countries should follow .
I do not consider this a breach of subsidiarity , but if anyone has doubts , they can initiate a review .
Even domestic parliaments can do this , thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am curious as to whether they will take advantage of this criticism , or merely engage in endless empty talk .
( LT ) I voted for this report and feel it is important to stress that on average , women in the European Union are still being paid less for every hour they work - 17.4 % less than men .
This disparity has only been reduced slightly in the past 15 years , while in some countries , it has even grown worse .
I agree with Parliament 's call for the preparation of regular reports on the gender pay gap in the European Union , and I support all measures to help reduce discrimination against women in the European Union .
( CS ) We approved the controversial proposal because our IMCO committee broadened and enhanced it by introducing country of origin labelling for the European Union as well .
Italian Members submitted further proposals at today 's plenary session , including broadening the regulation to encompass shoes as well .
I have strongly backed this idea for a long time , but it must be drafted to a high standard by the European Commission .
It is a matter of resolving the technical definitions , which Parliament cannot do very well itself .
I therefore did not vote in favour of it , but at the same time , I would like to ask the Commission to begin work immediately and to submit the proposal .
( DA ) Madam President , I would just like to say that I voted against those parts of the report that concern ' made in ' labelling because I do not think there is any evidence to show that the advantages are greater than the disadvantages .
I believe that this is tending towards protectionism and that is something that I find difficult to vote in favour of .
I therefore voted against the parts in question .
( PL ) Madam President , I decided to endorse this initiative , which gives certain regions in Europe the opportunity for development .
Attention should be drawn to the fact that in economic terms , certain areas in Europe itself are also becoming outermost regions .
Therefore , programmes like this have as their objective , among other things , the development of areas in Europe , and I hope they will stimulate development by agriculture and also by the fishing industry .
Madam President , I would like to express my concern regarding the situation of banana producers in the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe , Martinique and Madeira , which the treaty include among the outermost regions .
Their situation has been made more difficult especially since the EU , within the World Trade Organisation , concluded an agreement with Latin American countries on lowering tariffs for banana imports from that region .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that in 2006 , the EU reformed its common market organisation for bananas .
It committed budgetary funds for aid to banana producers in those regions .
Since the reform , the EU has committed EUR 208 million each year to supporting banana producers in the Canaries , the French Antilles , Madeira and , to a lesser extent , in the Azores .
Although we should welcome such support , for many banana producers , this support will not be enough .
So I would like to urge the competent institutions to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that traditional branches of the economy in the EU are not compromised for more strategic trade goals .
Madam President , I support this report because it addresses the issue of diversity and our agricultural policy between the regions .
However , I want to comment on the winding-up remarks made by Commissioner Cioloş .
He responded to concerns expressed on the reopening of talks with the Mercosur countries and , while his words brought some comfort to those who listened - because he said he would ensure that the interests of EU farming and the EU farm model would be safeguarded - I am afraid I was not reassured .
It is very clear from the Commission 's own papers that European Union beef producers , poultry meat producers and pigmeat farmers will be adversely affected if a deal is done .
We are having this reopening of talks at a time when we are reforming agricultural policy .
The budget is under threat .
We may not have a sufficient budget and yet we are facing further disruption of farm prices and incomes .
It does not make sense , and I hope the Commissioner hears these views .
( HU ) I support this report because it simplifies the enormous administrative and bureaucratic burden currently weighing down farmers .
I am very confident that as a result of the report , a new form of relationship will emerge between the officials responsible for implementing the common agricultural policy in Member States , especially in post-communist states like Hungary , and farmers .
This will put an end to the sort of practice in use until now , which systematically punished , penalised and terrorised farmers .
I hope , too , that a new form of cooperation will also develop at last between officials and clients .
I think it is very important that responsibility does not rest only with farmers , who have hitherto had to pay fines for every petty incident , but that the state , too , assumes responsibility , such as when the office is late in paying farmers what they are owed .
Claims for such payments should be enforceable in a court of law by both farmers and clients .
( IT ) I voted in favour of the Ashworth report because I believe that simplifying and reducing bureaucratic procedures relating to the CAP , the common agricultural policy , is not only desirable , but necessary so that European farmers can take full advantage of its benefits , and not , as so often happens , encounter administrative difficulties and delays .
I also believe that many will share the desire to ensure clearer and more comprehensible legislation , both for the responsible authorities and for farmers , to do away with all superfluous regulations , and to promote the exchange of good practices between Member States and local authorities .
( DE ) Madam President , the common agricultural policy needs to be constantly checked for its practicability , as unnecessary red tape costs us and , above all , our farmers , a great deal of time and money .
Elements that are not meaningful and appropriate must be dismantled and simplified .
This is the case , in particular , for the often very complicated and disputed cross-compliance regulations .
Our stated goal is to make agricultural policy simpler and more transparent .
The European Union 's farmers should be able to spend more time in the field again , rather than behind a desk .
I really hope that the Commission takes note of this important message from our report and takes action to realise it .
Madam President , I voted for this report , like many others who are actively engaged with farmers in their region .
One of the key things we hear about all the time is the bureaucracy involved in the industry .
So a key aspect of the new CAP must be a reduction in the amount of red tape and bureaucracy .
Legislation must be meaningful to farmers and we must not restrict farmers from food production .
However , not only streamlining of legislation is important but also flexibility for Member States and , most importantly , with the Commission and the European Court of Auditors .
The European Court of Auditors has shown little to no flexibility , or indeed common sense , when applying penalties .
This legislation needs urgent attention , and more common sense is needed .
A financial review is also needed to assess the cost of farm inspections and the amount of money recovered in penalties , to see if this is actually value for money for the taxpayer .
Madam President , I think when we introduced decoupling , few of us realised the implications of making cross compliance part of the package which farmers now need to comply with .
I think it is over 17 different directives .
Perhaps we should ask ourselves in this House how well we legislate for simplification .
However , there is one particular area that I want to comment on , and that is the area of inspections .
We have the overarching inspection for cross compliance by competent authorities , but farmers are increasingly facing other levels and layers of inspections from processors , from retailers , from all sorts of groups ; we need a little bit of coordination and not duplication of inspections .
They do not add any value or any degree of safety or security to the final product , but they add a huge amount of bureaucracy and frustration for the producers who are required to meet and greet all of these inspectors .
I welcome this report .
( FI ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ashworth , for his excellent report .
To my mind , there is very good reason now to focus attention on our ability to simplify the processes that relate to agriculture in the European Union .
You could say that the payments jungle is such that the ordinary farmer , whether in the north or east of Finland , or anywhere in Europe generally , is disinclined to look into it .
We therefore need clear , workable and comprehensible models .
We also need trust between the farming population and the government in order to be able to make headway .
At the moment , the European Union 's agricultural policy is such a shambles , with its 27 different countries and 27 different cultures , that it is hard to see any clear future other than a simplification and clarification of the systems .
This report by Mr Ashworth is an excellent step in this direction , and I hope that we will be able to continue along this path : clear , simple instructions and guidelines on agriculture now and in the future .
Madam President , I think it is refreshing to have a report coming before Parliament today starting with the word ' simplification ' .
Of course , that in itself should not be necessary but it suggests that until now , it has been too complicated .
Anything involving an educational approach to a particular topic should involve simplification rather than complication .
We have had too much complication up until now , as anybody who has attended farmers ' meetings will know .
Farmers are driven absolutely berserk by the amount of forms they have to fill in and the overbearing inspectorate they have to endure .
So I welcome this proposal .
Of course , it also has to be said that what you do with forms is not actually going to decide how you farm your land .
It is the way the farmers treat their animals and the way they farm their land that is going to give us the traceability , accountability and food security and quality that we need .
So this is a step in the right direction .
I hope we see many of them and , in due course , eliminate the need for the word ' simplification ' to be introduced , because it should be there automatically .
( FI ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the report , but I voted wrongly in the allimportant Article 34 , under Amendment 5 .
It is very important that we clarify the size of this carbon footprint and , furthermore , discover its costs .
It is high time the European Parliament sat in just one location , and I am very glad that the new government in the United Kingdom has decided that this matter should be raised as part of its programme .
I hope that the other Member States will also make it their concern .
It is a matter of the environment , and it is a matter of costs .
As long as the European Parliament is able to spend as much money as it does now on a rally of this nature , we will continue to ignore the economic crisis .
( IT ) As regards the Ţicău report , I voted in favour of the common position on updating the directive on the energy performance of buildings , because the aim is that , from the end of 2020 , all newly constructed buildings will have an energy balance equal to zero , an aim that the European institutions must make every effort to achieve .
Europe has a shared commitment , and is firmly convinced that in the near future , it will not be necessary to produce more energy , but to make better use of that which is already produced .
Energy saving and energy efficiency effectively represent a source of energy production .
We do not need to wait ten years to move in this direction ; instead , Member States need to commit as of now to achieving energy efficiency targets , using financial resources that , until today , have been dedicated to producing greater quantities of energy .
I remind you especially of the iniquitous launch of the nuclear programme in Italy , which damaged and endangered the health of citizens and the environment .
A huge quantity of public resources was wasted on this launch in order to produce , in less than twenty years , the same quantity of energy that we could do without if we were to invest the same resources in energy efficiency right now .
Green investments for our children , not radioactive waste !
I will now move on to the explanation of vote for the Rühle report .
( IT ) I voted in favour because I think it is important for Parliament to support the simplification and rationalisation of public procurement law .
This will make work easier both for administrative bodies and for businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , which will find it easier to participate in tenders .
I consider it essential to refer to the use of public procurement as a means of encouraging paths of sustainable development , by introducing environmental and social criteria within invitations to tender .
I also think that it is the duty of this Parliament and of the European institutions to continue pressing for all-round transparency surrounding the use of public money , particularly with regard to public procurement , using all possible means and especially the Internet .
Citizen control represents a crucial contribution for using public funds in a way that is genuinely in the collective interest and , as the Committee on Regional Development reminds us , for fighting the corruption that prevails within local and regional authorities .
( CS ) Public procurement is unfortunately an area suffering from one of the highest levels of corruption .
I was happy to back the report by Heide Rühle calling for a simplification of public procurement .
At the same time , however , I would like to point out that until the Commission introduces a public portal with information on the circumstances of suspicious contracts funded by the Union , not much will change .
Competition will not be efficient , fair and accessible to small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am talking about monitoring and analysis , about a reference price for one kilometre of motorway , for example , publishing the names of the real owners of victorious firms , including subsidiaries of parent companies , and also the names of firms that win repeatedly , so that they can be investigated by the media and the public .

Madam President , I also wanted to speak on energy efficiency but apparently the rule is that , if there are no amendments , no oral explanation may be made , so I will put in a written one .
On the Keller report , I want to be very clear that I reject it on the basis of paragraphs 44 and 45 and recital I. I regard paragraph 44 as deeply disturbing .
Also , where does this Parliament sit ?
Last year and the year before , we pressed the Commission to take action to assist dairy farmers across the European Union who were in a dire situation .
The Commission responded with export refunds as an emergency measure .
The only people who complained to me about it were from New Zealand , which is not a developing country .
I think that to put these paragraphs into this otherwise good report does a disservice to this Parliament and to our producers across the European Union , who are struggling .
We are reducing production in Europe .
That has a consequence for the developing world . We need to heed it .
Mrs McGuinness , you were exactly right on the Rules .
I had thought that Mrs Alfano was going to carry on in a similar vein to Mrs Jäätteenmäki , but in fact , that report should not have had any explanations of vote .
You are correct .
Madam President , I just want to say that I agree with my colleague Ms McGuinness .
We had difficulties with some of the proposals here and for that reason , we did not go with the EPP line , which we would normally like to do .
I think Ms McGuinness has explained why .
I fully understand and also concur with what she said , so I hope that the EPP will understand as well .
( NL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the Ranner report on the grounds that it offers a good solution to the problem of driving times and rest periods in road transport .
This solution lies in the harmonisation and interpretation of the legislation . This can be found in paragraph 17 , as amended .
The European Commission , in cooperation with the Confederation of Organisations in Road Transport Enforcement ( CORTE ) , Tispol and Euro Contrôle Route , must work on producing an article by article interpretation of the application of the legislation .
In addition , this interpretation must be clear for , and known to , everyone involved in applying legislation on Europe 's roads .
I also welcome the amended paragraph 27 , and call on all drivers to make use of the Disproportionate Fines Complaint Desk at Euro Contrôle Route .
Drivers , things have to change in Europe in terms of driving times and rest periods , and so proof is required .
I encourage you , therefore , to report your complaints to this desk provided by Euro Contrôle Route .
( IT ) Madam President , my colleague 's report accurately emphasises that there are still notable discrepancies between the way serious social road traffic offences are treated in the various Member States .
I am therefore in favour of the proposed measures for the harmonisation and levelling of offences and the relative European penalties , and of the possible setting up of a coordinating instrument at European Union level .
Written explanations of vote
There are still far too many accidents on Europe 's roads .
This is connected to the growing traffic volume , but also to the excessive demands on road users due to professional or private stress and overtiredness as well as a confusing mass of traffic signs and advertising billboards , etc .
We must also not forget that , in particular in the case of accidents involving fatalities or serious injuries , heavy traffic has a negative role to play .
For the sake of the environment , we must finally implement ideas that are only paid lip service to , such as transferring goods transport to the rails , but we must also implement intelligent traffic arrangements such as traffic light phasing .
Traffic calmed zones , city centre driving bans and similar measures have not yet been sufficiently researched and therefore should not be implemented on a large scale .
There are a number of problems that this report simply does not go into in sufficient detail and I have therefore voted ' no ' .
This proposal is part of the Union 's legislative efforts towards establishing a European asylum system .
This European Asylum Support Office must therefore provide the Member States with expert assistance and contribute to applying a consistent and high-quality common European asylum policy .
The creation of this new office will , without doubt , be an added value for the reinforcement of mutual confidence and sharing of responsibilities between the Member States .
It must facilitate exchanges of information , analyses and experiences between them , organise training activities , and develop concrete cooperation between the administrations entrusted with analysis of asylum requests .
It is important to confront the significant divergences in the decision-making processes of the 27 Member States regarding international protection requests and to successfully achieve a certain amount of convergence in how the Member States analyse and respond to these requests .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal to include the offering of support on resettlement .
I agree that the necessary budgetary changes to the European Refugee Fund will provide adequate funding for the new agency in its initial phases .
Issues relating to immigration and , especially , the right to asylum are particularly sensitive .
Whether or not this right is awarded to non-EU citizens could have a dramatic impact on their lives , so the decision must be taken seriously , given thought and treated with humanity .
I think that it is basic common sense that an open-door policy - without criteria to restrict access to the Union 's territory - is unacceptable , but that a policy of absolutely prohibiting entry is intolerable .
A fair balance is needed which seeks to reconcile the legitimate interests and concerns of the nationals of the Member States with the needs of those who are seeking them .
The establishment of a European Asylum Support Office could constitute an important step towards the adoption of best practices in this area , giving Member States greater confidence in each other , and resulting in the improved exchange of information .
Nevertheless , I must emphasise that the Member States must continue to have a freedom of movement regarding whether or not to admit those seeking asylum within their borders .
I would also stress that the EU must not hide the fact that the interests of its Member States in this area are not absolutely convergent .
The goal of the European Asylum Support Office is to provide expert assistance that contributes to applying a consistent and high quality common European asylum policy .
This office enables the development of mutual trust and the sharing of responsibilities and will be responsible for coordinating the exchange of information and other actions relating to resettlement by the Member States .
As a promoter of values of human dignity , which constitute basic elements of freedom , democracy and socio-economic development , in the context of the current global landscape , the European Union must be a pioneer and an example to others regarding asylum .
The creation of a European office , to support the Member States in this area of intervention with citizens of third countries , will be a determining factor in applying a common European asylum system and the solidarity of Member States in consistent action that fits with the values and principles of the project of building Europe .
I call for the mechanisms and resources necessary to establish the Asylum Support Office to be ensured quickly .
I voted in favour of the creation of the European Asylum Support Office in the hope that it will allow a certain added value to be brought to a European asylum system that today is clearly flawed .
Certainly , I would have liked the mandate of this Office to be more ambitious and to be the instrument through which compulsory solidarity between the Member States is finally established , so as to put an end to the lottery of the right to asylum .
This will remain a pious hope until common asylum procedures are adopted .
Hopefully , this office will at least have the merit of contributing to improved identification of asylum issues and problems , in order to ensure the best possible protection for people who are the victims of persecution and are seeking refuge in our country .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of setting up the European Asylum Support Office as , in the case of Member States whose national asylum system is under pressure , the Office can support the implementation of solidarity mechanisms intended to promote a better reallocation of beneficiaries of international protection from such Member States to others , while ensuring that asylum systems are not abused .
I welcome the fact that the European Asylum Support Office will coordinate the joint assistance actions of Member States which are facing specific situations , such as large influxes of third country nationals requiring international protection .
It is vital for us to harmonise both our asylum laws and practices .
The European Asylum Support Office will identify good practices , organise training courses at European level and improve access to exact information about the countries of origin .
Furthermore , I believe that the European Asylum Support Office 's activities should also include drawing up guidelines aimed at facilitating a fairer assessment of asylum applications , as well as monitoring compliance with and enforcement of the relevant Community legislation .
We are persuaded of the added value that the European Asylum Support Office will represent for the development of mutual trust , and for the division of political and financial responsibilities .
The EU Member States have yet to reach a final agreement on the treatment to be afforded to refugees , the profile of individuals to whom refugee status should be accorded and they must , above all , overcome the reservations of some governments where possible costs are concerned .
This office will be responsible for providing specialised assistance .
Its role will involve coordination , information exchange and actions relating to the resettling of refugees .
It will run training programmes aimed at those responsible for this sector within each country , contributing to greater harmonisation between the various practices .
We MEPs reserve the fundamental right to appoint its executive director .
I feel it is my duty to stress our call to make the necessary changes to the European Refugee Fund in order to ensure that the new agency operates appropriately .
The biggest political question remains the relationship between human solidarity and the division of financial burdens : the EU is called upon to offer effective support to States most affected by migratory flows and by a high number of asylum seekers , and which face specific and often disproportionate pressures due to their relatively small size .
On such a sensitive subject , relating to human rights , the creation of a European Asylum Support Office is important in enabling specialised assistance at EU level to define a consistent and high-quality common European asylum policy .
That is why I voted as I did .
The Asylum Support Office could represent a very useful body , specifically if it took on a coordinating role in relation to repatriation and thus accelerated repatriation measures .
As a result , the support would also be helpful for resettlement .
The present report treats this element , which I find very important , only as a subordinate issue .
Instead , it contains numerous bureaucratic proposals that will result in a bloated apparatus and a sluggish implementation of the measures .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
I express my support for the proposal to create a European Asylum Support Office .
The role of this office , initially financed by the European Refugee Fund , will be to provide the specialised assistance needed to activate a common asylum policy , and to coordinate information exchanges and actions relating to the resettlement of refugees .
It will be the job of the European Parliament to appoint its executive director , implementing principles of transparency and democratic control .
Solidarity within the community will be assured by an agreement between Member States with the consent of stakeholders .
I also support the establishment of a consultative forum as a result of pressure exercised by us MEPs , which will ensure close dialogue between the Asylum Support Office and the various stakeholders .
Today , we are giving the go-ahead to the establishment of the European Asylum Support Office .
It will have multiple benefits .
The Asylum Support Office will make a decisive contribution to the integration of a single European asylum area .
It will quickly put an organisation into operation which will coordinate and strengthen cooperation between the Member States on asylum issues by promoting a rapprochement between various national practices .
The Office will also help to promote convergence between regulatory arrangements which apply in the EU in the field of asylum rights .
Bearing all these benefits in mind and the consent of both the Member States and the European institutions to the establishment of the European Office , I was delighted to vote in favour of its establishment .
Although a favourable vote on this report is merely a formality , since the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon required some adaptation of the legal basis and delegated acts , I would still like to highlight the importance of energy efficiency in the building industry when it comes to achieving the EU target of reducing energy consumption and CO2 emissions by 20 % , and to increasing energy production from renewable sources by 20 % by 2020 .
As we know , achieving energy efficiency and emission cutting targets in urban centres depends chiefly on improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings , and those under construction .
I still believe , however , that the directive sets very ambitious targets that local administrations will struggle to achieve unless they are given financial aid , including EU aid .
I am thinking particularly of the huge amount of energy recovery work required in existing building stock , such as social housing , where energy renovation ( which would help families to cut their utility bills ) will require a significant financial commitment by local authorities .
The aim of this ambitious text is to encourage the construction / renovation of buildings according to standards that are more environmentally friendly since they are more energy efficient .
I voted resolutely in favour of its adoption .
With this type of initiative , the European Union is demonstrating its role as a leader in the area of sustainable development .
This directive is a good compromise between encouragement and constraint where environmentally responsible construction is concerned .
The construction sector is responsible for 40 % of the EU 's energy consumption and 35 % of its emissions .
This legislation stipulates that by 2020 , new buildings must be nearly zero energy and that renovated existing buildings must meet minimum energy performance requirements .
This legislation will therefore contribute to reducing energy dependency in Europe , decreasing CO2 emissions , improving internal and external air quality , and increasing well-being in cities .
The incentive to improve the energy performance of buildings also represents a chance to reclassify our cities , contributing to tourism , job creation and sustainable economic growth in the EU .
However , reclassification requires increased public and private investment .
We are looking at direct public investment with a direct effect on job creation and on the involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises ; a programme of urban regeneration will be appropriate for the economic recovery .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Member States to use the Structural Funds to reclassify buildings in environmental and energy terms , with this financing used as a catalyst for private funding .
I also call on them to find the appropriate financing model for renovating existing buildings .
We spend 50 % of our lives in our homes .
Today , 30 % of existing homes in Europe are unhealthy , even if there is a great disparity between the different Member States .
It is therefore important not only to promote new sustainable buildings , but also to carry out sustainable renovation .
I welcome this new legislation , which will help consumers to reduce their energy bills and the whole of the EU to achieve its climate objective of reducing energy consumption by 20 % in 10 years .
The Member States will have to adapt their building regulations so that all buildings constructed from the end of 2020 comply with high energy standards .
Existing buildings will have to be improved if possible .
For the Democratic Movement , the housing issue is also one of urbanism and build quality .
We must give priority to the way in which our homes are designed .
We must therefore encourage the rehabilitation of our building stock , for example , through a modulation of property taxes depending on the energy performance of buildings .
We therefore call on the Member States to establish a tax system that is reoriented to encourage all the parties involved to behave in a more environmentally responsible way .
I regard this report as being beneficial to the future of the European Union 's energy sector , as long as the objectives outlined in it are feasible and compatible with the financial situation of all Member States .
I welcome the objectives adopted by the Council on 14 April 2010 on the need to reduce the major disparities between Member States in terms of heat efficiency in buildings , as well as the proposed target of all buildings achieving zero energy consumption by 31 December 2020 , based on gradual steps being taken by Member States in 2015 and 2018 .
However , the Commission and Council must bear in mind that many Member States are still facing economic recession and will require financial and logistical support to achieve the objectives being proposed .
The Commission must consider for the future drawing up a financial intervention plan based on allocating development funds that will support Member States which are unable to allocate the necessary funds , especially for renovation work .
This measure must be seen as beneficial to ordinary citizens as they are the ones who are footing the bill for part of the renovation costs .
I voted for the recommendation on the energy performance of buildings , because it presents ambitious and feasible proposals for a 20 % reduction in energy consumption and CO2 emissions in the sectors not covered by the emissions trading scheme by 2020 .
This directive will have a direct effect on the lives of the European public , as it will help consumers to cut their spending on energy and , at the same time , it can contribute to creating millions of jobs throughout the EU through the planned investments in improved energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources .
In 2008 , the EU committed itself to a 20 % reduction in energy consumption by 2020 and for 20 % of energy consumed to come from renewable sources .
Improving the energy efficiency of buildings is the most effective way to reduce by 20 % the energy consumption and emissions for sectors outside the Emissions Trading System .
Furthermore , energy savings for energy efficient buildings average 30 % over conventional buildings .
On 13 November 2008 , the Commission tabled its proposed amendment to Directive 2002 / 91 / EC on the energy performance of buildings .
These amendments will impact the lives of the European public significantly , as they will have immediate consequences for the buildings in which they live , and will create the need for more efficient technologies in the construction sector to be researched and developed .
Moreover , this strategy will create jobs and contribute to sustainable growth .
As the current draft is based on the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council in November 2009 , I support the rapporteur 's proposal .
The adoption of this directive relating to the energy performance of buildings is an important step towards reducing Europe 's CO2 emissions and energy dependency .
These factors are increasingly decisive for the European public 's quality of life , and the competitiveness of our economy and social organisation .
Given that the building sector is responsible for 40 % of energy consumption and for 35 % of total CO2 emissions , the self-sufficiency and improved energy performance of renovated buildings are taking on decisive importance in the European Union 's ability to achieve , by 2020 , the goal of a 20 % reduction in energy consumption and a 20 % increase in the use of renewable sources of energy and energy efficiency .
As well as helping private consumers and public services to cut energy costs , it is hoped that the application of this new legislation will help to fight the crisis in the civil construction sector and that it will contribute to developing urban regeneration programmes , which will have a positive impact on improving the quality of life and well-being of the public .
Improving the energy performance of buildings is particularly important in increasing the EU 's general energy efficiency and in reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
If the European Union wants to achieve the objectives that it is proposing , seeking to reduce energy consumption by 20 % , to ensure that 20 % of energy consumption comes from renewable sources and to increase energy efficiency by 20 % before 2020 , it will have to make a significant commitment to the energy performance of buildings .
The political agreement reached between Parliament and the Council has resulted in the clarification of technical aspects , minimum energy performance requirements depending on the age of a building and whether or not it has been renovated , evaluation of the role of local and regional authorities , and support for public authorities in applying the recommendations .
Nevertheless , we still have some concerns regarding the stronger role for the Commission in evaluating national plans and inspection reports , as well as the adaptations to the Treaty of Lisbon , which focus more power on the Commission through the so-called ' delegated acts ' .
The basic factors affecting energy performance are : 1 .
Conversion of one form of energy into another so that it can be put to a specific use .
The longer the chain of conversions , the greater the losses .
In practice , this mainly concerns the stream of heat energy released from primary energy sources .
A large part of this passes into the environment .
This effect can be reduced in cogeneration processes , which can achieve an efficiency rating of as much as 90 % .
2 .
Electrical resistance , or Ohm 's resistance , which is important in the transmission of electrical energy .
3 .
Thermal resistance .
Low resistance is important in heat exchangers , while high resistance is important because of the low thermal conductivity of insulating materials .
Use of these insulating materials - such as polystyrene , mineral wool and cellular concrete - significantly reduces residential housing 's thermal energy requirement .
At the moment , it is quite high - around 40 % of the total energy used .
4 .
Friction in anti-friction processes , such as in bearings , and in friction processes such as brakes .
This concerns mainly cars and turbulence in aeroplanes .
Friction losses are around 30 % of total energy .
I voted in favour of the regulation without the amendments , because energy losses in residential buildings are - alongside conversion losses - the greatest , while savings will help poor people .
In Poland 's case , thermal modernisation , alongside cogeneration , can bring economic , social and ecological benefits .
In this area , there should be a certain priority of realisation , because new regulations often slow down the implementation of earlier ones .
I voted for the draft revised directives on the energy performance of buildings because I believe that new buildings should abide by the principle of energy saving and that binding standards should apply in this area , so that they are respected effectively everywhere .
Public buildings will lead the way from 2018 , giving public authorities more weight and legitimacy in their information campaigns for citizens .
These texts also stipulate that energy saving must be a fundamental element in the renovation of buildings .
I would therefore like these measures to give SMEs a new momentum and the Member States to strengthen training programmes for the workforce responsible for making buildings energy efficient .
Similarly , as far as the energy labelling of energy using products is concerned , I feel consumers should be aware of the energy characteristics of the products they buy .
The issue of energy efficiency is crucial to the 2020 strategy .
An important step has been taken towards reducing energy consumption over the coming years with the adoption of this recommendation , which aims for nearly zero energy buildings by 2020 .
The effort must be made not only when constructing new buildings , but also on large renovation projects involving already existing buildings .
It will also be crucial for a good example to be set in public construction projects .
That is why I voted as I did .
Easy to implement energy saving measures have often been implemented in the past and it is difficult to estimate how high the easy to achieve ( meaning that they are possible without extremely extensive renovation work ) potential for energy savings is .
All of this , in any case , must not get out of hand to the extent that buildings on which excellent energy efficiency renovation work has been carried out stand empty because the rent rises exorbitantly .
Generally speaking , even in the interests of protecting the climate , we must not interfere unacceptably with the ownership rights of citizens where renovations are concerned .
Energy saving measures are , for one thing , very cost intensive and do not always involve completely mature technology , so in that respect , we must not simply lay down something ; we must provide incentives through subsidies .
Given the wage and social security cuts that we are facing , we must double and triple check that the new regulations do not drive simple house builders or residents to wrack and ruin .
The impact of energy demand cannot be clearly estimated , for which reason I voted ' no ' .
The building sector was identified by the EU as one of the markets with the highest energy saving potential .
Energy savings for energy efficient buildings average 30 % over conventional buildings .
In the new EU Member States , including Lithuania , in many apartment blocks , around 60 % of thermal energy is wasted .
In Lithuania alone , there are over 35 000 apartment blocks .
Their inhabitants not only pay huge sums for heating , but are also responsible for tonnes of CO2 emissions .
The Conservative government in Lithuania is incapable of beginning building insulation .
After almost two years of promises that renovation will start imminently , not one building has been renovated .
I voted for this recommendation on the energy performance of buildings , since it promotes the objective of moving towards nearly zero energy buildings .
This will guarantee that in time , EU buildings become sustainable from an energy point of view .
By implementing this directive , we will begin the process of reducing the EU 's energy consumption by one fifth by the year 2020 .
Investment to increase energy efficiency will create millions of jobs and will contribute to the growth of the EU economy .
I express my support for the recommendation to improve the energy efficiency of buildings .
Energy efficiency means not only saving energy , but also reducing CO2 and greenhouse gas emissions .
To achieve this target , we should limit household energy loss , which has increased due to a technology that has shifted energy costs from construction to maintenance .
Research in the construction sector is moving towards a greener approach to building .
Today , the largest projects are concentrated within temperate countries , where this kind of technology is spreading at a rate that suggests we will have sustainable cities in the not too distant future .
In Mediterranean countries , these new technologies are not spreading at the same pace .
Even if the problem of heat dispersal is less serious in these areas , the buildings are no more environmentally sustainable .
The growing use of air conditioning systems , which are increasingly widespread in homes , actually requires a great deal of energy .
The European Union therefore needs to implement information campaigns , and to take action by making use of Community funds , incentives and information campaigns , and by applying and researching new production technologies .
Achieving the 20-20-20 objective by 2020 , in other words a 20 % reduction in energy consumption , an increase in the ratio of energy from renewable sources to total energy consumption to 20 % and a 20 % increase in energy efficiency requires coordinated and targeted action , both by the EU and by the Member States .
More importantly , improving the energy efficiency of buildings is the most effective way of reducing energy consumption and emissions within non-ETS sectors by 20 % .
To be precise , energy savings for efficient buildings average 30 % over conventional buildings .
In addition , energy efficient buildings use less water and offer lower maintenance costs and utility bills .
I therefore voted in favour of the directive on the energy performance of buildings , because it is expected to have a significant impact on the life of European citizens , given that it directly affects the buildings in which they live and which they use .
In addition , investments in improving energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources will create millions of jobs and will contribute towards growth in the EU ; at the same time , they will also help to cut the money currently wasted on maintaining energy-intensive buildings .
Buildings are responsible for nearly half the CO2 emissions not included in the EU emissions trading certificate scheme , offering a major potential for cutting these emissions , with negative or low abatement costs .
The new Energy Performance of Buildings Directive establishes a set of minimum indicators / requirements for the energy performance of new buildings so that they can achieve by 2020 an energy consumption close to zero , with a large part of the energy coming from renewable sources .
This also involves applying these requirements to existing buildings .
It is vital to inform citizens of these requirements and to encourage them , even when buildings are being renovated , to introduce smart metering systems ( to replace the hot water and air-conditioning systems with energy efficient alternatives , such as reversible heat pumps ) .
Partial funding will be provided from the EU budget to encourage energy efficiency measures .
Member States must adopt suitable measures in order to implement this directive quickly .
I voted for this report as the new legislation will help consumers cut the value of their energy bills , thereby enabling the EU to fulfil its objective of achieving a 20 % reduction in energy consumption by 2020 .
I have voted in favour of this important directive due to the need to improve the energy efficiency of buildings , which is one of the areas with the greatest potential to contribute to the EU 's general targets of increasing energy efficiency by 20 % by 2020 .
According to the text agreed between Parliament and the Council , before the end of 2020 , all new buildings must have zero energy consumption , producing as much energy as they consume .
Public buildings must set an example by complying with this legislation before 31 December 2013 .
The EU budget will fund part of the costs of the reforms .
Moreover , existing buildings will have to comply with very high energy efficiency standards calculated by the Member States based on a common framework established in the directive .
The indicator for measuring the energy efficiency of buildings must be included in advertisements for sale or rental that appear in the media .
Another important new element is including smart meters and control and management systems focused on saving energy .
The directive will be revised before 2017 .
Today 's vote on EU rules on the energy performance of buildings represents major progress in the area of energy efficiency .
However , we utterly deplore the fact that the legislation does not take into account the renovation requirements of existing buildings , which account for 40 % of the energy consumption and 36 % of the greenhouse gas emissions in Europe .
Instead of establishing an ambitious energy efficiency policy by investing heavily in the renovation of buildings , the EU is concentrating exclusively on new buildings .
It is letting slip the opportunity to create millions of jobs , to reduce our energy dependence on our neighbours and to significantly combat climate change .
The construction sector is one with tremendous energy saving potential .
The sector is responsible for 40 % of energy consumption and 35 % of total greenhouse gas emissions .
Improving the energy efficiency of buildings is the most effective way of reducing energy consumption and emissions .
This agreement deserves our full support .
By 31 December 2020 at the latest , all new buildings must be nearly zero energy . All public sector buildings must achieve this two years earlier .
Minimum energy performance requirements will even apply from now on when older buildings are renovated .
Nearly zero energy buildings are buildings with very high energy performance .
In addition , the negligible or very small amount of energy they consume should originate , to a very large extent , from renewable energy sources .
It is to be welcomed that the directive devotes attention to the provision of funding instruments to enable this transition .
The Member States must draw up a list of measures for achieving the objectives of this directive by 30 June 2011 at the latest .
Finally , the Commission must assess the functioning of the directive in good time ; that is , by 1 January 2017 at the latest .
This directive represents an important contribution to the fight against climate change .
The Stockholm Programme provides for the creation of a reliable and sustainable common asylum policy in the European Union .
However , in order to implement and ensure asylum policy objectives , it is necessary to encourage Member States to participate voluntarily in the Joint EU refugee resettlement programme .
Therefore , the European Parliament is aiming to provide as many Member States as possible with the opportunity to participate in EU refugee resettlement programmes .
The European Parliament supports the Commission 's proposal and is of the opinion that resettlement of refugees should play a central role in the external asylum policies of the EU .
It should be further developed and expanded into an effective protection instrument by the EU .
By voting in favour of this report , Europe has taken a step towards reaching a common policy on asylum .
This will make it possible to protect human rights more effectively and , at the same time , to limit illegal immigration .
The EU must make its voice heard as far as migration and integration are concerned .
It must assume responsibility for defining European rules , and for contributing to the expenditure incurred by the EU countries affected by migratory flows .
Resettlement cannot and must not , however , be divorced from a shared line of action against illegal immigration .
Such action requires not only the agreement of bordering countries but also of the countries from which future illegal immigrants will depart .
in writing . - Resettlement of refugees is a process in which it is possible for these individuals to be resettled following a request by the UNHCR where it is deemed that there is a need for such individuals to receive international protection .
This is one of the eligible criteria under the ERF .
This process can be an ideal solution for those persons whose safety cannot be adequately guaranteed by nations of first asylum .
I am in agreement with the conclusions that have been made by the rapporteur and have therefore decided to vote in favour of this report .
It is only through a common asylum policy and joint resettlement scheme that we can pursue a proper human rights policy in the EU .
Resettlement is , without doubt , one of the durable solutions for refugees whose protection cannot be assured in countries of first asylum .
It is important for adequate funds to be available , although just assigning part of the budget cannot be considered a true refugee resettlement programme .
We have no doubt of the importance of this amendment to the Refugee Fund , making it possible to plug a gap that exists in several Member States and improving their resettlement capacity .
I am pleased to note that the number of Member States participating in this programme has increased in recent years ; it is important that we manage to encourage the others to take part .
The EU 's development and expansion of this resettlement instrument must continue in order to establish the most effective protection possible .
The Commission will , therefore , be able to set the EU 's joint priorities regarding resettlement of people every year .
These priorities may relate to specific geographic regions , nationalities or categories of refugees to resettle , although I agree that flexibility must be guaranteed in order to respond to emergency situations .
The pressure of migration flows is intensifying and there are a number of migration target countries whose concern about this phenomenon needs to be understood .
This is why it is important for the resettlement programme to be in operation as it would facilitate a fair distribution of the responsibility for complying with international obligations on refugee protection , as well as ease the load on countries burdened by the large number of refugees they are accommodating .
One positive step would be to get the European Asylum Support Office up and running during this year , which can provide Member States with support in applying resettlement initiatives .
No matter which country refugees are going to be resettled in , what is paramount is that they are provided with instant access to language and cultural courses about the relevant country , as well as to other facilities of a religious nature and to psychological counselling , if required .
I believe that sustainability must be the main feature of such a programme , which is guaranteed a longer-term budgetary outlook as a result of this decision .
The beneficiaries have already been traumatised by the break with the culture and traditions of the country they come from .
They have to create a new identity for themselves , which is a traumatic process that does not need to be exacerbated by the precarious and insecure nature of their future .
The need to resettle refugees has been becoming increasingly important in a Europe that does not wish to be closed off to the outside world or blind to what is going on there .
A welcoming nature and solidarity for those who are suffering are two European characteristics that are inspired by Christianity and which it would be good to bring back in full .
This must be done , however , without neglecting the legitimate limits set by the Member States .
The EU 's joint annual priorities in terms of geographic regions and in terms of specific categories of refugee to resettle must really take into account the needs of the Member States and their individual circumstances ; the Member States ' participation in resettlement actions must be encouraged .
One of the ' eligible actions ' of the European Refugee Fund ( ERF ) is resettlement .
The Stockholm Programme states that the EU must act in partnership and cooperate with third countries hosting large refugee populations .
The Commission defines annually the common EU priorities of persons to be resettled and this definition must be sufficiently flexible to respond to emergency cases .
Particular attention must be given to the victims of the most repressive cultural , social and political systems .
The number of Member States participating in EU resettlement programmes has been increasing and must be extended to the greatest possible number of Member States .
I would stress the positive impact of introducing funds to assist with resettlement , with larger amounts for the first and second years of the process .
These funds are in response to the increased costs naturally incurred by the creation of mechanisms and structures , as well as the importance of guaranteeing conditions to ensure the greatest sustainability and quality of the refugee resettlement process .
Given its rather poor performance , Europe must contribute more to the effort to resettle refugees whose existence is threatened in the countries that have received them .
It was in order to encourage the Member States to join this movement of collective solidarity that I voted in favour of this report , which aims to encourage the reception and resettlement of refugees in Europe .
Good intentions are no longer enough ; we must transform words into action and , in particular , give priority to women and children who are victims of violence or exploitation , to non-accompanied minors , to people who have been victims of torture , and to people who are seriously ill .
Only 10 EU Member States , including Portugal , accept refugees for resettlement .
The resettlement of refugees is a procedure whereby , based on a request from the United Nations High Commission for Refugees according to a person 's need for international protection , third country nationals or stateless persons are transferred from a third country to a Member State .
The adoption of this recommendation seeks to increase the number of Member States that resettle refugees , to which end those that do so for the first time will have increased financial assistance for the first two years .
The resettlement of the following must take priority , irrespective of any geographical priorities that the EU may have set for a given period : children and women at risk of violence or psychological , physical or sexual exploitation ; unaccompanied minors ; persons with special medical needs ; survivors of violence and torture ; and persons who need emergency resettlement for legal and protection reasons .
The eligible measures for support under the European Refugee Fund ( ERF ) include the resettlement of refugees from third countries .
' Resettlement ' means the process whereby , on a request from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) based on a person 's need for international protection , third country nationals or stateless persons are transferred from a third country to a Member State whereby they are permitted to a ) reside as a refugee or b ) be given a status which offers them the same rights and benefits under national and Community law as refugee status .
The measures proposed in the report will result in the EU - which already has to face the problem of mass immigration - becoming even more attractive to migrants .
The UNHCR 's figures confirm this .
While , in 2008 , approximately 5 000 people were resettled throughout the EU , at present , there are 750 000 people around the world with this need .
It is for that reason that I voted against this report .
In many Member States , including my home country of Austria , the capacity for accepting refugees is already at bursting point and the population is quite rightly resisting new reception centres and similar facilities .
The report on the European Refugee Fund , calling , as it does , for the resettlement of refugees in the EU , is thus all the more incomprehensible .
I therefore voted against this report .
The problem of refugees is a European problem and cannot be left to be managed by national States , particularly given their geographic and economic differences .
I therefore support the setting up of a fund at European level .
The setting up of such a fund must serve two purposes : it must support refugees who arrive in our countries , often on our coastlines , seeking help , and also those States that receive the greatest numbers of these desperate people due to their geographical location .
The problem is , and must be , a European problem and we cannot leave certain States to manage it alone .
I hope that the fund will be merely the beginning of a journey towards developing a more European and united approach to the whole issue .
In view of the need to help refugees in Europe , I think the decision made by the European Parliament about this is extremely important .
The main objective of the fund is to support measures taken by Member States , which very often involve additional expenditures .
Such measures are intended to ensure decent living conditions for refugees , and also concern legal regulation of their stay in countries of the Union .
I think it is essential to increase financial assistance for countries which are engaged in helping refugees .
We must not give any grounds for the criticism that , as developed countries , instead of protecting refugees at all costs , we are trying to prevent them from coming to us .
Refugees who come to Europe from the developing world , and who often have had to face enormous problems , such as violence , lack of the means to live and lack of access to medical care , should be given care organised in the best possible way by EU Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the committee , there were many amendment proposals put to a vote which were aimed at pointing out the importance of the church and faith groups in solving the problem of refugees .
All of these amendment proposals were rejected .
When liberals and left-wing politicians assert that day-to-day work with refugees is sufficiently covered by non-governmental organisations and state funding , it reveals their short-sighted cynicism and hypocrisy .
In reality , the exact opposite is the case .
Is it not perhaps true that states often face criticism over the fact that conditions in refugee camps are , for the most part , undignified ?
Would it be out of place to state openly the hypocrisy of states such as Germany , Spain , France , Italy or Malta ?
Governments fail in the reception and care of refugees .
The misery of these poorest people is an affront to affluent Europe , and so we return them .
Due to political correctness , we ignore the fact that in the deepest misery of the reception camps , where the politically correct non-governmental organisations have already given up the fight , it is now the unobtrusive orders of Catholic nuns alone that work on with enthusiasm .
Thanks to the Maltese Order , the Jesuit Refugee Service and many Christian organisations , governments are acknowledging their obligation to tackle the fate of the refugees .
The Christian organisations are a thorn in the eye of our conscience .
For this , they deserve our thanks - even now , when they get very limited funding from the EU budget and cannot even be mentioned in the own-initiative report on this topic .
The report on the Schengen Information System and its modernisation contributes to this magnificent breakthrough in free intra-European movement .
Faced with growing movements of people between Member States in the Schengen Area , as well as the latter 's enlargement , we must improve the handling of data to ensure that this freedom is exercised in total security .
The Coelho report contributes to the search for greater effectiveness in the circulation of information , as well as to the necessary respect for individual freedoms that the European Union guarantees .
I logically voted for this report .
The objective of this proposal is to ensure the migration from the Schengen Information System , whose current form is SIS 1 + , to the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) .
It is indeed regrettable that the start of this system has been delayed .
The European Parliament did all it could to ensure that this system would start to operate as soon as possible and that the SIS II implementation process would be completely transparent .
However , it is necessary to seek the approval of all of the institutions .
It is important to stress that the Commission would have to apply an alternative programme if the SIS II project is unsuccessful , and that Parliament should be included in the decision making as regards migration .
Before switching over to the new SIS II system , Parliament should be fully informed by the Commission on the test results and given an opportunity to issue an opinion .
in writing . - Prior to the migration to the new SIS , it is necessary that the appropriate tests be carried out and that the necessary safeguards are in place .
While I believe that the above should be carried out in a professional and thorough manner , I also share the rapporteur 's disappointment with regards to the extended delays that are impeding migration to the new system .
I voted broadly in favour of the proposed amendments to this regulation .
The data-migration phase is the final task under the development mandate for the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) .
This therefore justifies the need to give the Commission a development mandate valid for the development of the system until it becomes operational .
Given the considerable delays that have already been confirmed and the increased costs of the SIS II project , I understand that the sunset clause must be kept .
The new mandate conferred on the Commission must be defined according to the date envisaged for the SIS II to become operational , in late 2011 .
However , the Commission must have some flexibility in order to be able to postpone dates using the comitology procedure so that it can adapt the legal framework to an alternative scenario if the SIS II is unsuccessful .
The Commission 's inability to set a likely date for the SIS II to become operational is unacceptable , since better guarantees of security , freedom and justice in the European area are depending on it .
It also raises doubts about the lack of transparency in the way the process has been handled .
The particular sensitivity of this subject justifies the assigning of the report to one of the Members of this House who has dedicated himself most to this subject , my colleague , Mr Coelho ; I would congratulate him on his work .
The delays that this process has suffered are regrettable , but I share his caution on the success of the migration process and his concern over Parliament 's right to be informed of developments .
The ' saga ' of migration from SIS I to SIS II has simply gone on for too long .
That is why I voted for this report : to point out the need to respect the deadlines set and to end what could be viewed , following numerous fruitless outcomes and given the resources deployed to achieve the objective of said migration - so far without success - as mismanagement .
The ball is in the Commission 's court , but as the budgetary authority , the European Parliament must use its powers and reserve itself the right to ask the European Court of Auditors to proceed with a detailed audit of the management of the project and of the financial impact that a failure would have on the EU budget .
I see slight progress in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs ' amendments contained in this report .
The latter , in effect , demands that the European Parliament be involved in the decision-making process and indicates that its favourable opinion is required before there can be any migration to the second version of the Schengen Information System .
However , this report is still unacceptable .
We cannot support the possibility of migration to SIS II - the new tool for achieving ' total security ' - with impunity .
With this system , more and more personal data can be gathered together , and for reasons of which the validity is subject to interpretation .
How can the suspicion of the will to commit a terrorist act be deemed valid ?
Worst of all , the United States could be given access to this data .
In this hour of crisis , the reigning eurocracy continues to build us a Europe characterised by competition and by an overemphasis on law and order .
However , now more than ever , it is time to build the Europe of solidarity and cooperation that we need .
We have a Schengen Information System that works and is capable of expansion , and we have a prestige project costing millions that seems to be flopping .
It is time to stop pouring money into the money pit and to rescue what can still be rescued .
If the EU really wants to spend further millions , they should be spent on border protection or on benefiting indigenous families .
Instead of simply paying out ' bounties ' for taking in refugees , the Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees should finally be accurately applied and it , of course , does not apply to the army of economic migrants .
Finally , we do not need a new asylum support office to further expand the asylum jungle and the morass of EU agencies that gobble up millions .
Until we have a functioning Schengen Information System , the Schengen Area must not be expanded .
The new proposals are not only badly thought-out , they are quite simply counter-productive , and that is why I abstained from the vote .
I express my full support for the report by Mr Coelho .
The Schengen Information System has proved itself an excellent and valid instrument for management and control within the European Union .
It has , however , required adjustment and adaptation during the course of its development , and also in view of further requirements that have become apparent .
The rapporteur 's proposal very much agrees with this viewpoint : second generation migration can no longer be postponed or put off .
We need effective and efficient instruments for coordinating information on and controlling those who enter and travel within the Schengen system .
For this reason , I join Mr Coelho in emphasising the need for the Commission to implement the new second generation SIS system as soon as possible .
in writing . - Prior to the migration to the new SIS , it is necessary that the appropriate tests be carried out and that the necessary safeguards are in place .
While I believe that the above should be carried out in a professional and thorough manner , I also share the rapporteur 's disappointment with regard to the extended delays that are impeding migration to the new system .
In addition , I feel that it is necessary for the Court of Auditors to be asked to take an in depth look into the management of this matter .
The increased number of Member States has seriously complicated the process of transition , and migration between the Schengen Information System to the second generation Schengen Information System .
Parliament has been demanding exact and up-to-date information on how this report is coming on , and rightly so .
I hope that the migration takes place in the most effective way possible , that this change does not in any way damage Europe 's security , and that it has a satisfactory outcome .
I voted for this report since the question of refugees in the Community is still very relevant .
At present , the issue of the resettlement of refugees in the European Union is not properly coordinated and only 10 Member States resettle refugees on a yearly basis , causing a lack of strategic use of resettlement as an EU external policy instrument .
I welcome the Commission 's decision to set up the European Asylum Support Office , which will be able to offer support to the Member States in carrying out resettlement initiatives , while ensuring coordination of policies within the EU .
The EU is participating far less than the United States and Canada in the reception and resettlement of refugees from third countries .
I voted for the European Parliament 's own-initiative report on the establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme .
The latter demands that an ambitious and sustainable resettlement programme be established within the EU and proposes financial support for Member States ready to participate in this .
This report also indicates our disagreement with the Council 's vision .
The latter wishes to take refugees ' nationality as the basis for deciding who has priority to be resettled .
In addition to the geographical origin of refugees , we would like a category of ' vulnerable refugees ' to be established ( women and children exposed to violence and exploitation , unaccompanied minors , people in need of medical care , torture victims , and so on ) .
The latter must always have priority .
It is essential that the European Union has a fair and realistic migration policy .
I therefore welcome this effective , sound and sustainable resettlement programme , providing a durable solution for refugees who cannot return to their country of origin .
The resettlement programme may help to make illegal immigration less attractive to refugees seeking to enter the European Union .
The success of an effective resettlement programme requires access to job opportunities for adults and immediate integration of minors in schools .
For this reason , access to educational and professional guidance services is essential .
The follow-up measures must be undertaken by various entities of the public sector ( for example , municipalities ) and civil society , as well as NGOs , charities , schools and social services ; it is essential to promote cooperation between entities .
I call on Member States to promote the creation of private funding mechanisms and more widespread public-private initiatives so as to underpin the European resettlement programme .
It is positive that the number of Member States participating in these resettlement programmes has been increasing in recent years .
Nonetheless , only 10 Member States resettle refugees on a yearly basis , without any coordination among themselves or a joint EU resettlement programme .
It is important that the Member States show solidarity with each other and fairly share responsibility for compliance with international obligations .
An effective and sustainable European resettlement programme will bring benefits for the refugees being resettled , for the Member States , and for the EU itself by giving it a leading role in the international humanitarian field .
A multilateral approach is desirable , involving all the relevant actors at local level and without forgetting the fundamental role played by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees .
An effective EU resettlement programme must provide lasting protection and solutions , as well as the creation of mechanisms for cooperating and coordinating between the Member States .
Such a programme must allow the exchange of best practices , create a joint strategy and reduce the costs of resettlement operations .
I support the suggestion by the rapporteur - Mr Tavares , whom I congratulate on an excellent report - to create a resettlement unit that makes it possible to coordinate and facilitate resettlement processes .
The draft regulation applying to the EU programme for managing and regulating resettlement will , as a matter of priority , resolve the settling and adaptation of refugees in their new environment .
Humanitarian catastrophes and other unforeseeable events can unleash a wave of refugees , to which we must be able to respond jointly , within an EU framework .
However , I completely reject refugees seeking asylum on political grounds within the EU .
I cannot imagine that it would be legally acceptable in any EU Member State to persecute a citizen for political reasons .
The participation of local authorities in a resettlement programme should always be on a voluntary basis , as is the case with Member State participation .
Some countries are used to having increased numbers of foreigners in the local population , but for others of course , it is something new .
In order to avoid phobias and concerns about foreigners in some countries or regions , we should respect their interest or lack of interest in participating .
It would also be appropriate , for the sake of the conformity and complementarity of the EU resettlement programme with other asylum-related EU policies , to coordinate the proposed programme within an EASO framework .
Despite the previously mentioned reservations , I back the entire report .
The resettlement of refugees has been proving necessary in cases where the receiving third countries are unable to provide them with safety and a livelihood so that they can settle there .
That is why various entities that are active on the ground are feeling the need for this problem to be fought at European level , and the joint EU resettlement programme proposed by the Commission could be the appropriate means of tackling this .
Irrespective of which model wins out in the end , it is clearly urgent for the Member States to cooperate more with each other and with first-settlement countries in order to provide a lasting , sustainable and interconnected solution to this serious humanitarian problem .
European citizens should not be deceived by the title of this report : by resettlement .
We are not talking about some aid package or other for the repatriation of immigrants , but about the reception , on EU territory , on the recommendation of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , of people who have already sought asylum in a third country - the first country of asylum or refuge that , for some reason or another , does not suit them or does not suit the United Nations .
This is an incredible new incentive for socio-economic immigration that is disguised under cover of an application for international protection , while a European Asylum Support Office will be increasingly responsible for distributing applicants across the EU , whether we like it or not .
How can we trust the UN and the first countries of asylum to organise such a check ?
How can we tolerate the fact that a European agency is telling Member States who they have to accept on their territory and under what status ?
According to the UNHCR , there are 750 000 people in the world who could claim asylum .
Do we have to receive all of them in our countries , on the orders of this organisation ? This is completely irresponsible .
Only 10 EU Member States , including Portugal , accept refugees for resettlement .
This situation must be changed , and solutions and incentives found to make the majority of Member States start accepting the resettlement of refugees .
The creation of this programme constitutes an important step in that direction .
It will also contribute to increasing the EU 's involvement in resettlement at global level , and so also have an impact on the EU 's ambition to play a leading role in world humanitarian issues and the international stage .
Allow me to express my support for the report by Mr Tavares .
As I stressed with regard to the setting up of a European Fund for refugees , the problem requires a European line of action and approach .
I believe that procedures for conferring refugee status should be harmonised to achieve this end .
We cannot have discrepancies over this definition at European level .
A common concept would prevent the ' migration ' of refugees within European States , while allowing more appropriate management .
It therefore seems to me that a common programme would take us in the right direction .
Finally , an efficient EU resettlement programme should provide protection and lasting solutions , not only for long term refugee situations , but also for the need for swift and appropriate responses in emergency situations , or situations of sudden urgency .
Approval of the European resettlement programme for refugees from third countries in Member States of the EU is a step in the right direction and , of course , I voted in favour of the report for which I acted as rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
In fact , it is very important to build solidarity between the EU and third countries on refugee issues .
However , we shall soon need to be bold and show the same solidarity within the EU by creating an internal refoulement programme , in order to mitigate the disproportionate pressure on certain Member States , compared with others .
The pilot programme in Malta is a very good example in this direction .
It is good that a joint EU resettlement programme has been established .
The number of refugees who need to be resettled is growing , in contrast to the number of places available to accept them .
However , the Member States which receive refugees are often among the poorest , and their resources do not allow them to accept a large number of people .
Resettlement should be treated as a last resort - the only solution when refugees cannot return to their own country and cannot find a safe haven in a third country .
The Member States should adopt a more ambitious programme which will ensure the quality and effectiveness of resettlement .
We need to support the creation of mechanisms of private financing and the adoption of more frequent public and legal initiatives to strengthen the European resettlement programme .
Particular attention should be given to the human resources needed in the current and future EU resettlement programme so that a procedure can be introduced which will enable good practices concerning adaptation and integration of refugees into the receiving society .
The objective is to establish a joint EU resettlement programme , so that thanks to the closer cooperation of governments of EU Member States , the number of people resettled can be increased and their situation in the EU improved .
Every effort should be made for more EU Member States to join the EU resettlement programme , which will initiate political and practical cooperation between Member States for the permanent protection of foreigners .
in writing . - I voted yes to these reports , as agreed also with the rapporteurs during our debates in the Committee on Civil Liberties .
The report , which I hope the vast majority of you will vote for , is an evaluation of the progress made in Europe on education and training policies in the period 2007-2009 .
The report also discusses the challenges identified by the ' New Skills for New Jobs ' initiative .
The result shows that there is still too much lacking in the training of our young people , both in terms of preparation for the new sectors of the economy and in terms of giving them the skills to develop in a context in which Europe and the world are increasingly open and increasingly interdependent .
The 2020 strategy reflects the importance of training and education for successfully tackling the social and economic challenges facing us in the next decade .
Therefore , in the context of an EU economic crisis , I want to stress the importance of preserving education and training budgets at national and Union level .
I supported this report , since I believe that we must improve the quality of education and training in the EU .
Unfortunately , the guidelines identified in the Lisbon Strategy will not be implemented until the end of 2010 .
Despite progress in recent years , many European citizens are still not yet sufficiently skilled and one third of the population of Europe have very low-level educational qualifications .
Also of concern is the fact that an increasing number of young people are leaving school early and do not acquire any qualifications later .
I think that it is very important to begin to implement as soon as possible a policy aimed at raising the quality of education and training in the Member States .
The European Commission , Member States and employers should cooperate closely with education and training providers , to ensure a higher level of education and broader scope in order to meet the demands of professional sectors and the labour market .
I voted in favour of the report on implementing the ' Education and training 2010 ' work programme because the report includes some very important passages , which I hope can find specific application in the sphere of EU policies and then be implemented in full by the Member States .
I am referring particularly to the points on vocational training and the link between training processes and the needs of the job market .
From this point of view , for the future of both our education system and our economic system , which is made up almost entirely of SMEs , one hopes that the need to strengthen the connection between institutions , particularly vocational training institutions , and the world of enterprise , will be recognised .
The idea of fostering the establishment of forms of partnership between national and local production businesses , on the one hand , and the world of training , on the other , is without doubt a good one : this would allow schools to be more successful in coordinating training programmes with real local needs and the economic world that reflects those needs , not to mention the fact that the idea would also help schools to overcome the perennial problem of finding suitable resources for providing young people with high quality training that they can put to immediate professional use .
I voted for this report , because this is an appropriate time to review the education and training objectives that were laid down in the Lisbon Strategy and to evaluate what was unsuccessful in this area .
I am pleased that one of the most important objectives in the new Europe 2020 strategy is to improve the level of education , reduce the number of people leaving school without qualifications and increase the number of people with higher education or equivalent .
Firstly , I would like to highlight the fact that due to the rapid development of information and new technologies , the educational environment is becoming increasingly complicated and varied and it is necessary to adapt to new needs in a changing world .
Therefore , it is necessary to reform and improve curricula in schools and universities , taking into account the needs of the changing market .
Secondly , I call for more efforts to increase literacy and encourage skills upgrading for people from disadvantaged backgrounds .
One of this programme 's most important objectives is the modernisation of vocational education and training ( VET ) and higher education .
In other words , closer relations with the world of business are increasingly needed and it is crucial to develop new , more attractive qualification perspectives and mobility opportunities for students enrolled in VET .
I am delighted that the European Parliament has drawn significant attention to the fact that we must facilitate the integration of people with disabilities in the areas of education and training .
I also agree that we must allocate appropriate funding in order to ensure the integration of people with disabilities in the area of training .
Quality education and training are a must in terms of personal fulfilment of the individual , equality , fighting social exclusion and poverty , active citizenship and social cohesion .
It is essential to improve the quality of education and training for all students in order to attain better results and competences .
That is the only way to implement the renewed social agenda for opportunities , access and solidarity , and help to create more and better jobs .
Mobility between higher education institutions , the business world and vocational education and training must be promoted in order to promote student-centred learning and the acquisition of competences , entrepreneurship , intercultural understanding , critical thinking and creativity .
I also call on the Member States to modernise the agenda of higher education and , in particular , to coordinate curricula with the demands of the labour market
Since the Lisbon Strategy , education and training policies have been becoming increasingly important within the European Union .
I therefore welcome this report in general and , very especially , the Commission communication ' Key competences for a changing world ' .
Nevertheless , I am concerned about the mismatches between skills levels acquired at school and the requirements of the labour market in the European Union .
A clear commitment to professional training and lifelong learning will contribute much to the success of the ' New Skills for New Jobs ' initiative , as will the development of transversal key skills such as digital competence , the ability to learn , social , civic , sporting and artistic competences , a sense of entrepreneurship and cultural awareness .
In order for the coming generations to be able to overcome the current gap between acquired skills and the needs of the market , I therefore believe it to be essential for preschool teaching to be of high quality as an instrument for early acquisition of essential skills .
I also see primary and secondary education focused on the development of more specific skills as essential , for example , mastering foreign languages and adapting to the needs of communities in which schools are located .
Higher education that is coordinated with the needs of the labour market , companies and society in general is also crucial .
I voted for the report on key competences for a changing world : implementation of the Education and Training 2010 work programme .
Despite some improvements , we are still a long way off achieving the goals on education and training set out in the Lisbon Strategy .
This report analyses what went wrong and proposes challenges that have yet to be overcome , such as better linkup between teaching , professional training and lifelong learning systems .
Having worked in government in the area of education in my country , I find it deeply regrettable to see it continually wrongly classified in practically all indicators relating to these subjects .
I fear that these unfavourable results are , in large measure , the result of an ideology of learning that seems to be completely absent from the Commission 's communication and Parliament 's resolution : in these , not once can the words ' merit ' , ' rigour ' , ' effort ' , ' concentration ' and ' discipline ' be seen , and ' knowledge transfer ' and ' memorisation ' are seen as less important than the issue of ' aptitudes ' and ' attitudes ' based on ' essential competences ' .
It would be useful if governments stopped worrying about statistics and instead tackled the root of the problem , abandoning methods involving a lot of talking , taking away responsibility from all the people involved in the education process and statistical camouflage .
They must instead adopt methods focused , above all , on scientific content and cognitive processes ; on effective learning and teaching .
There must be less focus on stating shared positions that are as hollow as they are well intentioned .
Given the generally positive content of the resolution , I will vote for it , but not without registering my profound disagreement with this interpretation of what the education system should be .
Education and training issues are clearly of the greatest significance , given the never-ending advances of science and technology , and the increasing incorporation of scientific and technical knowledge into productive processes .
It is in this context that the report under discussion considers it ' vital to introduce policies seeking to improve the quality of education and training ' ; naturally , we share this concern .
However , in voicing this concern , it does not even make the necessary mention of the importance of state schools in pursuing this goal , nor is there reference to the consequences of the lack of investment in public schools , or the exclusion of many young people from access to education and training ; it chooses instead to make a mistaken and ambiguous reference to strengthening ' cooperation of the public and private spheres ' .
As regards higher education , the Bologna Process does not put forward any solution for the necessary improvements to education : on the contrary , in countries like Portugal , it has made it worse , not least the state system .
We cannot fail to point out and condemn the advocating of ' flexibility ' , pushing young people into insecure , uncertain , intermittent and poorly paid work .
We also disagree with the concept of volunteer work as a substitute for jobs , exacerbating the exploitation of young people seeking to enter the world of work .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues can agree with much of this report .
We remain supportive of attempts to develop lifelong learning strategies and to promote vocational education and training ( VET ) and the better integration of key competences such as foreign language learning , mathematics and science .
And we believe that the most important element is to ensure that labour markets are flexible enough to ensure that young people can gain employment .
However , we cannot support the reference in this report for all migrant children to be taught in their mother tongue .
It is our belief that this will be extremely unworkable , costly and inefficient , particularly in schools which have children from many diverse linguistic backgrounds and would do little to foster integration of migrants into local communities .
In addition , education policy is , and should remain , the preserve of individual nation states .
For this reason , we voted against this report .
Following the 2000 Lisbon Strategy , a series of initiatives has been implemented aimed at reaching the strategic goal set by the European Council of Europe ' becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 ' .
Commitment to education and training is essential and must involve improving the quality and effectiveness of education systems in Europe .
A commitment must be made to training teachers and educators , providing access to education and training systems for all , making the teaching process more attractive , opening up education and training systems to the rest of the world , and promoting stronger links with the world of work .
The standardisation of objectives in a Framework for Key Competences was an important step towards achieving the goals proposed for 2010 , which were not , however , fully achieved .
From the point of view of reviewing and assessing the work done up to now , this document becomes even more important if it is viewed from the perspective of preparing recovery strategies in order to achieve objectives initially proposed for the education sector , taking into account the new proposal for strategic framing of European cooperation in this sector : Education and Training 2020 .
Education is important , but the reality is that a good education and training has , for quite some time , been no guarantee of employment , let alone a good job .
Instead of investing money in appropriate qualification schemes , the plan is to ship lowly qualified staff into the EU using all possible kinds of card solutions , with transitional deadlines in the labour market to be dismissed as unnecessary .
In the context of the basic conditions referred to , the training programme is not adequate , for which reason I voted ' no ' .
The recognition that education and training are essential for a knowledge-based society , and for the future economy , is no longer a myth .
These things represent the basis of our society and the foundations for our own future and that of generations to come .
Education ( pre-school , primary , secondary and higher ) and professional quality training are indispensable if we are to respond to the challenges that Europe must face , including under the EU 2020 strategy .
I support the communication system which mentions various strategies that could be implemented , such as supporting the development of teachers ' competences , updating assessment methods and introducing new ways of organising learning .
I express my support and I congratulate the rapporteur for the sensitivity she has shown in drawing up the report .
I voted in favour of the report on key competences for a changing world : implementation of the Education and Training 2010 work programme .
The text presents a global approach to upgrading and adapting education to modern requirements .
Identifying the reasons which led to the failure of the objective of the Bologna Process on the convergence of higher education between the Member States , the importance of adapting education systems , in order to prepare European societies so that they can exit the economic crisis and resume sustainable growth , and the importance of the penetration of new technologies at all levels of education , are key points for the education system of tomorrow .
That is why I tabled amendments to that effect , which were adopted by the Committee on Culture and Education .
in writing . - I am very glad that today , we adopted the report led by my Catalan colleague from the S & D Group , Maria Badia i Cutchet , on the very important issue of seeing education and training as key competences for a changing world .
I voted in favour of this report and would like to recall the importance of the basic skills that every European must acquire .
The number of young people unable to read properly by the age of 15 is steadily increasing ( 21.3 % in 2000 and 24.1 % in 2006 ) .
With a European strategy focused on quality jobs and a smart economy , this knowledge gap is something that will marginalise an ever-greater section of the population .
The Member States must integrate this priority to acquire basic skills ( reading , writing , arithmetic ) into their educational programmes before their pupils specialise .
Moreover , the learning of foreign languages is crucially important .
As an English teacher , I am particularly aware of this .
The fact that some European countries have fallen behind in the teaching of foreign languages closes many doors to students , at a time when jobs are becoming increasingly international in scope .
Finally , the adaptation of educational models to the new professions of the green economy or the digital economy is a major challenge for education in Europe .
For that reason , assistance for lifelong learning is the key to a career path that is flexible and adapted to the jobs of the future .
I endorsed the report on the Education and Training 2010 programme with pleasure and with hope for rapid implementation of the programme 's ideas .
As an academic teacher and a professor with many years of experience , I pay particular attention to the necessity of creating greater mobility between institutions of tertiary education , the world of business and vocational education and training .
Modern higher education should prepare students thoroughly with a view to entering the labour market .
As well as the right knowledge , competences such as entrepreneurship , intercultural understanding and creativity are becoming increasingly significant , and are playing a decisive role , on a par with formal training , in the achievement of professional success .
From this point of view , therefore , education is very important .
It is also essential to adopt effective measures to increase the representation of women in science and scientific research .
On this matter , I have already asked the European Commission for an opinion and to consider the possibility of establishing special programmes to create equal opportunities for women in science .
Taking into account the alarming statistics on the qualifications of Europeans - including , among others , the fact that 77 million people , or nearly one third of Europe 's population between the ages of 25 and 64 , either have no formal qualifications or very low qualifications - I consider this report to be extremely important for promoting science and raising vocational qualifications .
In relation to this , I appeal to the EU 's Member States and the Commission for effective realisation of the ideas of the programme .
Education has important social functions , opens doors and offers prospects for a better future .
Therefore , we must make every effort to help in the education of young people through EU programmes and grants combined with national measures .
In an era of globalisation , increased competition and rapid change , it is important to participate in lifelong learning .
Thanks to student exchanges , such as Erasmus , our young people are not only furthering their knowledge in specific subject areas , but are also broadening their horizons .
Experiencing new cultures and languages and making international contacts leads to the creation of more solid bonds within Europe and helps in creating the European identity .
Europe 's ambition is to be at the forefront in terms of research and development , innovation and new technological solutions which enable better management of energy resources .
Our hopes are pinned on young people , so we have to treat this group as a priority .
Young people who have completed their university education find it difficult to enter the labour market because employers very often emphasise professional experience , which young people do not have at that stage of their lives .
For this reason , we need to promote dialogue between universities and businesses , adapt courses of study to the needs of the labour market and emphasise placements and practical experience which will make it easier to find work .
Ladies and gentlemen , the belts being tightened throughout Europe - as a painful and severe measure - are beginning to have an impact .
Victims and compromises have already become part of daily life in many EU sectors , but it is important ( particularly during the economic recession ) that we do not neglect our commitments in such fundamental areas of policy as education .
As history has shown , education is a thing worth fighting for - whether in the underground educational institutions of Nazi-occupied Europe , or in the dissidents ' ' flying university ' in the Stalin era .
The global economic crisis means that we are being forced to adapt once again .
Vocational education and training must be adapted to the needs of the labour market .
Europe 's literacy rate must be improved , since in this area , Europe is far behind the United States and Japan .
We must fill the gap .
Not only is it important to raise the level of literacy , numeracy and computer literacy among young people , but also that of unemployed adults belonging to the lower socio-economic class .
Lifelong learning from the cradle to the grave , as well as so-called ' second chance ' programmes for adults with limited abilities , are not only important for stimulating the economy and the labour market , but also for social inclusion and active citizenship .
It is our duty to raise the level of the quality of training throughout Europe and make education appear more attractive .
That is a long-term struggle , but it is something worth fighting for .
The administration and management of commercial companies is an area which raises new concerns , especially during the current crisis , even though it has been subject to constant regulation .
In fact , making managers accountable , and I am not only referring here to administrators , is an absolute necessity in the context where we are intending to reduce systemic risks .
In the case of corporations operating in strategic sectors , with either a large turnover or a significant market share , the financial problems which such corporations may encounter obviously go beyond the simple interest of shareholders , entering into the realm of ' stakeholders ' , in other words , creditors , employees , consumers , the relevant industry or state .
In this situation , the amendment being proposed by myself about making members of the Board of Directors accountable by forcing a percentage of this body 's members to be professionals supports the reduction in systemic risks as , at the moment , it is no longer enough to be a representative of the shareholder as long as , just as I showed , the benefit to the financial health and stability of certain corporations exceeds the strict investment benefit in the form of ownership of share capital .
In addition , in order to encourage shareholder involvement in these corporations , which is passive in many cases when the proportion of capital held is too small , electronic voting should be regulated .
The governance of companies and their ethics is a critical issue , particularly in the current situation in which many shareholders are suffering losses on their investments because of violations of some of these principles .
Good managers who are responsible and whose conduct is guided by ethics are central to the balanced decision-making process which leads companies to become competitive .
When we talk about regulating certain ethical practices , we cannot forget the principle of private autonomy and that there must be a limit at which certain practices must be regulated .
I also consider it essential for shareholders to participate more in and take more responsibility for ensuring that good administrators are rewarded by the market and that less ethical managers are punished , so that their practices do not harm the rights of shareholders or have a negative impact on the entire market .
The recent financial crisis reinforced the need for us to look at deontological issues relating to managing companies in a more responsible way .
Issues relating to remuneration regimes and governance arrangements with regard to the remuneration of the directors and managers of listed companies must be governed by ethical and deontological principles that do not allow situations such as those experienced in the recent past , with the awarding of management bonuses in companies that immediately afterwards filed for bankruptcy or were found to be in serious difficulties .
The EU must have a productive , social and environmental model with a long-term outlook that respects everyone 's interests : companies , shareholders and workers .
That is why I voted as I did .
I express my support for the report by Mr Lehne .
The recent financial crisis has illustrated the need to analyse issues related to pay policies of company directors .
I agree with the rapporteur when he suggests a method based on binding measures , aiming to avoid a situation where the variable payment element ( bonus , shares , etc . ) gives rise to investment policies that are too risky and too far removed from the state of the real economy .
To this end , there seems to be a need for legislative measures , allowing us to resolve the problem of disparity between national regulations concerning payment for companies , especially in cases of cross-border mergers .
It is necessary , particularly when it comes to the financial sector , to put ethical issues at the centre ; not only from a moral viewpoint , but also and , above all , from a social viewpoint .
In order to achieve this , we must introduce uniform and global guidelines .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report on deontological questions related to companies ' management as , above all , I support the European Parliament 's call for encouraging higher numbers of women to be assigned to management posts and the request for the European Commission to put forward a proposal to introduce a system for the filling of posts on company decision-making bodies , posts in other bodies and posts in general .
At the same time , however , I regret the fact that my amendment , which would have made this an obligation , was not included in the final resolution .
I would have liked to have seen the European Parliament make more ambitious demands .
In connection with pay policy , I would also like to point out the serious differences that do prevail in reality and to emphasise that the principles laid down in the European directives of equal pay and equal treatment for men and women must be observed and nurtured .
I advocate these fundamental principles being made mandatory in every Member State and believe that a system of sanctions should be introduced for non-compliance .
I supported the report by Mr Papanikolaou because I am aware that the consequences of the economic and financial crisis have already reached and affected the fabric of society , especially young Europeans , exposing them to alarming rates of unemployment .
I therefore believe that it is the duty of European institutions to establish a well-defined strategy that can make the most of existing training and mobility programmes ( such as Comenius , Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci ) , while also increasing the correlation between the supply of training , competences and the demands and needs of the labour market , in order to make the necessary transition between vocational and occupational training smoother and more secure .
I agree with this resolution because as we shape the policies of today , we have a strong responsibility towards young people and future generations .
The European Union possesses important tools relating to youth policies , yet these tools need to be fully exploited , communicated and integrated .
I am concerned about the increasing numbers of young people who are unemployed , under-employed or have no job security , especially in the current economic crisis .
It is very important to ensure a youth perspective in the post-2010 Lisbon and Europe 2020 strategies .
I also support the proposal to develop appropriate measures targeted at young people in the recovery plans drawn up in the economic and financial crisis plans and to ensure better integration of young people into the employment market .
The report , which I voted in favour of , contains interesting reflections and suggestions for developing constructive policies that aim to give young people in today 's society a sense of responsibility .
Young people face many challenges today if they are to make their way in the job market and in society .
I agree with the basic premise of the report : Parliament could be a useful instrument for implementing European youth strategies , in view of its democratic roots and its resulting ability to gather the requests of young people on the ground and within Member States , and to bring their demands to the attention of Europe .
I reiterate , as have other previous speeches , the importance of ensuring training pathways reflect local business patterns : only by doing this can we help the young people of today and tomorrow to enter the job market more easily and with greater satisfaction .
Nowadays , jobs are still the main problem for millions of young people in Europe , especially during the current economic crisis , which has raised the youth unemployment rate to more than 20 % .
I also agree fully with the report 's emphasis on the social and human importance of young people taking part in voluntary work as a factor in helping them achieve personal and collective growth .
I voted for this report , since the preparation and implementation of the EU strategy for youth is very important , particularly at this time when the economic and financial crisis has had a negative impact on youth employment and still threatens their future prosperity .
Since young people are Europe 's future , it is our duty to help them by applying a well prepared strategy for youth .
Therefore , above all , Member States need to safeguard the right of all children and young people to obtain state education and must provide everyone with the same opportunities for education , irrespective of their social background and financial situation .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that , as provided for in the new Europe 2020 strategy , it is necessary to take measures as soon as possible to reduce the number of students leaving school without qualifications .
Only by creating more flexible learning conditions for all young people , and safeguarding for all the right to learn and study , can we create opportunities for young people to get a foothold in the labour market .
I would also like to stress that it is necessary to prepare specific policy guidelines to implement employment policy and combat youth unemployment .
It is very important to stimulate youth entrepreneurship and provide young people with more flexible conditions to take advantage of micro-credits and micro-finance facilities .
The financial crisis has been having a serious impact on the lives of young people .
I therefore welcome the renewed youth strategy , which puts the well-being of future generations on the political agenda .
As the knowledge triangle is a key element for growth and job creation , I would stress the importance of creating more opportunities for youth in education and employment through increased interaction between education , research and innovation .
The Members of the European Parliament play a crucial role in promoting European youth policies in the Member States .
I would draw your attention to the problem of early school-leaving and the need to ensure that a higher percentage of young people complete compulsory education .
The European Parliament also plays an essential role in the formulation , implementation , monitoring and evaluation of youth strategy .
It is essential for Union programmes and funds to reflect Europe 's ambitions for young people , and for the EU 's policies , programmes and actions to be coordinated , with a view to an EU strategy for youth .
in writing . - I voted in favour because , though the EU strategy for youth is , by its nature , a wide-ranging and all-encompassing document , it is crucial to reassert that any new strategy must place education at the centre of its ambition and policy .
In the past , such an education policy would have correctly placed its emphasis on the need for all students in the EU to complete primary and second-level education .
Thankfully , we have now come to the point where we can afford to cast our attention towards more ambitious goals .
In the past two decades or so , many initiatives have been trialled which have been aimed at getting those from demographic groups traditionally disinclined towards university to attend third-level institutions .
Some of these initiatives have been more successful than others , but in general , it remains the same social groups who make up the overwhelming majority of third-level students .
This cannot be allowed to continue .
If we are to truly address the poverty which remains but often goes unremarked in the EU , an effective system by which less-inclined areas of society start to become truly represented at third level must be achieved .
I support Mr Papanikolaou 's report on ' An EU Strategy for Youth - Investing and Empowering ' .
I agree with his call for the Member States to fully implement the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon in the area of youth policy , such as encouraging the participation of young people in democratic life , special attention for young sportsmen and sportswomen , and the legal enforcement of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I would stress the important role of the Comenius , Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci programmes in the development of European education and training policies .
I urge the Commission to prioritise instruments that improve young people 's qualifications and increase opportunities to work and , especially , to develop ' Erasmus first job ' .
I agree with combating the use of drugs , alcohol and tobacco and other forms of addiction , including gambling .
I would stress the role of informing young people about sex education issues in protecting their health .
I would highlight the importance of volunteering activities and , as the Portuguese Social Democratic Youth Movement ( JSD ) has always argued , giving young people central responsibilities in conceiving and implementing youth policies at European , national and regional level .
Investment in youth policies is essential to the future of European societies , particularly at a time when the number of young people in the general population continues to decrease .
I welcomed receipt of the ' EU strategy for youth ' , in which information on the situation of young people of Europe was collected for the first time , as well as the three priorities for youth set by the Commission .
Creating more opportunities for youth in education and employment , improving access and full participation of all young people in society , and fostering social inclusion and solidarity between society and young people , are fundamental aims for an effective European youth policy that is capable of contributing to the development of a European mentality .
Nonetheless , the existence of different definitions of ' youth ' in the various Member States , as well as the fact that youth policy is covered by the principle of subsidiarity , show the problems involved in effectively implementing the instruments of youth policy .
Strong desire and great commitment from the governments of the Member States are requirements for renewed European cooperation on youth in order to produce concrete results , as is the urgent strengthening of the open method of coordination .
I voted for the report on ' An EU Strategy for Youth - Investing and Empowering ' .
The financial crisis is mortgaging , at least in the short term , the professional futures of millions of young people throughout the European Union , essentially because of the increased difficulty in entering the labour market .
We urgently need to ensure that training measures ensure a better match of skills and the demands of the labour market , thus promoting young people 's autonomy and economic independence ; otherwise , we run the risk of squandering young people 's talent .
At a time when Europe is struggling through the largest , most serious economic and financial crisis of recent decades , it is essential that the European strategy for youth that we are now discussing be focused on the problems which the crisis has caused and which especially affect young people .
Of these problems , we would stress the high rate of youth unemployment ; the difficulty of getting into the labour market ; low pay ; the inadequacy of formal training from schools and universities for the demands of working life ; and the difficulty of reconciling starting work , which is always difficult , with family life .
These are concerns that must be present in any European strategy for youth .
Policies and strategies that enable Europeans to adapt better and quicker to the challenges of the twenty-first century - especially in a crisis situation - must also be sought .
I would especially stress the importance of measures that give education its due importance , those that aim towards the acquisition of new skills , and those that stimulate creativity and entrepreneurship .
Finally , I believe that in order to successfully achieve the proposed objectives , it is necessary to strengthen coordination between the various agents involved in pursuing the strategy for youth .
A commitment to young people is made through a good education system that gives absolute priority to the problems of early school-leaving and illiteracy , and that supports equal access for all young people to high quality education and training at all levels .
We also advocated the promotion of opportunities for lifelong learning .
Given the high rates of unemployment to which Europe 's young people are exposed , and as young people with poor qualifications are more likely to be unemployed , it is essential to ensure that they receive the best possible training , which guarantees them prompt access to , and a long-term stake in , the labour market . The first job is very important .
That is why we proposed an ' Erasmus first job ' scheme , which was approved ; we are waiting for the Commission to follow up this proposal .
The EU should better inform , develop and implement the instruments that it already has at its disposal .
Young people must be called on to participate more , not least in building the recycling society and in the objective of combating climate change , to which they have already been generously contributing , as a matter of fact .
We believe that this report takes the correct point of view in approaching young people 's problems as something that cuts across several sectors of society .
By doing so , it identifies specific problems in several areas : education and training ; employment ; health ; well-being and the environment ; culture ; and others .
These problems include , amongst others : school leaving ; insecure and precarious jobs ; unpaid work placements ; the brain drain ; environmental degradation ; drug dependency ; and social exclusion .
Although the rapporteur presents some proposals to solve these problems which seem fair to us and deserve our support , there are others that are clearly inadequate ; some are even ambiguous and others go so far as being contradictory .
We cannot accept , for example , that a Europe 2020 strategy that is ' more focused on young people ' can adopt insecure or intermittent employment as ' strategic ' solutions for young people ; both of these concepts are present in the aforementioned strategy , which also advocates competitiveness as a possible way out of the crisis .
As in other areas , harmonisation achieved through social progress and not by everyone ending up with the same , low standard of living is required here .
Some countries - including Portugal - have included a broad range of youth rights in their constitutions ; it is important for these to be implemented and not restricted .
Unemployment , temporary work , internships .
What kind of prospects await the younger generation ?
What life expectations ?
How must they feel , being forced to stay at home and be supported by their parents , and not even able to think of starting a family ?
Working intermittently , often underpaid , and doing jobs that are far below their level of education .
No prospects of a pension .
What does the future hold in store for them ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is young people who are bearing the brunt of this crisis .
They are disillusioned and alarmed by the possibility that they will be cut out of the job market .
There is no point hiding behind good intentions and promises .
Young people are asking for facts . And it is our duty to give them proper answers .
We must invest ; we must provide certainties , offer opportunities .
The world of work is changing , and we must create conditions whereby young people are the first to adapt to these changes , making the most of new technology , and following educational pathways that are appropriate for the new needs .
We must redouble our efforts ; we must put young people at the centre of our European policies .
If there is no future for young people , there is no future for society as a whole .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the report on the new youth strategy , as I believe that the future of Europe is the young people today .
We need to take action now to ensure that young people are best prepared for their life ahead and best equipped to face the challenges .
I urge the Member States to take the new youth strategy seriously and implement the proposed measures vigorously .
The youth strategy needs to feed into the personal and professional development of each young person in Europe by providing them with the means to learn at home and abroad , through formal , non-formal and informal learning .
The strategy should also serve to empower young people and increase their participation in society .
Furthermore , no policy can truly function without cross-sectoral implementation .
All relevant actors across sectors need to work together to make the strategy a success .
Although youth policy in Europe is carried out at national level , we need to learn from each other and set examples .
Making the national reports public is a crucial step in getting closer to our young citizens , but also in learning from each other through best practices and from possible challenges .
The global economic crisis is just one of the factors contributing to a change in the behaviour and living conditions of young people in Europe .
This must sound an alarm bell for both Member States and the European Union as a whole .
We have been witnessing for some time now in Europe a declining population , with the dramatic consequences this entails for our economies and social welfare systems .
It is a source of concern that young people are getting married increasingly later and having ever fewer children at a late age .
At the same time , they are not being provided with adequate conditions for developing theirs skills and taking an active involvement in society .
Education , employment , social inclusion and health are the major concerns of the young generations , but these pose challenges for Member States .
This is precisely the reason why I voted for the draft report compiled by Mr Papanikolaou .
I firmly believe that the amendments which we have proposed will make a significant contribution to the task of devising policies aimed at young people , by allowing them to make decisions independently and supporting their personal initiatives , equal access to education for disadvantaged young people and their inclusion in the labour market later on .
I believe that the partnership with the mass media aimed at raising the profile of the European programmes and projects for young people is a key factor in helping us achieve our objectives .
The EU strategy for youth has become increasingly important and must now be faced up to as one of the Union 's political priorities , given that young people make up 20 % of the total population .
The objectives are clear and defined , and are connected with areas as important as the creation of more employment opportunities or encouraging young people to play a more active part in society .
In the situation of economic and financial crisis that we are currently experiencing , combined with the problem of ageing , young people are one of the most vulnerable groups .
I therefore advocate an ever greater commitment to youth policies at EU level .
That is why I voted as I did .
Young people , in particular , are especially hard hit by the current crisis .
In the face of rising youth unemployment , it is important to improve educational opportunities .
While we at EU level are still talking about promotion , the Member States are already making cuts in the funding for universities .
If we really want to help the youth , we need to rein in the phenomenon of ' eternal trainees ' .
These measures are , at best , a declaration of intent but , given the conditions in these times of crisis , they are scarcely enough to actually achieve anything .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
I voted for this document as I am myself part of that same younger generation shaping the future of the EU and I am concerned about the sort of future that awaits me and people of my generation .
At present , unemployment is one of the main problems facing young people in my country of Lithuania and in other EU Member States and we are already beginning to refer to today 's young people as the lost generation of this era .
Another problem is the incompatibility of the education system with the needs of the labour market .
Although we agree with the Communication from the Commission on an EU strategy for youth , I am concerned that , like many of the other strategies we have adopted , it may never be anything more than a set of fine declarations on paper .
We , the European Parliament , other EU institutions , the Member States have to understand that unless we care about young people today , it may be that none of our other strategies , including EU 2020 , are ever implemented , as there will not be anybody left to implement them .
Therefore , I call on the Commission , the other competent institutions and the Member States to take specific action as soon as possible so that this strategy becomes a reality .
I voted in favour of European Parliament resolution No concerning the report on ' An EU Strategy for Youth - Investing and Empowering ' , because defining a strategy for young people is extremely important today .
The young section of European society is faced by many challenges which will have to be tackled in the near future .
The economic crisis and the ageing of society are undoubtedly important and urgent questions , and they mainly concern those who are going to build the future .
What we ought to do , and what in fact we must do , is to create equal opportunities and equal access for all those who will begin their adult life in a few years , and also for those who are beginning their adult life today .
Unfortunately , there are many young and talented people who , for a variety of reasons , have been left behind .
We should give them a second chance .
Measures such as financial support for people who have completed university are essential for a smooth transition to the labour market .
Unfortunately , the unemployment rate among young people is high , and inequalities in the labour market persist .
There are definitely more problems than those I have mentioned .
Therefore , I fully agree with the rapporteur that the ' present report constitutes a further step of a continuous effort .
An effort that is our duty .
An endless duty towards future generations . '
This is what is expected of us , today , and it is what we should do .
I agree with the view expressed by Mr Papanikolaou .
The creation of a new EU strategy for youth is of crucial importance .
The main aim of the new strategy for youth should be to use existing instruments more effectively and to promote knowledge .
It is possible to make progress by urging governments to cooperate more on this issue , regardless of the existing differences between national policies concerning young people .
This is an essential factor when it comes to offering future generations of European citizens a promising future .
The economic crisis is having profound effects on young people , and represents a threat to their future prosperity .
The ageing population will also have a strong impact on their future .
Given the many pressures to which young people are subject , the resulting duty to support them by means of an effective youth strategy , the fact that policies favouring the young are subject to the principle of subsidiarity and the fact that Member States ' cooperation in this area is voluntary , it is crucially important that the new strategy should overcome the weak points of the previous strategy and provide concrete results .
in writing . - Educating young people is a crucial task because if mistakes are made , and they are not corrected in time , they tend to have generational consequences and are liable to be repeated , thus bringing about further degradation .
The trouble with our ' Strategies ' is that , once elaborated , we become obsessed with implementation , thus neglecting the need to revisit and adjust them regularly .
The current strategy on youth , essentially elaborated before the current crisis , is already facing a number of challenges : how to protect the young from the negative psychological impact of the current crisis ; how to prepare them for tomorrow 's world , not today 's ; how to ensure equal opportunity to education irrespective of income ; how to separate ' mobility ' from ' brain drain ' ; and how to balance ' virtual bonding ' through the net with actual bonding and team spirit through collective action .
These are ' strategic ' challenges which need ' strategic ' attention from decision makers in all EU countries .
I voted for this report since its goal is to promote the active citizenship , social inclusion and solidarity of all young people .
As regards youth policy , where subsidiarity is the rule , we must encourage the Member States to define common objectives and agendas , and to improve their cooperation and their exchange of good practice .
This is a matter of urgency because we know that , in Europe , 1 in 4 15-year-olds cannot read properly .
While we are discussing the 2011 budget , I am concerned about the gap between the ambitions of the report that we have just voted on and the 3.4 % reduction in the ' Youth in Action ' budget .
Why cut a programme that aims precisely at developing a sense of citizenship , solidarity and tolerance among young Europeans ?
I therefore hope that the 2020 strategy , which is based on a smart , sustainable and inclusive economy , will result in ambitious financial commitments to youth education and training , because in these times of systemic crisis , the medium-term survival of the EU is dependent on young people who are educated and mobilised by the European project .
I endorsed the EU strategy for youth with complete conviction and with certainty as to its success .
It is one of the key areas of the work of the Committee on Culture and Education , on which I serve .
It is imperative to improve the situation of young people and their educational and vocational chances .
Three matters are crucial in this regard .
1 .
Young people in the EU , and also in Poland , are making good use of EU programmes , such as Comenius , Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci .
Therefore , it is very important to increase funding for these programmes and to recognise them as the basis for development of a multiannual EU strategy for youth .
In the future , these programmes should receive greater financial support .
Investment in the education of young people is the best possible use of the EU budget .
I also appeal for improvement and full implementation of the Erasmus Mundus programme .
2 .
As a socialist , I also stress the need to create equal opportunities for young people in their access to education .
It is essential to give financial assistance to those who cannot afford to complete tertiary education .
It is also important to help young people by making their access to the labour market easier .
3 .
In view of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , I would like to draw attention to the obligations of Member States concerning implementation of the strategy , which includes encouraging young people to participate in democratic life , paying special attention to young sportsmen and sportswomen and the legal enforcement of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The report adopted by the European Parliament is a thorough analysis of the multi-dimensional question of youth - a question which sometimes appears to be under-discussed or pushed into the background .
Today 's young people are going to create the Europe of the future , so we must make sure they develop properly , and we must help them make the best use of the opportunities the Union offers .
Young people are a special kind of added value - they bring freshness and innovation , and can make Europe 's social vision a reality , based on tolerance , diversity and equality .
The question of young people acquires even greater significance in the context of the current situation - the economic crisis and demographic factors in Europe .
Young people are more vulnerable to the adverse effects brought by the current economic situation .
Unemployment in this group is almost twice as high as the overall rate , and the financial situation facing young people often forces them to give up their education , which can , as a result , lead to poverty and exclusion .
In the context of an ageing population , instruments need to be found which will encourage young people to start a family .
They often put off this decision because of their unfavourable financial situation , problems with finding work or the need to reconcile work with family life .
As for questions of organisation and structures of cooperation in the area of young people , we should be more clear and specific .
The question of young people is complex and requires the involvement of many policy areas .
The resolution adopted today concerning the Commission communication on ' An EU strategy for youth ' points us in the right direction based on an integrated approach to the problems and needs of young people .
We expect that taking account of the interests of young people and future generations when formulating policy strategies at all policy levels will ensure efficient and effective resolution of the most urgent questions .
For example , the continued high level of unemployment in this social group shows a lack of structural solutions , such as errors in education systems , which educate young people in isolation from the needs of the labour market .
We need to encourage young people to be active in civil society , to be politically active and to stimulate them to enterprise .
We must create the conditions for them to be creative in the area of culture and awaken an interest in art , science and new technologies .
On the other hand , we should ensure young people protection from discrimination and run campaigns which promote pro-environmental ideas , while not forgetting the fight against drug abuse and other dependencies to which young people are particularly vulnerable .
This is why , today , I was delighted to endorse the resolution prepared by Mr Papanikolaou .
The 96 million young Europeans aged between 15 and 29 account for approximately 20 % of the European Union 's population .
The unemployment rate among young people hit the 20 % mark at the start of the year , due to the economic crisis , while the school dropout rate reached 17 % , with young people in rural areas being mainly affected by this .
In addition , young people are being increasingly offered temporary employment contracts , thereby reducing their chance of achieving financial stability and buying themselves somewhere to live .
Young people are our future and we should be involving them more in the decision-making process at European level .
They are the ones who should be planning and implementing along with us , contributing to the development of the society we live in .
I call on the Commission and Member States to adopt urgently a specific strategy and measures to help young people become more involved in society .
These measures should have the following objectives : providing non-discriminatory access to education enabling young people to acquire the skills they need to find a job which will provide them with a decent living , offering accessible child care services to facilitate the work-life balance and giving support to facilitate young people 's entry into the labour market and to provide social housing for young people .
The global economic crisis came as a painful blow to us all .
The saddest thing is the fact that the strongest blow was borne by those on whom our future depends .
The financial tsunami of the last few years has made most young people unemployed or underemployed .
On the basis of this report , the unemployment rate among young people in most EU Member States has almost doubled in comparison with the working population .
Now we have the chance to turn the crisis into an opportunity .
We owe it to the future generation of Europeans .
It is important for my country , Lithuania , together with most of its neighbours , to halt the ever-increasing brain drain of qualified workers .
As the name of the report suggests , we can achieve that by investing and providing opportunities .
Education and employment are the principal areas from an investment point of view .
We need to facilitate a smoother transition between education and the labour market .
However , the impact of this essential investment will be limited unless we provide our young people with opportunities .
We must encourage our young people to become more active citizens both socially and politically .
Voter turnout among young people is very low in Eastern Europe .
Therefore , we must revive their interest in the political process .
Civil society and the corresponding non-governmental organisations can support EU interests , for example , the ' My vote ' project , which used innovative Internet technologies , contributed to the political awareness of young people .
In addition , we must start a constructive dialogue with young people and youth organisations in Europe , free from the web of bureaucracy and technical jargon .
in writing . - I supported the report on a European youth strategy as I believe it will prove vital in getting young people into full-time employment over the coming years .
With 5.5 million Europeans under the age of 25 out of work , it is clear that an effective strategy to combat the problem is needed .
The problem of youth unemployment is not only due to the economic crisis ; employers are looking for people with professional experience .
I fully agree with the suggestion that higher education should be more effectively linked with the labour market .
Cooperation between Member States is key to dealing with the problems of youth unemployment , which can have both heavy social and economic costs .
It was important to strengthen the protection of self-employed women .
Mrs Lulling 's report on equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity is a step in that direction .
It provides for 14 weeks ' maternity leave and social security cover for assisting spouses , which was not the case previously .
Once again , the European Parliament is guaranteeing the protection of women in their work .
As I share this vision , I voted for this report .
Bearing in mind the need to repeal Directive 86 / 613 / EEC on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity , this proposed amendment represents a significant step forward , for the situation of the spouses of self-employed workers too .
As regards social protection , it is being proposed that where there is a social protection system in place for self-employed workers , the Member State takes the necessary measures for spouses to be able to benefit from social protection in accordance with national law .
Although the social protection of spouses is not mandatory , this proposal constitutes an important step , since in many Member States , spouses do not enjoy any form of social protection , mandatory or voluntary .
Finally , there is provision in this proposal for maternity protection , although not for the assisting spouses of self-employed workers to have the same amount of maternity leave as that for salaried workers .
However , they will have the right to an appropriate payment to enable them to cease their activities for at least 14 weeks and / or request a temporary substitution service .
For the above reasons , I voted for this proposal .
In order to overcome the economic recession , it is very important to invest in human capital and social infrastructure , creating the conditions for men and women to take advantage of all their opportunities .
The European Union has now come close to the Lisbon Strategy objective of achieving a 60 % employment rate for women by 2010 , but female employment in the Member States is very uneven .
Therefore , the Commission and the Member States must take effective measures to implement at the earliest opportunity the directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity .
The issue of maternity protection for self-employed women and assisting spouses or recognised partners is very important .
It must be recognised that they need to be granted an allowance enabling them to stop work for long enough to come safely through their pregnancy and physically recover after a normal confinement , and that the maternity allowance granted to women should be adequate .
Therefore , I particularly agree with the rapporteur 's opinion on the proposals at this directive 's second reading .
In addition , in the Commission 's consultations on the new 2020 strategy , insufficient attention is given to the issue of gender equality .
We must strengthen and integrate issues surrounding the gender equality dimension in the new strategy .
I welcome the adoption of this directive that establishes a framework for the application in the Member States of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in a self-employed activity , or who contribute to carrying out such an activity .
Women 's reduced participation in self-employed work constitutes an inequality , in as far as family responsibilities seem to have a negative impact on the entrepreneurship of women in comparison with men .
As regards collaborating spouses , lack of social security cover and non-recognition of their contribution to family businesses confers an unfair competitive advantage on some companies , so this initiative would guarantee equal conditions in Europe .
It is essential to adopt measures to resolve the gender disparities in entrepreneurship , in order to better reconcile private and professional life .
I call on Member States to ensure full equality in practice between women and men in professional life , with a view to promoting entrepreneurship initiatives amongst women .
The directive of December 1986 has proven to be ineffective , as it has had quite unsatisfactory results according to its implementation reports .
That is why it is urgent to proceed towards reinforcing the protection of motherhood for self-employed women and ensure equal treatment for women who work for themselves , including their assisting spouses .
In Europe , 16 % of the active population are self-employed , of which only a third are women .
This figure is undoubtedly a result of the innumerable obstacles that businesswomen encounter , not least in terms of juggling their family and professional lives .
However , if the 1986 directive did not achieve its goals , the current proposal also lacks ambition .
It is regrettable that the potential of this directive has been reduced in order to reach a political compromise in the Council .
Nevertheless , it may be considered a first step towards improving the current situation regarding the social protection given to self-employed workers and assisting spouses .
Minimum rules have been created under which , for the first time , the right to maternity benefit will be recognised at Union level , enabling work to be interrupted for at least 14 weeks .
The Swedish delegation within the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) yesterday ( 18 May 2010 ) voted against the recommendation for a second reading on the common position of the Council at the first reading with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity and repealing Directive 86 / 613 / EEC .
It is crucial that the Member States work together to ensure equal treatment for men and women so that more women can become self-employed .
On the other hand , we do not believe that it is the job of the EU to take decisions on equality policy , which have a far-reaching impact on the public finances of the Member States .
That must be for all of the Member States to decide for themselves .
Furthermore , we do not believe that women and men are being treated equally if only self-employed women ( and not men ) are to be guaranteed benefits and parental leave when they become parents .
Finally , we would like to highlight the fact that greater equality is one of the EU 's major challenges , and one where Sweden could give inspiration to the other Member States of the Union .
In the current economic crisis , it is of the utmost importance that the self-employed be supported and encouraged .
It has been well over two years since we debated the report on the situation of women in rural areas , when we urged for necessary updates to be made to social protection legislation .
The Council is now submitting to us a new type of directive whose scope of application , however , is confined only to agriculture .
I do not think that there are any grounds for this restriction .
The situation of women in rural areas is extremely hard , especially in the new Member States , and we must be constantly and actively concerned by this .
However , when we are talking about self-employed activities , we must not overlook those who are involved in gainful employment in handicrafts , trades , SMEs and the liberal professions .
In addition , I think that those provisions proposed by the Council , which could allow Member States to limit access to social protection schemes , need to be avoided .
In compliance with the principles of proportionality and subsidiarity , the directive , in the amended form proposed by Parliament , provides the necessary framework which is conducive to narrowing the disparities between women and men involved in self-employed activities .
In this regard , I believe that , on the one hand , maternity protection is vital , based on the entitlement to a minimum of 14 weeks ' leave and to maternity benefit .
On the other hand , the right for spouses or life partners to legally set up a company is just as vital .
As a staunch defender of human rights and the principle of equality , I would not undermine initiatives that aim to protect the rights of women in the labour market , as is the case with this report by my dear colleague , Mrs Lulling .
As I have already said , ' Men and women need to be treated fairly , giving them the same rights but taking their respective needs into account .
In the case of women , this is particularly pertinent in areas such as maternity support , the reconciliation of work and family life ... ' .
That is why I welcome the fact that I find , amongst other things , concern for the protection of maternity for self-employed workers here .
Nonetheless , I am also a staunch advocate of the principle of subsidiarity and believe that many of the subjects being debated must remain under the Member States ' jurisdiction .
I welcome the efforts that the European Parliament has been making to strengthen social justice and gender equality mechanisms in the European Union .
As well as being an incontestable principle of the civilised world , and not least in a Europe that sees itself as culturally and socially developed , ensuring the equal treatment of self-employed men and women - particularly as regards access to social protection mechanisms , above all , those relating to maternity - is becoming even more pressing and obvious during this long period of profound economic and social crisis .
I would stress our concern that differences in treatment between areas of activity be eliminated , in the face of well known developments at the levels of both organisation and of tools and mechanisms of work or production .
Workers must have the same criteria for accessing public social protection schemes , notably as regards contributions and privileges .
I would also stress that this recommendation will definitely strengthen incentives to female business entrepreneurship .
The European economy still has much to gain , and many developments to undergo , as a result of stronger and more inclusive participation by women .
As someone who is particularly sensitive to issues of gender equality and equality in general , including equality of social rights , I welcome the adoption of this report .
Indeed , it seems fundamental to me that the Member States should guarantee social protection for self-employed women and assisting spouses and that this protection should be equivalent to that of salaried women .
This measure is about boosting the entrepreneurial activity of women in Europe , which is still too hesitant ; and , above all , it is about allowing these women to benefit from maternity leave in the same way as women doing another type of job .
Maternity leave must be guaranteed in all the Member States and for all women , regardless of their employment .
Since this measure is subject to the principle of subsidiarity , let us hope that the Member States will do what has to be done to ensure that these men and women can reconcile family and professional life as quickly and as easily as possible .
I would like to congratulate my fellow Member , Astrid Lulling , on the acceptance of her report , which represents an important step forward in resolving an extremely long-standing problem .
The situation of spouses and life partners of self-employed workers - who contribute to the activities and earnings of the business without having the status of an employee or business partner - could not be satisfactorily addressed in the 1986 Council directive .
Therefore , it was time to repeal the abovementioned legislation and draw up a new directive recognising the work of assisting spouses and putting them on a par in terms of social security protection with self-employed workers .
Moreover , an important achievement of the rapporteur and the European Parliament is that , compared with the original Council recommendation , the scope of application is no longer confined solely to gainful self-employed activities in the agricultural sector , since this target group also works in small and medium-sized enterprises , for example , or in retail , where they constitute a majority .
Although the Council did not accept several important recommendations made by the rapporteur and Parliament - leaving the provision of equal social protection for spouses and life partners up to Member States and allowing Member States to maintain restrictive provisions relating to certain schemes or levels of social security protection - nonetheless , the draft directive as a whole represents a significant step .
I applaud the approval of the proposal for a directive on applying the rule of equality for treatment of men and women who are self-employed .
At last , the European Parliament is expressing an opinion on the application of this principle , so symbolic of social and economic progress !
While respecting state prerogatives , I believe there is a need not only to formulate a minimum standard of protection for self-employed women-mothers , as well as for assisting spouses and recognised life partners , but also to make their degree of protection equal to that of women-mothers who are employed , as opposed to self-employed .
It is hoped that the declaration of these rights will be followed by de facto respect for them , and that States will commit to introducing appropriate measures , especially for protecting self-employed women and assisting spouses during pregnancy and motherhood . We must fight discrimination in the workplace in all its forms in order to support female emancipation as well as that of men .
The Commission 's proposal seeks to ensure equal treatment for self-employed men and women .
I therefore see the adoption of this text as an important and very positive step in moving closer to current European legislation on salaried workers , as the fundamental rights of equality and social protection are already protected , and the proposed amendments to the original text are moving in the direction of a general improvement as regards the protection of the spouses of self-employed workers , specifically with respect to the maternity allowance awarded to self-employed women and spouses or recognised partners of self-employed workers .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted for this report , not just because it is important and will , I believe , affect millions of EU citizens .
I know many artists , lawyers and other people who are self-employed and I know that very often , they are assisted by family members , usually a wife or children .
The fact that they will now have a right to social protection will doubtless improve their material status , morale and drive to work .
This is particularly important for Lithuania , because now at a time when the crisis has hit the Baltic States hard , the material status of many families borders on poverty .
No longer can we look on from the sidelines as self-employed women or men with families experience social injustice .
The adoption of this report is a clear signal to the governments of the EU Member States to support the spouses of self-employed people , to guarantee them the right to a pension , paid holidays , maternity or paternity leave and to help them reintegrate into the labour market .
I wish to express my support for Mrs Lulling 's report .
The proposal is necessary because of the great gender divide that still exists in the self-employed sector and threatens to become even more pronounced .
The proposal also considers that social protection should be provided for assisting spouses , who often make a substantial contribution to the business of self-employed workers , yet completely lack any such protection in many Member States .
The proposal , which aims to provide incentives for women to gain access to the job market and to help in the fight against undeclared employment , brings three main changes to current Community law : the definition of ' assisting spouse ' is changed to include couples who are not married , where they are recognised by national law ; self-employed women and assisting spouses are granted the right to benefit on demand from paid maternity leave lasting at least 14 weeks .
The assisting spouse is also granted the right to a social protection scheme on demand .
I voted for this report as I believed that adopting this directive is of paramount importance at European Union level , given the current economic and financial crisis we are going through .
Taking into consideration the fact that in most Member States , assisting spouses do not enjoy the social security benefits of their spouse , I believed that , in the case where a Member State makes it obligatory for the self-employed to join a social security scheme , this should also be mandatory for their assisting spouses and life partners .
The Council 's position is regrettable in that it does not accept that it should be compulsory for spouses and life partners assisting self-employed workers to join the social protection schemes in those countries where they are recognised as having this status under national law .
Given that the large majority are not members of such schemes , they are therefore unaware of the benefits provided by the social security schemes which cover illness , disability and old age .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I supported the position that self-employed women , spouses and life partners who decide to have children should enjoy social protection and paid leave and should not be prevented from receiving child allowance , as the Romanian Government is doing .
in writing . - I am very glad of the fact that today , the European Parliament adopted its position in second reading on the directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity and repealing Directive 86 / 613 / EEC .
Women play an essential role in sustaining self-employed businesses as owners and assisting spouses or life partners .
I welcome Parliament 's decision on the application of the principle of equal treatment between women and men for self-employed workers and their spouses as an important part of EU legislation .
in writing . - The ECR Group are strong proponents of working to bridge the gender gap for self-employed workers and their partners .
We support the report 's aim , in that we would like to see all countries of the EU offering support and social protection to self-employed workers .
However , we do oppose this legislation being made at EU level .
The ECR Group has always defended the principle of subsidiarity and strongly believes that Member States should take the lead role in creating and driving employment legislation and social policy .
For these reasons , the ECR Group has abstained on amendments 1-17 .
Today , Parliament has reiterated the need to obtain a high level of consumer protection throughout the EU , and the importance of harmonising regulations concerning the labelling of textile products , making this obligatory for all items of clothing marketed in Europe .
The implementation of a future regulation on the naming of textile products , as well as information on labels about materials , will simplify the existing regulatory framework , making it transparent , clear and advantageous for consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Consumers will be able to use labels to make informed choices about buying products , also based on ethical considerations , such as health , considerations of environmental impact , human rights , and the pay and conditions of workers employed in the manufacturing of textile products .
Meanwhile , small and medium-sized enterprises , and the textile industry in general , will be able to protect the quality , design and innovation of their products , all of which will make them more competitive , not just in the European market , but also worldwide .
The ' made in ' labelling would enable consumers not only to obtain additional information about product characteristics , but would also help strengthen the economy by developing new products for many sectors , promoting employment and supporting the fight against counterfeiting as far as products from third countries are concerned .
In this era of globalisation , when products are increasingly the result of a journey through an international assembly line , it is difficult to know their ' nationality ' .
In parallel to this phenomenon , consumers want to be able to make purchases in full knowledge of the facts , sometimes favouring articles coming from countries with higher quality standards or social and environmental standards .
In this context , I decided to vote in favour of this report since it proposes to make country of origin labelling obligatory .
In my opinion , this is essential information that must always be communicated to the consumer .
I also support the idea of the European Commission preparing , two years from now , a report , or even a legislative proposal , aimed at the harmonisation of textile labels .
Indeed , given the fact that we have shared the same market for decades , why is it that size systems and many other , equally important , items of information still vary from one Member State to another ?
I voted for this regulation as I believe that it will provide more clarity both to textile manufacturers and consumers .
I welcome the form of regulation chosen , which brings together the separate directives currently in force and so will reduce the administrative burden incurred by Member States when transposing into national legislation the technical adaptations required each time a new fibre name is added to the list .
Nevertheless , I feel it is time we began to discuss a revision of the textile labelling system , which would not be an additional burden on manufacturers and would be clearly understood and accepted by consumers .
Therefore , I support the proposals adopted in the regulation that the European Commission report should cover such issues as an EU-wide uniform size labelling system for clothing and footwear , an indication of any potentially allergenic or hazardous substances and issues of ecological and social labelling .
Surprising though it may seem , the phrase ' made in ' , which we find on many clothes labels , is not compulsory today and its use varies greatly from one Member State to another .
Having considered the Commission 's proposal for a regulation on the time-to-market of a new fibre , we used it to remedy this labelling problem .
In fact , in the absence of European legislation , there is a risk that products will appear that were manufactured in third countries , but which bear an inscription suggesting that they were manufactured in Europe .
The report also calls on the Commission to consider labelling which would give consumers access to information on the social and environmental manufacturing conditions of the products they buy .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Manders , for his hard work in bringing together three complex directives .
This report simplifies the existing regulatory framework by ensuring , for example , that a new fibre can be quickly brought to market .
For our small and medium-sized enterprises , this means saving on administrative expenditure and profiting more quickly from the sale of new fibres .
These measures encourage innovation , an element which is - in my opinion - essential for European companies .
Indeed , only with innovative and high quality products can we overcome the fierce worldwide competition and emerge from this difficult time of crisis .
The text also protects consumers , whose interests - I stress - are central to our policies .
The adopted rules will ensure clearer and more transparent regulations for European citizens , and will also mean they can benefit more quickly from innovative products .
Finally , public health will be better protected : more detailed labelling will provide citizens with information on the origin of yarn and related products .
I welcome this proposal for a regulation , which seeks to simplify and improve the legislative framework currently in force , with the aim of encouraging innovation in the textile and clothing sector , whilst allowing fibre users and consumers to benefit more readily from innovative products .
The issue of simplification is essential to promoting innovation in European industry and increasing the amount of information given to consumers .
It is also important to find alternative legislation that is less burdensome in terms of procedures and costs when transposing directives .
Industry will benefit from the reduced time between the submission of an application and the ability to place the product on the market , meaning savings in administrative costs and the possibility that it will reach the market earlier , increasing sales profits .
At last , we have adopted ' made in ' regulations in the textile sector .
Parliament had already voted in favour of the proposal for a Council Regulation on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries back in 2005 , but this was blocked by the Council .
Since it was not a codecision procedure , however , it was not possible to do very much against the opposition of some national governments .
This vote today , though , represents a strong political signal from the Assembly which represents European citizens and now forcefully calls upon the Council to adopt these regulations .
This goal is closer today and is also in line with the Treaty of Lisbon goals .
This may only be the first reading of the vote , but it is an important result , the outcome of much work in recent months with colleagues from other national delegations and other political groups .
This new regulation protects European consumers who wish to know the origin of textile products , and small and medium-sized enterprises who manufacture them within Member States .
This means , for example , that we will no longer be able to state that a product is ' made in ' a Member State where in fact only 25 % of it is made there ; today , at least 50 % of a product must be made in the ' made in ' country .
Broadly speaking , we support our colleague Mr Manders ' report on textile names and related labelling of textile products .
That said , we are very critical of mandatory origin marking as we are convinced that it would lead to higher prices for the consumers of Europe , together with inferior conditions and higher costs , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We believe in free trade , and we therefore believe that it is important not to create greater technical barriers to trade through unnecessary regulation .
Instead , we support a voluntary labelling system based on consumer demand for origin marking .
On 30 January 2009 , the Commission adopted a proposal for a new regulation on textile names and related labelling of textile products .
The proposal brings together all the existing legislation on textile names and related labelling of textile products in a single regulation .
In the words of the rapporteur , the review ' is essentially a technical exercise without major political implications ' .
Nonetheless , we know that the competition faced by European textiles - above all from Chinese products - makes it necessary for more profound measures to be taken on labelling in the future , and that must be the Commission 's task from now on .
Furthermore , the challenges that the European Union is facing today make it necessary to improve and strengthen the market , and efforts must therefore be made to remove obstacles to this being fully realised .
The harmonisation and simplification of standards relating to textile names meet this objective , since they clarify the information provided to the consumer and so contribute to making the sector more competitive .
The ability to properly identify where and how a product was manufactured and what it is essentially made of is a fundamental prerogative of consumers to ensure their trust and protect their rights ; it also introduces an important factor in promoting fair competition in the global textiles market .
In this context , the standardisation of how textile products are labelled will benefit the competitiveness of Europe 's textiles and clothing industry , and Portugal 's in particular .
I would stress the need for harmonised rules on the indication of the origin of textile products imported from non-EU countries and precise criteria for the use of a ' made in ' origin marking for products manufactured in the Union , as well as social labelling to keep consumers informed about respect for health and safety standards and human rights .
I also consider ecological labelling relating to the environmental performance of textile products important .
The introduction of these clearer and more transparent rules on labelling - which include information about non-textile components of animal origin - will also enhance consumers ' ability to differentiate products and their quality .
We voted for this report because of its main thrust , which advocates marks of origin and is concerned with defending the rights of consumers , the workers and the production of our countries ' textile and clothing industries .
However , we disagree with some of the details about labelling , notably about overly detailed content regarding fibres , especially when small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) are involved because of the costs that could be involved .
Therefore , although we have voted in favour in general , there are proposed details with which we do not agree .
We would argue that it needs to be revised or , at the least , that there needs to be provision for aid measures to guard against the problems of SMEs .
The designation of a product 's origin is important so that consumers know the exact source of the product that they are buying .
It is not correct to designate a given product as originating in the EU when it is only packaged in an EU country , with the other phases of its production carried out in countries that are not in the EU .
The new rules adopted will contribute to greater transparency in international trade and to making things clearer for consumers .
That is why I voted as I did .
Once again , the organic label promises something quite different to what it actually delivers - one only has to think of the ' Organic Cotton ' scandal or the recent bio-chemicals fiascos .
Firstly , it gives rise to yet another confusion of labels and marks in this organic market - which the EU could sensibly standardise once and for all , something which it usually loves doing - and , secondly , it is high time that the EU accepted genetically modified cotton .
If we are waiting for studies into the possible effects of harmful substances , then , in the meantime , labels should at least state that products contain genetically modified cotton .
Moreover , it is high time for the EU to also take care of radio frequency identification ( RFID ) .
We cannot apply electronic labels to textiles without the knowledge of those concerned ; we still do not have appropriate labelling rules .
If pedestrians are to be made visible by means of RFID clothing , it will be possible to monitor people 's every step .
As the report also notes this , it received my support in the vote .
I am in favour of the report by Mr Manders on origin labelling for textile products , since it resolves a problem that has long threatened our consumers ' freedom of choice .
Origin markings are essential to ensure transparency , safety and information for European citizens and , at the same time , to give our enterprises clear , common rules .
The problem does , however , remain open for textile products coming from third countries , our trading partners .
I therefore invite my fellow Members to confirm their support for the regulation on origin marking under discussion in the Committee on International Trade .
This will protect our consumers and enterprises , with regard not only to textile and clothing products , but also to sectors that are sensitive as far as European economic growth is concerned .
The European textile industry has reacted to the great economic challenges of recent years by undertaking a difficult journey of restructuring , modernisation and technological innovation .
European enterprises have improved their own position on the global market , concentrating on competitive advantages such as quality , design and technological innovation of those products with the highest added values .
European industry plays a key role worldwide in developing new products , hi-tech and unwoven textiles for new applications , and products for cleaning , the car industry or the medical sector .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal for a regulation , as I believe it simplifies the existing regulatory framework for developing and growing new fibres , and has the potential to encourage innovation in the textile and clothing sectors and , at the same time , to enable fibre users and consumers to benefit from innovative products sooner .
Finally , I will express my full support for the ' Made in ' regulation , as I believe that this is essential for ensuring that consumers have adequate information about the composition and origin of the product they are buying .
in writing . - We , as greens , have abstained on the final vote of this report mainly because some of the key amendments proposed by the PPE , Liberals and EFD were adopted .
In summary , all these amendments go in the direction of widening ' made in ' provisions .
I did not support the amendments in the Manders report on textile names and related labelling of textile products regarding ' made in ' ( 47 / 49 , 48 , 12 and 67 ) .
These amendments , which seek to impose origin marking for textile products imported from third countries ( with the exception of Turkey and the EEA Member States ) or to regulate precisely the conditions of voluntary origin marking of textile products manufactured in Europe by means of this regulation , would amount to endangering the adoption , within a reasonable timescale , of this important legislation .
The proposal for a regulation on origin marking put forward by the European Commission is still under discussion in the Council and is the subject of a report by the Committee on International Trade .
I am not against transparency and traceability of products for the benefit of the consumer .
Nevertheless , as Members of the European Parliament , we have a responsibility to respect certain regulatory frameworks .
In my opinion , before adopting the mandatory ' made in ' indication on the labels of clothes sold in Europe , we should have first made sure that the draft regulation on ' made in ' labelling included all the necessary guarantees , in particular , in its methods of implementation .
in writing . - I have supported this document .
The relations between the EU and Ukraine have always been very close and based upon a constructive dialogue .
The Ukrainian economy , like the economies of the EU Member States , has been hit by the international financial crisis resulting in a dramatic decline in output , a worsening of the fiscal position and an increased need for external financing .
Union macro-financial assistance of EUR 500 million should not merely supplement programmes and resources from the IMF and the World Bank but should ensure the added value of EU involvement .
However , this assistance can only contribute to economic stabilisation in Ukraine if the main political forces ensure political stability in the country and establish a broad consensus on a rigorous implementation of the necessary structural reforms .
Macro-financial assistance to Ukraine is particularly significant at this time .
This assistance may increase EU influence on the formation of Ukrainian policy and help Ukraine to overcome the current deep economic crisis .
The Community 's financial assistance shows that Ukraine is strategically important as a potential candidate country for EU accession .
The MFA would be provided at a time when the EU is also helping to mobilise financing to support the reform of the Ukrainian energy sector .
The Commission and other institutions involved are working together on a support package to the Ukrainian authorities designed to assist in developing a sustainable solution to Ukraine 's medium-term gas transit and gas payment obligations .
Even though the proposed MFA is not intended to be directly linked to that package , it would support Ukraine 's economic stabilisation and reforms .
I agree with this decision to provide Ukraine with exceptional MFA .
Without this assistance , Ukraine would be unable to further integrate fully into many areas of the economy and implement its further objectives .
Ukraine is now paying the price for a severe economic crisis , as well as for protracted political instability , which have allowed the authorities in Kiev to slip behind in the commitments they made to the international financial institutions .
It is important for the European Union to be involved in providing assistance to its neighbour on its eastern border at a time when the social situation is deteriorating against the backdrop of a lack of cash flow , which is needed to keep any state running .
Ukraine must have stability .
The loan granted by the European Commission , with the approval of the Community legislative , also provides confirmation that Kiev can be considered as a candidate for accession .
However , the European Commission must focus , from now on , a great deal of attention on the mechanisms for monitoring the trail of the loan granted to Kiev .
Furthermore , the European Union is in a position to ask Ukraine to tackle more decisively vital reforms which will help consolidate the rule of law .
Ukraine 's transition from a state-controlled economy to a market economy is a difficult and painful process , especially for its population .
This economic transition must be supported by efforts aimed at institutional reform .
Ukraine must grasp the nettle on both fronts , no matter how difficult it might seem at the moment .
I welcome the adoption of the legislative resolution providing macro-financial assistance to Ukraine , since it will allow the country to address the consequences of the global financial crisis by ensuring that its fiscal and external accounts are sustainable .
This response to Ukraine 's request is essential to economic stabilisation , in conjunction with the current International Monetary Fund programme .
However , Ukraine needs to take appropriate measures to prevent and fight fraud , corruption and any other irregularities associated with this assistance , as well as providing for controls by the Commission and audits by the Court of Auditors .
I am referring here to the memorandum of understanding and the loan agreement to be agreed with the authorities of Ukraine , which will provide for specific measures to be implemented by the country in relation to the prevention of , and the fight against , fraud , corruption and other irregularities affecting the assistance .
I was pleased to vote for Parliament 's proposal providing macro-financial assistance to Ukraine .
As a potential candidate for joining the European Union , Ukraine is a privileged partner and must be the target of specific policies aimed at resolving its particular problems .
However , macro-financial assistance from the European Union to Ukraine will only contribute to the economic stabilisation of the country if the party-political landscape stabilises and the dominant political forces - which , in recent years , have been too caught up in their little internal wars over power and influence - establish a broad consensus on strictly implementing the structural reforms that the country 's future requires .
It is also absolutely essential for the Ukrainian Government to take action to bring an end to the judicial authorities ' lack of independence , as they are subject to too much influence , not only from the political powers but also from economic actors .
Without a free and independent justice system , there can be no rule of law , human rights are not guaranteed , and there is no foreign investment or progress .
Any mechanisms set out by the loan agreement must take these factors into account in order to enable the EU institutions to strictly monitor how well it is being implemented .
Ukraine , which is an immediate neighbour of the European Union , also features among the European countries which have been hit hard by the global economic crisis .
The crisis 's detrimental impact on the Ukrainian economy is jeopardising not only internal stability , but also that of the region as a whole .
I voted in favour of providing macro-financial assistance to Ukraine , which will make a particularly important contribution to creating stability and continuing the economic reforms in this country .
The Commission and the other institutions involved - the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Investment Bank - must speed up the process of putting together a support package for Ukraine in order to identify and implement a sustainable solution with regard to reforming its economy and , primarily , its energy sector .
Resolving problems relating to the transit of natural gas across Ukrainian territory is strategically important .
I think that the inclusion of the gas transit issue on the European Union-Ukraine Association Agenda was welcome .
I firmly believe that this cooperation must be consolidated , which also means finding new forms of cooperation .
Ukraine must be supported in continuing the reforms to help it progress along the road to European integration , which is in keeping with the European Union 's objectives outlined within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The recent news of violence between Members of the Ukrainian Parliament has been of concern to the whole of Europe , and clearly reflected the divisions in Ukrainian society , the crossroads at which the country finds itself today and the inescapable role of Russia in the region .
I believe that the European Union must not stop pointing out the European way to Ukraine .
To this end , the macro-financial assistance that we are currently providing must constitute another sign of getting closer to Ukraine and solidarity with the country , at a time of particular social , economic and financial weakness .
I hope that Ukraine unreservedly undertakes a process of convergence with the European Union , that the proposed association agreement comes into force and strengthens bilateral relations and exchanges , and that the end of this road could be Ukraine 's accession to our common area .
I also hope that the need for aid of this type gets progressively less , that Ukraine recovers political stability , that the country manages to rebalance itself socially and renew its commercial fabric , and that it can continue to choose democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
The Ukrainian economy has been increasingly hit by the international financial crisis , with dramatically declining output , a deteriorating fiscal position and rising external financing needs .
EU financial support reflects Ukraine 's strategic importance as a potential candidate country for joining the Union .
I therefore voted in favour of giving Ukraine macro-financial assistance in the form of a loan facility with a maximum principal amount of EUR 500 million , with a view to supporting the country 's economic stabilisation and alleviating its balance of payments and budgetary needs , as identified in the current International Monetary Fund programme .
I consider it important to help Ukraine return to minimum necessary socio-economic levels and enable the stabilisation of its public accounts , so creating prospects for growth and political confidence .
I also agree that monitoring mechanisms should be ensured that increase clarity , transparency and accountability .
The European Parliament should be given regular updates on the work of the Economic and Financial Committee .
The macro-financial assistance to Ukraine that is currently being proposed does not constitute a form of genuine , disinterested aid : quite the contrary .
Amongst other things , making this assistance conditional on the International Monetary Fund 's requirements and the ' key principles and objectives of economic reform set out in the EU-Ukraine Association Agenda ' means the following : the establishment of a comprehensive free-trade area between the EU and Ukraine ; obedience to the objectives of the EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy ; closer cooperation through military channels in order to tackle matters of common interest ; the possible participation of Ukraine in the EU 's Atalanta naval operation ; the establishment in Ukraine of a complete and fully operational market economy and the principles of macro-economic stability established by the EU ; and the exchange of ' best practices ' between the EU and Ukraine on reforming the welfare state , with the goal of making Ukraine 's pensions system more sustainable .
As a result of everything that is explicitly stated and of everything that can be read between the lines , given the well known meaning of much of the EU language mentioned above , our vote could clearly only be against this proposal .
By voting this way , we are also expressing our solidarity with the Ukrainian people .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I endorsed the report on macro-financial assistance to Ukraine .
It is an important decision , which means that we will help a very important neighbour of the European Union and Poland .
A loan of EUR 500 million will help Ukraine come out of the financial crisis .
I do not suppose I have to persuade anyone that the economic stabilisation of Ukraine and reform of the Ukrainian energy sector lie in the Union 's interests .
Whether it will be possible to achieve those objectives depends on the Ukrainians themselves .
I am pleased we have shown , today , that we want to work with them and to help .
I voted in favour of the financial assistance granted by the European Union to Ukraine as I believe that we must show solidarity , which also means aiding recovery from the current economic crisis .
As a neighbouring European country wishing to join the EU in the period ahead , Ukraine must be given a clear political signal which will encourage the authorities to implement the reform measures agreed with the EU .
At the same time , it is important for us Europeans to have prosperous neighbours , with a stable internal political situation , in keeping with European standards and values .
In this respect , we hope that the loan provided by the EU to this neighbouring country will be used to help the whole of Ukrainian society . This includes more than half a million Romanians living in Northern Bukovina , Northern Maramureş and Southern Bessarabia .
The European Commission must , of course , take every measure to ensure that this exceptional financial assistance is used prudently and in the places where it is needed , in order to achieve the anticipated effects .
The terms for granting this assistance must be in line with the major objectives of the EU-Ukraine Association Agenda , and the process for using the funds must be subject to rigorous European control , with the European Parliament being briefed on a regular basis .
It is intolerable that European loans and subsidies are subject to constraints imposed by the IMF .
It is unacceptable that the European Commission is setting itself the job of verifying that the policies of the World Bank and the IMF are applied by the Member States that are beneficiaries of them , regardless of the sovereignty of the Ukrainian people .
I am voting against the macro-financial assistance presented today to the European Parliament .
It is not the case that I do not support the people of Ukraine .
On the contrary , I do not want them to suffer more than they already do from the obsolete and dangerous neoliberal system that the IMF , the World Bank and the European Commission are imposing on them .
The process of economic stabilisation and recovery in Ukraine is supported by the financial assistance of the International Monetary Fund .
In the face of its worsening economic prospects , Ukraine has requested macro-financial assistance from the Union .
The macro-financial assistance programme is vital for improving the financial stability of European nations that have gone through the recent global crisis and have suffered from the effects of this crisis on their main trading partners .
The financial imbalances relate to budgets and the balance of payments .
This aid is important in order for Ukraine to tackle the crisis in the most coherent way .
The EU must therefore be an area of solidarity .
That is why I voted as I did .
Ukraine , a major and important partner of the EU amongst its eastern neighbours , has been hard hit by the global economic crisis .
For this reason , the provision of macro-financial aid of up to EUR 500 million in the form of a loan under the Commission proposal should be approved .
This funding was to cover the country 's general balance of payments requirement and its external financing gap , as determined by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
Ukraine is to be supported in strengthening its long-term macro-economic stability , as it is also an important trading partner for the EU .
For me , however , it was also important that the aid granted from the EU budget not only conforms to the IMF programme but also to the most important principals and objectives of EU policy towards Ukraine .
Thanks to the EU 's help , further necessary structural reforms have been set in train in Ukraine on the basis of a positive conditionality .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Moreira .
The proposed macro-financial assistance aims to supplement the IMF support provided as part of the stand-by framework agreement , as well as the support of the World Bank , which should take the form of loans granted to the budget support policy .
The macro-financial assistance programme sets out to complement other financing from the Union .
The Union 's financial help reflects the strategic importance of Ukraine as a potential candidate for EU membership .
MFA is granted at a time when the EU is also participating in the mobilisation of finances to reform Ukraine 's energy sector .
I agree with the rapporteur 's aim of improving the clarity , transparency and documentability of the proposed project .
in writing . - Nobody disputes that Ukraine is our ' strategic partner ' whose situation is of great interest to us .
Today , Ukraine stands at a crossroads economically , given its difficult situation , and politically , with a new government that favours closer relations with Russia .
Helping Ukraine by making EUR 500 million available is therefore the right decision strategically , which we will support .
However , tactically , is there not a discrepancy between the level of financial support - a mere half billion compared to other schemes involving tens of billions in financial support - and the control over Ukraine 's economic policy we want to achieve in exchange ? !
The EU does , of course , have strict rules that beneficiaries of its financial support have to respect , no matter the sums of money they receive , but sometimes , especially when the level of that support is relatively low , maintaining the same high conditionality reflects a political inflexibility which only diminishes the effectiveness of this instrument , especially at a time when others are much more flexible in their support .
in writing . - In my capacity of EURONEST Vice-President , I voted in favour of the macro-financial assistance for Ukraine .
I hope it will be swiftly delivered in conformity with the conditions underlying the provision .
I welcome , in particular , the involvement of the European Parliament in this decision-making process as a consequence of the enactment of the Treaty of Lisbon provisions .
The macro-financial assistance for Ukraine is the first case to be decided under the new procedure .
Meanwhile , the delay registered in the decision-making process due to the new procedure is regrettable .
I urge the EU institutions to build upon the experience of granting Ukraine macro-financial assistance and avoid further delays .
Our Eastern Partners should be spared unnecessary delay .
I refer in particular to the case of the Republic of Moldova and its pro-European government , which is still waiting for the delivery of the EU macro-financial assistance .
While the Republic of Moldova is in urgent need of assistance , the proposal of the European Commission is already unacceptably late .
It will be submitted to the European Parliament only this week .
I call upon all EU institutions to avoid further delay in deciding on the macro-financial assistance for the Republic of Moldova .
Our nine outermost regions ( the Azores , the Canaries , Guadeloupe , French Guiana , Madeira , Martinique , Réunion , Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin ) are a real asset for the European Union .
Since their remoteness handicaps their development , the European Union must adopt specific compensatory measures .
Thus , in Réunion , for example , it must be possible to produce UHT milk reconstituted from powdered milk for human consumption .
The valuable exemption granted to Madeira must be extended to Réunion , which shares this characteristic of very significant geographical remoteness .
I therefore voted in favour of this report with the objective of introducing , extending or adapting the existing exemptions for the Azores , the Canary Islands , Réunion and Madeira in the sugar , milk and wine sectors .
The outermost regions face greater challenges because of geography , which places them far from the centre of the Union .
I therefore welcome the adoption of specific measures in the area of agriculture to help these regions in the current economic crisis .
In particular , I would stress the specific nature of the regions of the Azores and Madeira , and I welcome the main measures adopted .
These measures are related to the introduction , extension or adaptation of certain derogations in the sugar , milk and wine sectors .
It is important to stress that it is essential to have an integrated strategy for the outermost regions , without forgetting that each of them has its own specificity : it is important to find the best responses for each different region .
Several existing EU instruments , such as regional strategies and the European Neighbourhood Policy , should be highlighted , as should the importance of our continuing to debate strategic guidelines for the outermost regions , so as to raise awareness amongst decision makers of these regions ' specificities and potentials .
There is more than just one outermost region .
Each island , each territory has its own specific character , identity and problems .
The report that we have just adopted will allow the introduction of certain exemptions in the area of agriculture to help the outermost regions .
As an example , the people of Réunion will now be able to produce UHT milk reconstituted from milk powder of EU origin , thus compensating for the insufficient production of fresh milk .
The Azores , meanwhile , will benefit from an exemption from the rules limiting sugar exports to the EU , since the production of sugar beets represents the most viable alternative for the island - for both its economy and its environment - when milk quotas end .
These exemptions will help the outermost regions .
That is a good thing , and it is why we would like them to be guaranteed in the long term .
This is what we expect of the Commission .
I voted for the report on the proposal for a regulation laying down specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the European Union .
As well as providing an opportunity for agricultural diversification , the adoption of this report means that the ban on re-exporting certain products has been lifted .
At a time of economic crisis , this is a decisive contribution to restructuring and maintaining , not only many dozens of jobs in the Azores , but also activity in the region 's sugar industry .
The Commission 's proposal envisages amendments to Regulation ( EC ) No 247 / 2006 laying down specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union .
The changes are related to the sugar , milk and wine sectors .
I congratulate the rapporteurs involved on the quality of their work .
One of the basic principles of the current multiannual financial framework and the next financial perspectives must be the principle of solidarity ; social and territorial cohesion must be ensured in this way .
We all know about the natural difficulties against which the outermost regions of the European Union struggle because of their geographic location and conditions , resulting in negative effects on their economic activity and productive capacity .
The proposed amendments are in line with this principle of solidarity , so I support them .
The budget underlying this report - which is made explicit in the first item of the compromise proposal 's preamble , accepting an end to dairy quotas - is unacceptable to us , which is why we voted against .
In fact , bringing an end to quotas will - as the adopted report admits , presenting it as a fait accompli - have extremely serious effects on the milk sector in the Azores , and for the region 's entire dairy sector .
The consequences of abolition of the milk quotas for the region 's economy - against which we have fought and will continue to fight - will not be mitigated with the measures aimed at the sugar-processing industry that are being proposed now , considering that the re-exporting of sugar is being prolonged .
This is a fair goal .
It is weakened from the start when it is accepted that this measure , too , will be gradually abolished over a five-year period .
As far as Madeira is concerned , the process of reconverting vines is significantly behind schedule and could even be compromised if the incentives are not strengthened .
The negative consequences for the region of the so-called ' Geneva Agreement ' on the banana trade are also being ignored .
Another issue that it would be important to consider is the possibility of aid to stimulate an inter-island market for the sale of local agricultural products .
I voted in favour of the final text , which was pushed through urgently , since the application of these different exemptions for Réunion , the Azores , the Canaries and Madeira was key to ensuring the protection of jobs and the continuation of agricultural activities , in particular , milk production in Réunion .
However , I voted against the compromise proposed by the European Commission and the Council since the latter was making proposals that fell far short of the measures that we had proposed and which had been adopted by the Committee on Regional Development and the Committee on Agriculture .
It is regrettable that the quotas for sugar exports have not been kept at 3 000 tonnes for the Azores , that the exemption granted to Réunion for milk production has not been considered for the other French overseas departments , and that the safeguards concerning the sustainability of the results achieved by the Réunion milk producers have not been upheld by the Commission .
I would put all of these questions back on the table during the negotiations that will deal with the reform of the POSEI programme .
The outermost regions are usually characterised by a low population , small size , stagnation and difficult economic conditions .
They are regions which are strongly dependent on climatic and geographical conditions , and whose access to products and services is based on cooperation with the mainland of the Union .
Assistance for these regions should be permanently guaranteed , just as the difficulties which the people of outermost areas have to overcome are permanent .
In order to guarantee these regions development of enterprise , stimulation of professional activity and the same level in the agriculture sector as in the whole of Europe , we need to introduce new legislative concessions - and continue with those which already exist - adapted to the needs of specific regions .
The economic and social development of the outermost regions of the European Union is conditioned by their extreme remoteness and insularity , their small size , difficult terrain and climate , and their economic dependence on a small number of products .
As these factors , taken together , severely restrict their development , there is provision in Article 349 of the Treaty of Lisbon for specific measures to benefit the outermost regions , which must be put into practice through appropriate initiatives that seek to respond to their specific needs , not least in the agricultural and fishing sectors .
The main amendments are related to the introduction , extension or adaptation of certain derogations in the sugar , milk and wine sectors .
We are voting in favour of these measures because of all these constraints and the international crisis that is devastating us .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution , because the second pillar of the common agricultural policy , namely rural development policy , is extremely important for improving the effectiveness of the CAP itself , but also for facilitating the management of land which has natural handicaps .
The document which has been drafted by the rapporteur is very necessary , not only for us , but for the whole of the European Union .
We must have information about land which , for reasons not dependent on the owners , cannot be used effectively or well .
I agree with the rapporteur in his assessment of the review , which began in 2005 , of criteria for classifying disadvantaged areas .
The previous criteria for support of these areas must be modified so that they reflect actually existing handicaps .
It should also be remembered that there are areas which come under specific criteria but where the handicaps have now been removed due to the application of effective measures .
It is Member States which should be responsible for identification of less-favoured areas and for development of aid and development programmes .
Of course , all measures must be based on a Community framework .
The Commission 's proposal , as improved by the rapporteur , makes provision for some changes to previous Community law , specifically to Regulation No 247 of 2006 .
The main changes concern the introduction , extension and adaptation of some derogations in the sugar , milk and wine sectors .
I believe that the proposed changes are positive for the outermost areas concerned .
The situation is very difficult , especially in some areas whose main economic sectors have been hit by the recent crises ( dairy sector in the Azores , sugar beet , etc . ) .
It would therefore be advisable to encourage the diversification of economic activities .
However , to encourage such diversification , producers and transformers must be offered long-term prospects , and economic operators must be allowed to reach an appropriate level of industrial and commercial activity .
In view of the system outlined by the rapporteur and the amendments presented by my colleagues from the relevant Committee , I declare myself in favour of the report .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development on the report by Mr Alves , I am satisfied with the road we have started down with a view to a quicker , more effective adjustment of the maximum export quantities for products included in the arrangements for supply from the outermost regions .
The framework for this report is Article 349 of the Treaty of Lisbon , in which there is provision for aid for the outermost regions to overcome permanent difficulties resulting from their geographic situation , topography and climate .
The provisions of this regulation must address the specific needs of these regions and the realities of the local market .
It was this objective that I had in mind when drafting my proposals , which the European Commission has committed to revisit during the general review of this regulation that is still to be undertaken in 2010 .
I was also concerned with safeguarding the incomes of Madeiran and Azorean producers of wine from hybrid varieties banned by the common organisation of the market in wine , enabling them to continue growing these varieties for consumption by their families , which means that they are not forced to grub them up .
As I was hoping , the compromise resulting from the trialogue between Parliament , the Commission and the Council was confirmed by a large majority in Parliament today .
The Trüpel report on the 2011 budget is a new stage in the European Parliament 's budget adoption procedure .
In March , Parliament adopted the guidelines for 2011 .
The aim here is to adopt the draft estimates , which follow the negotiations that took place between the Committee on Budgets and the Bureau of the European Parliament , which is the body responsible for the matter .
I supported this report , which notably provides for the adoption of the second instalment of the EUR 1 500 per month increase in parliamentary assistance allowance , the financing of the 18 new MEPs as they take office , the improvement of support services provided for MEPs ( policy departments , library services ) , and the increase in the number of visitors that each MEP can sponsor financially from 100 to 110 per year .
These various provisions are in keeping with the European Parliament 's new responsibilities granted by the Treaty of Lisbon : henceforth , as colegislators with ministers of the Member States on almost all European competences , MEPs must be able to benefit from in-depth technical expertise on legislative matters , but also to inform citizens of their work , in particular , by receiving them in Parliament in Strasbourg or Brussels .
I voted against Mrs Trüpel 's report .
In so doing , I am coming out very clearly against the increase in the secretarial allowance and any increase in the number of officials here in the European Parliament .
The argument that the Treaty of Lisbon will bring more work for MEPs must be proven first .
Should this be the case , the solution in these times of exploding state debts , however , can only be more efficiency , not more bureaucracy .
There is an enormous potential for greater efficiency in this House , and it would be easy to also increase performance with a smaller staff and less funding .
As I have said before , under the Treaty of Lisbon , the amount of matters to be dealt with by Parliament under the ordinary legislative procedure will increase .
Adequate technical and logistical means are necessary in order for the work to be carried out quickly and efficiently .
Taking into account the future enlargement of the European Union and the need to better inform the public about the work of this House , it is therefore necessary to allocate funds that will make it possible to work efficiently in 2011 , so that the Union 's entire legislative process does not become slower because Parliament is underfunded .
In line with the policies that I have been advocating , I consider the adoption of the policy of zero-based budgeting at the beginning of each parliamentary term important .
As a result , Parliament 's budget will reflect real needs and will increase transparency , budgetary discipline and efficiency .
I also advocate a distinction between fixed and variable costs , with the latter justified by a cost-benefit analysis .
This cost-benefit analysis is important to ensure better results and resource management .
New competences were assigned when the Treaty of Lisbon came into force and the inclusion of 18 new Members makes it necessary to create conditions that enable them to exercise their mandate in a fitting , effective way .
I would stress that excellence in law making must be Parliament 's main priority .
This House must be provided with the resources necessary for it to operate properly ; all the more so in this very demanding time that we are experiencing , in which EU institutions have a crucial role to play for Europeans and society in general .
in writing . - We , as Greens , have voted in favour of the report by our colleague , Helga Trüpel .
All amendments tabled to the report were rejected .
The estimates of the EP for the year 2011 are thus forwarded to the Commission for inclusion in the draft budget proposal for 2011 .
As to the assistants ' allowance second tranche increase for 2011 , this means that the appropriations are currently entered in reserve pending a detailed financial statement of all related costs .
Parliament can come back to this issue at the first reading of the 2011 budget in September / October .
As to the first tranche of the secretarial allowance increase for 2010 , this will be voted tomorrow as part of the Maňka report on the amending budget No 1 / 2010 .
Here we are already in the budget procedure proper and the vote here will constitute the final result .
We have managed to get used to the fact that the European Parliament budget reflects complicated compromises between the European Parliament and other EU institutions , and also - indirectly - between the European Union and Member States .
Next year may turn out to be particularly difficult in this respect , if we look at the importance and scale of the work which awaits Parliament .
For , on the one hand , Parliament is faced with having to adapt to new conditions which result from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and from enlargement of the EU with Croatia - I need only mention the 18 new Members , the 68 additional posts and the 62 posts linked to the Croatian enlargement .
On the other hand , Parliament 's budget is not going to rise significantly in comparison with 2010 ( 5.5 % ) , which raises the question as to how to reconcile this figure with the new reality .
In this context , I welcome the proposal , which is repeated throughout the report , for spending to be planned prudently .
Like the author of the document , I think it is necessary to review the level of subsidies given to employees ' families , to increase employment in the library only after a thorough analysis of MEPs ' needs and to ensure the security of Parliament 's staff at a sensible cost and based on the principle of openness towards the ordinary citizen .
Parliament remains too closed as an institution and , as far as is possible , we should increase financing for projects such as the House of European History and tours of Parliament .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has meant that the European Parliament 's powers have increased , which naturally means new funds to meet the increased needs .
That being the case , this estimate of the budget for 2011 represents a 5.8 % increase compared to the financial year 2010 , in an attempt to ensure that Parliament is able to fully make use of and exercise its prerogatives .
The budget for 2011 will increase to EUR 1 710 574 354 , of which 20.32 % will be for Heading 5 ( administration ) , allowing the political objectives to be reconciled with the respective finance .
This budgetary proposal includes provisions relating to representation for Croatia , to extra funds for Members ' secretarial services , to extra jobs , to an increase in the annual number of visitors that Members can invite , to the reduction in Parliament 's carbon footprint , and to financing for the House of European History and the Visitors Centre .
This report reflects a sensible budget , aimed at a policy of the sustainability of Parliament .
However , it does not fail to have a rigorous approach to the effective use of available resources .
in writing . - We voted against this report in accordance with UKIP principles and on the basis that we support legislation only where it limits the power of the EU or returns it to nation states .
Any amendments which we felt unnecessarily harmed British farmers were not supported , as were any amendments that expanded EU control in this sector .
UKIP will continue to defend the interests of British farmers against EU interference , as we feel the British agricultural sector is perfectly capable of running its own affairs , and already has high standards of both quality and safety .
UKIP opposes the British taxpayer being forced to subsidise farms in other parts of Europe which compete with our own farmers .
UKIP is committed to trade in agricultural produce under the terms of WTO rules .
The administrative burden placed on farmers must be reduced and the excessive bureaucracy that is often involved in agricultural affairs must be cut back .
Farmers should be able to focus on their primary responsibility : producing high quality products .
I voted in favour of the provisions of this report that relate to removing the current duplication and that relate to improving flexibility .
I also agree with the report 's statements in relation to legislation in this sector ; that is , that this legislation should be proportional to the objective and that no legislation should be brought in until an assessment is made of the legislation 's impact as regards its potential financial burden .
Excessive bureaucracy must be cut back if we are to achieve an efficient , competitive agricultural sector in Europe .
I voted for this document as I believe it is necessary to continue the simplification of the regulation and the provisions of the common agricultural policy that started back in 2005 .
Farmers and other economic operators in the agricultural sector should be freed from red tape and requirements that are not necessary to reach political objectives and ensure proper management of taxpayers ' money .
Simplifying the CAP is essential to making our agricultural economy more competitive , preserving and creating jobs and contributing to a sound development of our rural areas .
A high level of errors in applications has been recorded in some Member States and this makes it difficult for farmers to receive assistance on time .
Member States should place at the disposal of potential beneficiaries systems that are simple , clear and transparent .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to include this matter in the bilateral discussions with the Member States .
Three years on from the CAP reform , we are now wondering how to adapt our agricultural policy to today 's challenges .
The own-initiative report offers useful and widely shared suggestions for achieving the aim of an agricultural sector that combines quality and competitiveness .
We must welcome the spirit of this report positively , because with this report , Parliament is calling for the introduction of a new CAP in 2013 that cuts down on bureaucracy for farmers .
Any measure capable of reducing the administrative procedures and burdens that weigh down agricultural producers - not to mention the local authorities concerned - and that does not compromise quality standards definitely deserves our support .
A report such as this , which is attentive to the needs of farmers , including the need to ensure that they are not hampered by excessive bureaucratic burdens , will certainly be a useful contribution to the process of reforming the common agricultural policy which , for obvious reasons , is bound to be a complex and very sensitive process for the future of the European economy , and for the protection of the countless varieties of traditional local produce .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
Farming has always been close to the heart of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and we consider it a fundamental sector of the European economy .
However , our farmers have too long been overwhelmed by bureaucratic and administrative burdens : it is time to lighten their load .
I am , in fact , convinced that simplifying the bureaucratic procedures to be adopted with the CAP reform from 2013 is not merely desirable , but necessary .
I therefore think it is right to simplify the rules for the electronic identification of animals , and to create a telephone helpline in every EU Member State to provide better access to information .
In addition , it is essential to rebuild trust between authorities and farmers .
Farmers , moreover , must no longer spend their days filling in forms and declarations , but tending their fields , and thus supplying better agricultural products that comply with higher standards .
I therefore voted in favour of these measures , which form part of the process of simplifying bureaucracy , boldly supported by my parliamentary group , which offers a substantial response in times of crisis .
in writing . - We voted against this report in accordance with UKIP principles and on the basis that we support legislation only where it limits the power of the EU or returns it to nation states .
Any amendments that we felt unnecessarily harmed British farmers were not supported , as were any amendments that expanded EU control in this sector .
UKIP will continue to defend the interests of British farmers against EU interference , as we feel the British agricultural sector is perfectly capable of running its own affairs , and already has high standards of both quality and safety .
UKIP opposes the way CAP has historically been used in corrupt ways ( e.g. phantom vineyards ) or the way it is used to top-up the income of certain politicians in EU countries who own ' farms ' .
UKIP also objects to being forced to subsidise farms in other parts of Europe , which compete with our own farmers .
UKIP is committed to trade in agricultural produce , under the terms of WTO rules .
in writing . - UKIP voted against the report on simplification of the CAP because , although the implementation of the report would make the policy more comprehensible , transparent and workable , simplifying farm inspection , adding to flexibility to payment arrangements and making it more farmer friendly , to do so is to keep the CAP on track and potentially help to extend it for another generation !
UKIP therefore voted against the resolution as a whole , especially as it is without legislative impact .
I voted in favour of the report on simplifying the common agricultural policy , and I congratulate Mr Ashworth and the shadow rapporteurs on the excellent work they have carried out .
We must take action to simplify the bureaucratic procedures and requirements imposed on farms , in order to reduce their costs and , at the same time , increase their competitiveness and legal certainty .
We often forget that , although they produce a staple product , farms too are businesses whose competitiveness suffers as a result of excessive bureaucracy .
For this very reason , I think reports like this are important , because they underline the problems that arise due to conditionality , or over-complicated procedures , whilst also proposing solutions to simplify and improve what is still , after all , the most important EU programme , at least in financial terms .
I believe that , by voting in favour of this report , Parliament has taken another step towards a CAP that is more up-to-date , efficient and economical and that is , above all , able to ensure that Europe 's food requirements will be met not merely today but also in years to come .
Farmers have always been the most ardent and steadfast supporters of European Union integration .
They firmly believe that the CAP still is a common policy in the true sense of the term .
In a globalised world , the European Union , with its Community market , must take uniform action in order to guarantee food supply security and promote renewable resources .
It must also combat climate change and step up its research effort in order to make the best use of the opportunities that research can offer .
The potential cuts to the CAP budget would cause considerable social and economic disruption , thereby preventing agriculture from coping with the challenges of the future .
It is important for us to understand that farmers ' incomes are dependent on direct payments , even though these alone do not provide farmers with a decent standard of living .
The average agricultural income in the EU , including all direct payments , only amounts to half the average salary paid in the remaining economic sectors .
I believe that reducing direct payments as part of Pillar I of the CAP would have devastating consequences not only for farmers , but just as much for rural areas , as well as for public services related to agricultural production , for consumers and for society benefiting from these payments as a whole .
Direct payments are therefore vital and must be maintained .
In general , I voted in favour of the efforts to simplify the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
This simplification should benefit farmers , enabling them to concentrate on producing safe , quality food , and also the national and EU authorities , by reducing the bureaucratic burden associated with implementing the CAP .
The CAP is of vital importance to the EU , both because it ensures the production of safe food and because of its concern for preserving the environment or rural areas , with a view to properly sustainable development .
Simplification has to mean greater responsibility for all the actors involved .
I would therefore stress the need to transform the CAP into a simpler , fairer and more transparent instrument .
To start with , I would highlight the proposal to create a uniform system of animal identification .
This system must include the possibility of self-certification , the reduction of inspection quotas to limits lower than those currently in place , and the issue of the traceability of meat from sheep and goats ; I am referring specifically to the proposal for herd identification for livestock .
Finally , the necessary reform of the CAP will have to distinguish between supporting individual farmers or cooperatives of such individuals , and leaving big agri-food companies at the mercy of the markets .
The draft report on simplifying the common agricultural policy is a further step towards making the CAP simpler and more efficient .
We must , of course , do much more to boost the competitiveness of European agriculture , retain and create additional jobs and support the natural development of rural areas .
In this context , I would like to mention the issue of direct payments in border regions , where there is unfair competition and discrimination based on the place of registration of agricultural entities .
In neighbouring regions of Member States with differing price levels , there are indications of massive economic action on the part of some agricultural entities in response to these price differences .
An agricultural entity which gets higher prices in its country of origin does business in another country ( with lower direct prices ) at lower production costs and records the sales on the other side of the border .
In this way , agricultural entities in countries with lower direct prices are discriminated against and economically disadvantaged on the local market , while agricultural entities from Member States with higher direct prices secure an economic advantage on the market as a result of EU policies .
For these reasons , it is necessary to take account of the implications for prices when reforming the CAP ; that is , comparing the place of production to the place where the direct prices are recorded .
Through this regulation , we will also contribute towards creating a new and fair market in agriculture .
I am in favour of the report submitted .
I voted for this report because I consider the simplification of the common agricultural policy crucial to the competitiveness of EU agriculture , the preservation of jobs and the sustainable development of Europe 's rural areas .
The rules for checks must be simplified and made more accessible to farmers through help and advice by national bodies , in order to ensure that the quality of European agricultural products does not bring about unnecessary burdens and additional difficulties for actors linked to agricultural activity .
The simplification of legislation is a goal that is essential to bringing Europe closer to the public .
Simple and perceptive policies are necessary for those who have not mastered the Union 's code and do not speak ' Europese ' .
That is why a policy as fundamental and permanent as the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) must be understood by its main beneficiaries ; in this case , European farmers .
I would therefore acknowledge how right the rapporteur is in saying that ' a new CAP should allow farmers to concentrate on the core objective of providing safe , quality and traceable food while also supporting them to deliver non-market public goods ' .
I hope that the new CAP will be simpler , more transparent and fairer ; that it will be better aimed at the needs of farmers and the market ; and that its processes will be faster and less bureaucratic , but secure and effective .
Legal certainty does not require complexity or sluggish processes , but rather simplicity and effectiveness .
That is exactly what we want for the new CAP .
The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) must , on the one hand , ensure an adequate supply of safe food and , on the other , respond to such challenges as the conservation of rural areas , mountain regions , disadvantaged areas and the multifunctionality of European agriculture .
The harmonisation of legislation must be accompanied by the elimination of redundancy .
It is to be hoped that the target of a 25 % reduction in the administrative burden will be reached ahead of 2012 .
The CAP must be simplified , as that will make our agricultural economy more competitive , so preserving and creating jobs and contributing to the sustainable development of our rural areas .
Simplification of the CAP must benefit farmers first and foremost and not only the national authorities and payment bodies in the Member States .
Farmers must have access to workable systems that allow them easily , and without needless bureaucracy , to submit applications for direct payments in the place in which they live .
This simplification must go hand-in-hand with simplification of its implementation , and the Member States must minimise the bureaucratic formalities required of beneficiaries , especially in the area of rural development .
Greater flexibility is needed , so we are advocating the authorisation of more flexible payment arrangements even before all checks have been definitively completed .
This report has positive aspects , of which we would stress the following : the simplification of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) must not mean less aid for framers and the dismantling of traditional instruments for managing markets ; the need to amend the fines , not least when they relate to offences that are not the producer 's responsibility ; the simplification of the application process ; and very positive amendments regarding animal identification , particularly of sheep and goats .
Nonetheless , the approach proposed by the rapporteur is largely aimed at the market , at competitiveness , at ' reducing excessive protectionism ' , and at going further with liberalisation , with its well known and disastrous consequences .
The report also continues to support the current model for distributing aid .
It states that ' the distribution of the single farm payment should ensure fairness ' , but does not propose specific measures to achieve this goal .
It expresses its belief that the current definition of agricultural activity for the purposes of single payment should be reviewed , but proposes nothing to amend the current model in which people are paid to not produce .
In summary , the report lacks proposals and measures to change the CAP model in force , to begin with ( but not only ) as far as the distribution of aid is concerned .
in writing . - I fully agree that the simplification of the CAP should not result in less support for farmers and should not lead to the dismantling of traditional market management instruments .
Furthermore , I agree with a deferral on the obligation of electronic sheep tagging .
Simplifying the principles which define the operation of the common agricultural policy is extremely important .
The CAP should not be reduced just to the distribution of money .
Personally , I would like greater resources to be directed to individual agricultural investors , who could more effectively modernise farms and expand production .
However , increasing the financing of direct payments is , in my opinion , a way to retain poverty in the most backward regions , which supports people who , in reality , are not connected with agriculture and hinders the restructuring of agriculture .
Only subsidising ' real ' farmers - producers of healthy food and high quality products - can guarantee security in this area for Europe and the world .
in writing . - I have voted against the Ashworth report on simplification of the CAP , because of Paragraph 12 .
Farmers do not need more EU direct support ; they need fairer prices for their products .
However , I do agree with the essence of the report .
The CAP is overly complicated and unnecessarily burdensome on farmers , Member States and decentralised governments and authorities .
There is a great need to relieve this administrative burden and reduce bureaucracy , especially in these times of crisis .
Furthermore , there should be a possibility of error correction for farmers who have , unintentionally or due to factors beyond their control , committed infringements and are penalised as a result of this , as well as a greater transparency regarding these penalties .
The common agricultural policy is an essential element of the European Union , whether we are talking about providing food for our citizens or about conserving and protecting mountain regions and rural areas , as well as the outermost or disadvantaged regions .
I voted for this report because I support the need to simplify the CAP .
It has to be results-orientated and offer a greater capacity to respond .
I also think that closer cooperation is needed between Member States and local authorities in terms of exchanging good practices .
At the same time , farmers must be kept well informed and be given more assistance by the authorities .
Agriculture is one of the main resources in Europe , but it is also the sector that is most burdened by the grinding wheels of EU bureaucracy .
Neither must we underestimate the impact of climatic and environmental factors that are , by their very nature , hard to predict and force the farming world to face new and difficult challenges due to the global changes that are taking place .
Against this backdrop , the European Parliament considers it indispensable to bear in mind that the goal of reducing administrative burdens by 25 % set out in the 2003 programme is not enough and also not ambitious enough , given that we will probably achieve it before the deadline of 2012 .
Parliament also believes it must suggest urgent strategies to the Commission and the Council for further reducing the burdens oppressing our farmers .
The proposals in this parliamentary resolution also aim to anticipate the redrafting of the CAP in the light of the EU 2020 strategy .
This step is crucial for ensuring growth in this sector , and for ensuring that its financial allocation is maintained , in view of the erosion of EU resources that is foreseeable for 2013 .
This report has the merit of pointing out that the public service alone guarantees the independence and impartiality of inspections and of stressing the idea of agriculture as a public good .
The insistence on the traceability of foodstuffs is also important , although clear labelling on their environmental footprint is more likely to raise awareness among all citizens ( producers and consumers ) of the importance of relocation and of the environmental quality of produce .
The determination shown in the report to simplify the administrative rules of the common agricultural policy is also important .
However , the fact that the CAP is considered only from the perspective of competitiveness and neoliberalism , in the direct tradition of the policies implemented by the European Union in the last few years , prevents me from voting in favour .
I am therefore abstaining on this text as a sign of goodwill for the progress made in the intentions shown .
It is essential to simplify the common agricultural policy if the goal of a 25 % reduction in the agricultural sector 's administrative burden is to be achieved by 2010 .
Bureaucracy is a serious impediment for farmers , who neglect their daily activities in the fields because they waste a great deal of time on red tape .
Furthermore , the new amendments will also mean a reduction of hundreds of millions of euro in the administrative burden borne by farmers , with palpable benefits , especially if we take into account the difficult economic situation that we are experiencing .
The simplification of standards and of checking mechanisms is essential for farmers , who must ensure the food supply for 500 million people at a reasonable price .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted for this report , which contains important provisions aimed at removing the red tape which affects Europe 's farmers , especially at the moment when agriculture is being hit very hard by the financial crisis .
I would like to thank my fellow Members who voted for the amendments I tabled , thereby retaining the text already approved in committee .
I am referring mainly to Amendment 49 relating to the high level of errors in applications submitted for direct payments registered in some Member States , which also highlights that these errors are attributable mainly to the orthophotographic equipment used rather than to the farmers themselves .
I am also referring to Amendment 65 concerning the deferment of the obligation on the electronic identification of sheep and goats starting from 2010 , due to its excessive cost in the present economic crisis .
The proposal to simplify the CAP is part of the wider process of reducing bureaucratic procedures , a process initiated some time ago by various EU Member States , to ensure more efficient and accessible services for citizens .
This reform is also necessary for the agricultural sector , to allow farmers to save time and money , and to have access to the benefits under the system of conditionality and direct payments , as well as with regard to some aspects of rural development and methods of identification for reared animals .
At the present time , with the debate for the post-2013 CAP already under way , this proposal for simplification represents a test bench that can be used to highlight opportunities and threats and form the basis of a proposal for European agriculture in the future .
For the reasons I have expressed above , I voted in favour of the report .
The report on the simplification of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) examines an issue that has been of serious concern to farmers , who are the main beneficiaries of the CAP , and also to the European public in general , who find the CAP hard to understand because of the complexity of its mechanisms .
The simplification measures are therefore recognised as necessary and urgent by everyone .
It is essential that these measures have a direct impact on farmers and not just on each Member State 's administration , as has very often been the case .
The elimination of the market management instruments cannot be put forward as one of the means of simplification .
One thing that the simplification needs to address is the need to eliminate discriminations in the single payment scheme in the various Member States , which are problems that result from the inefficiency of national administrations , such as checks , deadlines , payments , etc .
Eliminating these discriminations will prevent us having a multi-speed CAP that encourages inequalities between the farmers of the various Member States .
I voted for the Ashworth report in favour of a simpler common agricultural policy which is also easier for farmers to understand .
Administering the common agricultural policy is often excessively complicated .
Consequently , it is of paramount importance to the whole agricultural sector to simplify it and make farmers ' lives easier .
The rules proposed by the European Commission are , on many occasions , extremely difficult to implement and there is a very high level of bureaucracy in Member States with regard to applying agriculture legislation .
In particular , the animal identification legislation must be reviewed to make it more flexible and less bureaucratic .
Current legislative provisions in this area are far too rigid and counter-productive on many occasions .
The simplification of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is crucial to making Europe 's agricultural economy more competitive , preserving jobs and encouraging their creation , and contributing to the development of rural areas .
It seems essential to me for the Commission to seek to eliminate unnecessary bureaucratic obstacles at the same time as proposing new regulations in this area .
The simpler the legislation is , the easier it is for interested parties to understand , be they farmers , national and regional authorities , or bodies for monitoring the application of funds .
In the same way , the less time these actors need to prepare applications , the fewer errors they will make .
The cost of monitoring financing will also be lower .
Simplification is also needed in the monitoring of how funds are used , and outside audits seem to me to be the most efficient way of doing this .
Fines must be applied in a way that is transparent and proportional , and must also take into account the size of the farm and the local situation , not least in the outermost regions such as Madeira .
I voted for this report in the Chamber today because it attempts to tackle these issues .
We must now ensure that there is better coordination between agricultural policy and cohesion policy in the general review of the CAP .
By endorsing this document , we have given expression to our determination over simplification of the common agricultural policy .
This process is essential to guarantee the right level of competitiveness in the European agricultural sector .
It is obvious that by harmonising regulations , reducing bureaucratic burdens and restricting costs , we have the chance for a simpler , fairer and more understandable common agricultural policy .
However , it should be remembered that the intended addressees of the simplifications should not only be the authorities and national bodies which manage the agriculture sector but , first and foremost , the farmers , who are excessively burdened with regulations .
The report presented by Mrs Rühle is an own-initiative report aimed at studying ways of improving public procurement procedures in Europe , in order to obtain a more stable and transparent legal framework .
The incorrect application of the rules on public procurement is , in fact , one of the most frequent causes of errors in the payment of the European Structural Funds .
I support the main points made by the own-initiative report : a call for better coordination of public procurement procedures within the various directorates of the European Commission , a statement that the objectives set by the 2004 review of the directives on public procurement ( clarification of the rules and greater legal certainty ) have not yet been fully achieved .
I also approve of the position taken by the report to the effect that small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , suffer from the complexity of these procedures , which may sometimes prevent them from participating in an invitation to tender through a lack of legal aid resources .
I therefore voted in favour of this report and will monitor closely the proper application , in our Member States and in France , in particular , of the public procurement directives that are already in force .
I supported this report since a public procurement system that operates properly and transparently is particularly important for the internal market in order to promote cross-border competition and innovation and achieve optimal benefit for government institutions .
The aims of the 2004 revision of the public procurement directives have not yet been achieved , particularly with regard to the simplification of procurement rules and the creation of more legal certainty .
The European Court of Justice has examined a disproportionate number of infringement cases in the area of public procurement , indicating that many Member States have struggled to comply with the public procurement directives .
The Treaty of Lisbon has incorporated into European Union primary law the first acknowledgement of the right to regional and local self-government and consolidated the concept of subsidiarity .
Given that public procurement law serves to ensure that public funds are managed soundly and efficiently and to give interested companies the opportunity to be awarded public contracts in a context of fair competition , I call on the Commission to simplify public procurement procedures in order to relieve both local governments and companies from spending a large amount of time and money on purely bureaucratic matters and facilitate SMEs ' access to such contracts and enable them to participate on a more equal and fairer footing .
A significant portion of the funds from Member States ' budgets is spent on public procurement .
Therefore I agree with the opinion of the rapporteur that public funds should be transparent and open to public scrutiny .
Public contracts must be awarded under transparent conditions whereby all stakeholders are treated equally and the relationship between price and project performance is the ultimate criterion , so that they go to the best tender and not merely the cheapest tender .
In order to increase the transparency of public procurements it is necessary to simplify public procurement procedures to relieve both local governments and companies from spending a large amount of time and money on purely bureaucratic matters .
Simplifying the procedures will also facilitate SMEs ' access to such contracts and enable them to participate on a more equal and fairer footing .
Due to globalisation processes , it is particularly important for the Commission to focus on procedures for the application of social criteria .
Therefore , guidelines or other practical assistance given to public authorities and other public bodies in connection with sustainable procurement are essential .
I welcome this resolution , which seeks to simplify public procurement rules , while simultaneously contributing to creating greater legal certainty .
European initiatives on public procurement require coordination at European level to avoid inconsistencies and legal problems .
Legal clarification of the conditions under which procurement law applies to institutionalised public-private partnerships is also important .
I call on the Commission to simplify procedures in order to relieve both local governments and companies from spending a large amount of time and money on purely bureaucratic matters .
Simplifying the procedures will also facilitate small and medium-sized enterprises ' access to such contracts and their participation on a more equal and fairer footing .
Public authorities must be encouraged to base public procurement on environmental , social and other criteria .
I call on the Commission to explore the possibility of using green public contracts as a tool to promote sustainable development .
In 2004 , the Commission carried out a revision of the public procurement directives , the purpose of which was to simplify the procedures , making public procurement more transparent , more efficient , more flexible and less bureaucratic .
As the rapporteur says , ' The main purpose of public procurement is the cost-effective purchase of goods and services with a view to the performance of public-service tasks .
Public authorities are not typical market participants , however ; since they manage public funds , they bear a particular responsibility . '
I am forced to say once again that a complex law is not the one that best serves the interests of the parties ; quite the opposite in the case of public procurement .
The more complex , the less transparent and the slower procedures are , the more likely it is that the law will be circumvented and , in extreme cases , that there will be corruption .
It is therefore crucial that , during the process of revising the current public procurement directives , simpler and more effective rules be sought to regulate a sector that represents almost 16 % of the European Union 's GDP .
Total annual expenditure on the public procurement of goods and services in the European Union amounts to EUR 1 500 billion , or more than 16 % of EU gross domestic product .
Against the background of the current economic crisis , public procurement directives must not make the process of awarding contracts slower or more costly .
Contractors , in particular small and medium-sized enterprises , demand legal certainty and swift processes .
I believe that the Commission and the Member States should revise , in cooperation with regional and local authorities , the various sets of rules applicable to public procurement in order to unify those rules and simplify the whole legal framework for public procurement , with a view to reducing the risk of errors and increasing efficiency in the use of the Structural Funds .
It should be noted that improper transposition of EU procurement rules leads to a large proportion of the irregularities in the implementation of European projects cofinanced by the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund .
I believe that the Commission must consider the possibility of continuing to use accelerated procedures in connection with the Structural Funds , even beyond 2010 , so that Member States do not waste these resources .
While I support the report 's objective of inviting the Commission to simplify public procurement procedures in order to save local government and enterprises from having to devote substantial amounts of time and money to strictly bureaucratic issues , I regret the wording of the second part of paragraph 9 .
I feel that this interpretation of a decision by the Court of Justice of the European Union indicating that local authorities can cooperate without ever resorting to the market deviates from the principle of neutrality .
That may well be detrimental to enterprises ( private or public capital ) , which thus see themselves ruled out of any opportunities to compete for contracts to deliver public services of an economic character .
This report throws a little light on the social and environmental standards that we must be able to integrate into invitations to tender ; it also proposes recommendations to facilitate SME access to public procurement markets .
Nevertheless , it has a major shortcoming on account of the explicit absence of any reference to the necessary adoption of a legal instrument specifying the definition and the status of service concessions at the time of the recast of the public procurement directives .
We cannot settle for the current case-law of the European Court of Justice on public service concessions ; the need for a framework directive on services of general interest is keenly felt .
Legal clarification is essential , for everyone 's benefit .
That is why I abstained from the final vote on this report .
Public procurement in the internal market of the European Union represents about 15 % of GDP .
Opening up the public procurement market is beneficial to the ordering institutions , because larger markets give greater opportunities for choice , and so for lower costs and better quality .
How public money is spent is extremely important , especially now , when the post-crisis economy requires stimulation , and the Member States are having budget problems .
As the rapporteur rightly observed , current legislation is fairly complicated , which is a particular challenge for local and regional authorities and for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Furthermore , clarification is still required for questions including public-private partnerships , town planning and service concessions .
Therefore , I agree with the main points of Mrs Rühle 's report , which show the need for greater legal transparency in the field of public procurement , and which do not call for the current directives to be changed at the moment , but for a thorough analysis of existing problems to be carried out by the European Commission services .
in writing . - ( RO ) Public procurement accounts for a significant proportion of the European Union 's GDP .
Its purpose is to purchase goods and services at the best price / quality ratio .
European procurement directives delay the process of awarding contracts , make it more costly and restrict the public procurers ' scope for action .
Unfortunately , an ever increasing number of Member States have encountered such problems .
This is the reason why I voted for the report as I strongly support measures to simplify and update the procedures .
Simplified , uniform legislation is required for all Member States .
This will enable us to eliminate current discrepancies between the regulations applied by Member States , along with errors , as well as to make more efficient use of public money .
Public procurement is a very delicate matter which deserves to be treated very seriously as it concerns public funds .
Public contracts must therefore be transparent and completely open to public scrutiny so that they do not arouse suspicions of any kind .
That being the case , public contracts must be awarded under transparent conditions whereby all interested parties are treated equally and the relationship between price and project performance is the ultimate criterion , so that they go to the best tender overall and not the one that is , perhaps , merely the cheapest .
That is why I voted as I did .
Public procurement accounts for approximately 18 % of Community GDP , and therefore has a key role to play in relaunching the economy and employment .
Procurement also has a significant impact on small and medium-sized enterprises , which often act as subcontractors .
In the current context , where the interaction between the internal market and international markets is increasingly clear , European companies run the serious risk of suffering unfair competition from companies in third countries ( for example , China ) , which benefit from State subsidies that European companies are not allowed , and which can offer considerably lower costs and shorter production times due to their failure to comply with European standards for safety and workers ' rights .
We need coordinated action at European level to counter this effect .
Lastly , I would remind you of the importance of respecting the principle of reciprocity and proportionality .
For example , Chinese enterprises have access to the European market , but European enterprises cannot take part in invitations to tender in China .
I applaud the rapporteur for his work and am voting in favour of this .
in writing . - I am very glad the amendment proposed by the Socialists and Democrats Group has been rejected , which has allowed our group , Greens / EFA , to vote in favour of the Rühle report .
I condemn the ostrich politics of those who think that the European Court of Justice 's current case-law on service concessions is satisfactory and that there is absolutely no need to legislate .
For years , the socialists have fought and campaigned to obtain framework directives protecting services of general interest , and there is no question of us abandoning this commitment .
The only long-term guarantee for public services is real European legislation , not judicial decisions , however well-founded they may be .
As we can see with the difficulties in transposing the Services Directive in relation to social services , only a specific framework can provide legal certainty and quality of service .
Small and medium-sized enterprises and local and regional authorities expect clarity and legal certainty in the awarding of public procurement contracts such as social housing public procurement contracts .
However , neither did we want to vote against this report , which contains important elements , in particular , as regards social and environmental standards , which we must be able to integrate into tender procedures , recommendations to facilitate SME access , and a clear call for vigilance in public-private partnership contracts .
It is essential for European policies on development to be coherent .
However , this report by Mrs Keller sometimes has a tendency to be either excessive or vague in its wording .
Very clearly I say ' Yes ' to EU policy coherence , but ' No ' to questioning the commitments made by the European Union ( and by France ) within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
Our agriculture must evolve gradually and by responding to the difficulties faced by our farmers , who are key players not only in our rural areas but also in our cities .
I therefore voted against this report .
The European Union is the biggest aid donor in the world .
This year in fact , it is expected that the amount of development aid provided to non-EU states will reach EUR 69 billion , marking a 20 % increase on 2008 .
The European Union has shown itself to be consistent with regard to the commitments it has undertaken towards the international institutions .
The clash between Europe 's development policies and its trade policies is a reality .
However , the European Union has made the commitment that all EU policies with an impact on developing countries will take into account the development objectives which have been assumed .
Contrary to initial predictions , the economic crisis is affecting poor countries in particular , many of which are involved in development projects run with European funds .
On the other hand , the export and agriculture policies applied by the EU in these countries have an adverse impact on their development .
We therefore have to deal with an undesirable upshot from this : the EU builds at macro level and has an adverse influence at micro level .
In these circumstances , the objectives adopted through the resolution voted on yesterday during the European Parliament plenary acquire huge importance and must be adopted by all EU institutions .
In the face of the economic and humanitarian crisis that the world is currently struggling through , it is more urgent than ever for Union development aid policies to be processed in a way that is consistent and unified between themselves , and which is fully linked to the Union 's other policies on trade , the environment , etc .
It is now clear that , despite the EU 's commitment to development policy and the fact that it is the biggest development aid donor in the world , there is not always an effective link between its policies , undermining the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) .
We aim to change the status quo , and rightly so .
We must look at Official Development Assistance from a long-term point of view of bringing together synergies between all the Member States and consistency between policies .
This consistency must be achieved because it contributes to meeting the development requirements of the needy .
I support this European Parliament report in general , and consider it crucial that EU actors give their all to removing obstacles to development , to achieving the MDG , to the fight against poverty , and to ensuring that human , social , economic and environmental rights are actually put into practice in developing countries .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Swedish Conservative delegation yesterday ( 18 May 2010 ) voted against report on the EU Policy Coherence for Development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus ' concept .
The primary reason for this is that we do not support the proposal for the introduction of an international transaction tax .
Introducing a Tobin tax would simply harm developing countries and lead to greater poverty .
We would like to stress , however , that there are elements in the report which are in line with our thinking , for example , the point that EU export subsidies for European agricultural products have had a disastrous effect on food security and the development of a viable agricultural sector in developing countries .
One billion four hundred million people in the world survive on less than EUR 1 per day .
The European Union has a duty to combat this situation .
That requires more efficient and effective development cooperation and assistance policies .
Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) commitments are still not being fulfilled satisfactorily .
To address the urgency of development , we call on the Commission to urgently define innovative additional sources of financing for development , such as a tax on international financial transactions intended to generate additional resources , in order to overcome the worst consequences of the crisis .
In the same spirit , the Member States should reaffirm the commitment made at the Millennium summit to devote 0.7 % of GDP to ODA over the next decade , while taking into account the absorption capacities and good governance of the recipient states .
Finally , European development policy must be linked to flexible regulation of the movement of people , goods and capital with developing countries .
We support the objective of this report for EU policy to be consistent with the Union 's aim of promoting development in low and middle-income countries .
Yet Mrs Keller 's report talks , for example , of a developed services market and clear competition rules as obstacles to meeting the Millennium Development Goals .
The result of this is that we do not feel able to support the report as a whole .
Clear ground rules are a precondition for the ability of a market economy to function properly and the trade in services is an important element in the development of countries ' economies .
The European Union often comes up against paradoxes of its own creation and the incongruities that its policies bring about for the Member States and their citizens , as well as for third countries and their peoples .
As the biggest development aid donor in the world , the European Union and the Member States must strive for their development aid policy to be not just efficient but also consistent and coherent ; this has not always happened .
All the efforts to encourage this consistency and seek to keep in mind the multiple needs of the peoples that receive the aid should be welcomed .
Trade policy cannot be immune to this goal .
The subject of this report is very relevant , since we know that the EU 's policies and actions in several areas frequently contradict stated ' development aid ' objectives .
There are several significant and positive aspects , such as : calling attention to the tragedy of hunger at world level ; pointing out the incongruence and ineffectiveness of agreements on fisheries in the face of proclaimed development-cooperation objectives ; denouncing the effects of Union subsidies on exports ; criticising the liberalisation of services , the introduction of competition rules , tax havens , the capital outflow from developing countries into the EU caused by incoherent policies , the small amount of aid dedicated to agriculture ; and advocating the creation of a patent pool for HIV / Aids medicines .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur herself ends up being inconsistent , notably by advocating the further development of instruments such as free-trade areas and the so-called economic partnership agreements .
The rapporteur ignores the fact that these instruments threaten the interests of developing countries in several areas , as has been becoming clear from the resistance of many of them to signing these agreements , which have only been overcome in some cases through unacceptable pressure and blackmail on the EU 's part .
I fully recognise the importance of EU development policy and of assistance to developing countries .
However , I voted against the Keller report , due to the position it takes on the impact of EU agricultural export subsidies on the farming sector in developing countries , which is totally inaccurate .
Moreover , the EU is a particularly open market in terms of imports of products from developing countries as a result , among other things , of the ' Everything but Arms ' and other preferential agreements .
It should be noted that the commitment made by the Member States of the WHO at the ministerial summit in Hong Kong ( 2005 ) concerns the parallel elimination of export subsidies and the imposition of disciplines on all export measures with equivalent competitive effect .
I voted in favour of this report as it is a particular concern of mine that international free trade agreements should include legally binding social and environmental standards .
I think it is particularly important for the European Union not only to apply the principle of the social market economy within the EU , but also to take it outside its borders .
Our partners in free trade agreements should maintain certain standards , and I also believe that we should bring an end to negotiations with states that do not comply with such standards .
in writing . - I voted enthusiastically in favour of Franziska Keller 's report on Policy Coherence for Development , and I am very glad it was adopted by a majority vote .
I deplore the negative vote of the EPP and ECR groups .
in writing . - ( SV ) In the European Parliament vote , I voted against the report ' The EU Policy Coherence for Development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus ' concept ' .
Conducting a responsible , effective policy for development should be a key focus for the European Parliament .
It is something that I , along with many others , work for on a daily basis in the Committee on Development .
It is clearly absurd and anything but responsible for the EU to take with one hand - for example , through agricultural subsidies that make developing countries less able to compete - and then provide aid to ' repair the damage ' with the other .
The debate on EU Policy Coherence for Development is important and valuable .
However , the present report contains elements that I cannot support , such as the paragraph on the imposition of a tax on financial transactions and the use of the vaguely defined term ' environmental rights ' .
Large parts of the report - which was voted through in plenary - are very sound , however , and my ' no ' vote should not be interpreted as an unwillingness to participate in the work on Policy Coherence for Development .
On the contrary - it is a process that I am very keen on , and I am keen that it should happen in the best way possible .
I am particularly pleased about the adoption of the report on EU Policy Coherence for Development and the ' Official Development Assistance plus ' concept , which is an excellent report aimed at ensuring greater respect for developing countries .
I especially welcome the adoption , by a slim majority , of paragraph 70 , which asks the Commission systematically to include legally binding social and environmental standards in trade agreements negotiated by the European Union .
This is an important step towards fairer trade .
The European Union must set an example in this area .
Given the current global economic situation , this report is extremely important as it seeks to make the Union 's policies more consistent in order for it to achieve the goals that it has set itself , such as the Millennium Development Goals .
The EU is the biggest development aid donor in the world - the latest sums point to some EUR 49 million - and its interventions pay attention to both countries and their citizens , so it is a far-reaching Union policy , with trade , environmental and social concerns .
The need is stressed here to promote the access of products from these countries to European markets ; amongst other things , the development of Union instruments for lowering customs tariffs .
However , I would express my concern regarding some suggestions , since it must be said that they could have consequences for European producers , not least those that come from geographic locations that deserve special attention .
Development aid and poverty eradication are a requirement of the greatest importance that deserve my full support .
Nevertheless , I think that commitments that cannot be met without endangering the interests of our fellow citizens must not be made .
Our citizens must not be forgotten or subordinated : we have special obligations to them .
I voted in favour of this European Parliament own-initiative report , which responds to the European Commission 's analysis of penalties for serious infringements against the social rules in road transport .
Today , differences exist between the Member States that adversely affect the fair functioning of the internal market and road safety .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism is proposing in this regard some ways in which to provide solutions .
In particular , the report proposes a harmonisation of penalties by means of a common categorisation of fines .
It calls for the creation of a coordinating body , to be responsible for improving cooperation between the Member States in the implementation of social rules , as well as the setting up of inspection bodies .
Finally , the report underlines the need to provide hauliers and drivers with sufficient information on the relevant social rules and the penalties for infringements by means of printed media , information technology and intelligent transport systems .
As I fully support these proposals , I voted in favour of this report .
The penalty systems in the Member States of the European Union show wide disparities , and therefore the legal position with regard to international transport operations has become very hard for undertakings and especially for drivers to understand .
The regulations and the directive on social rules in road transport currently in force afford the Member States a great deal of scope for interpretation and this results in a failure to achieve uniform transposition into national law in the Member States .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides for an opportunity to approximate the provisions of criminal laws and other legislation of the Member States .
I believe that the Commission must use this opportunity to develop and promote such harmonised approaches to checks and take regulatory action so as to remove obstacles to the European single market and improve road safety .
In order to ensure , as effectively as possible , the implementation of the social rules in road transport , the European Commission should come up with a uniform and binding interpretation of the Regulation on driving and resting hours , which the national inspection bodies should take into account .
Since 2006 , a European regulation has obliged all road hauliers driving in Europe to respect the same maximum daily driving limit and to take rest periods in order to guarantee safety on European roads .
Unfortunately , the way these measures are being applied is far from optimal : the penalties for an infringement are completely different in each Member State .
Thus , the fine imposed on a driver who exceeds the maximum daily driving limit by more than two hours is ten times higher in Spain than in Greece .
In some Member States , a prison sentence may be applied for serious infringements , while in others , the driving licence is simply withdrawn .
This lack of harmonisation undermines the effectiveness of the regulation and introduces considerable legal uncertainty for road hauliers .
I voted for Mrs Ranner 's report , which calls on the Commission to propose minimum and maximum sentences for infringements that would be harmonised in all the Member States .
The report also calls for the creation of a simple and accessible information brochure to inform lorry drivers of the risks they run should there be an infringement .
The European Union 's concern about the absence of a uniform system for regulating road penalties at Member State level is justified .
The enforcement of such penalties , at least non-financial ones , on all car drivers in Member States would lessen the confusion experienced by many hauliers or individual drivers as a result of legislative discrepancies between the country of origin and a third EU Member State in which they are driving .
On the other hand , the European Commission and specialist parliamentary committees are right when they say that it is too early for us to even contemplate standardising the financial penalties applied to traffic offences .
The European Union shows significant discrepancies in terms of the economic situation of companies and the population , which means that fines imposed for the same traffic offence cannot be the same across the board in all Member States .
However , standardising the regulations applied to passenger transport would place greater responsibility on transport companies .
Harmonisation of the regulations across all Member States , supported by their strict enforcement , without leaving it up to each Member State whether or not to adopt the European recommendations , would also increase safety on Europe 's roads .
Infringements are a serious problem in road transport , which poses significant questions as regards border crossings .
It is therefore important for the Commission to consider the situations in the various Member States , as well as what constitutes an offence in the different national legal systems and the respective penalties and fines .
On this subject , the rapporteur argues ' that an effective , balanced and dissuasive penalty system can only be based on clear , transparent and comparable penalties across the Member States ' and ' calls on the Member States to find legislative and practical ways of reducing the , in some cases , very substantial differences in the type and level of penalties applied ' .
I tend to agree with the importance of an effective and balanced penal system , and that the Member States should work together to reduce the differences in how road infringements are handled .
However , I have greater difficulty in thinking that the national legislator should be losing authority on criminal matters in favour of harmonisation at Union level regarding the nature of penalties and the value of fines .
The report prepared by the European Commission summarises the various types of penalty existing in Member States and demonstrates the differences between the systems adopted by each Member State in this area , concluding that the situation is unsatisfactory .
It therefore calls on the Member States to apply the social rules in road transport in a harmonised way .
The European Parliament 's rapporteur is proposing to increase harmonisation efforts in this area , particularly at the level of ' interpretation of the application of social legislation ' and penalties , by ' categorising ' it and so seeking to ' achieve an internal market in transport and to increase legal certainty ' .
Road safety is , without doubt , an important matter , as is improving working conditions in the road transport sector , not least driving times and rest periods .
We would reaffirm that these objectives are not necessarily achieved through generic harmonisation .
Harmonisation is indeed necessary , but through progress and not by everyone dropping down to the same low level , as has been common practice where attempts have been made ' to achieve an internal market ' .
Increased road safety is necessary , as are improved working conditions in the transport sector .
This will ensure better road safety in each of the Member States .
Road transport safety has always been a concern of the EU .
The adoption of this resolution is another step towards eliminating serious infringements of the social rules in this area .
Greater cooperation between Member States is necessary in order to create an easy communications network for all the sector 's professionals whenever they are working in a Member State that is not their own .
A financial effort is also necessary in order to establish an appropriate infrastructure , including a sufficient number of safe parking spaces and services , on the European road network so that drivers can , in fact , comply with the provisions on driving times and rest periods .
That is why I voted as I did .
Statistics show that heavy duty vehicles in particular are involved in a high proportion of traffic accidents .
It is therefore that much more important the vehicle be in faultless condition .
Drivers ' attentiveness falls almost as much as a result of tiredness as it does under the influence of alcohol .
Consequently , in the name of general safety , we need to ensure compliance with these regulations .
It is important , in this regard , that the same conditions apply to employees and the self-employed so as not to push ever more people into fake self-employment , who are then utilised up to or above the limits of their tolerance .
Fines , however , are often an unsuitable way of guaranteeing compliance with rest periods , which can only be possible when a vehicle is immobilised .
As no expansion of these road safety measures is planned , I voted ' no ' .
The report by Mrs Ranner , whom I congratulate on account of her work , sheds light not only on the differences between fines in different Member States , but also on differences surrounding the types of penalty in highlighting the unsatisfactory nature of this situation for drivers and transport enterprises .
I agree with the approach of the Parliamentary report , which underlines the importance to the internal market of fully implementing social regulations , by applying more frequent checks if necessary , establishing a European coordination instrument and harmonising infringements and their associated penalties .
Only by having a uniform arrangement will it be possible to ensure the rapid recovery of sums due for infringements .
I therefore voted in favour .
This report by my colleague in the Committee on Transport and Tourism is an excellent initiative towards solving some of the existing problems regarding the road transport penalties applicable to serious infringements .
The rules applicable in the case of serious infringements against the social rules vary considerably in each Member State with regard to the value of fines and the nature and categorisation of penalties , making greater harmonisation necessary .
I welcome the solutions proposed for such differences in the report , not least the necessary harmonised categorisation of serious infringements , and the implementation of a system of checks - coordinated at European level by a body with the appropriate characteristics - the purpose of which would be to improve cooperation on the implementation of social rules and ensure the training of inspection bodies charged with applying these rules .
I would also stress the importance of developing initiatives to provide adequate information about social rules , and create adequate infrastructure and car parks to ensure respect for the rules .
For the above reasons , I voted for the report brought before Parliament today .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation - Action plan on organ donation and transplantation ( 2009-2015 ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Mikolášik , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation - C6-0480 / 2008 - , and
the report by Mr Perello Rodriguez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Commission Communication : Action plan on Organ Donation and Transplantation ( 2009-2015 ) : Strengthened Cooperation between Member States .
I am delighted to have this unique opportunity to appear before you today and to talk about the progress we have achieved in the negotiations in Parliament , and also in the subsequent trialogue on this very important topic of organ donations and transplants .
I personally consider this bill to be enormously important , not only as the chief rapporteur , but also as a doctor .
I firmly believe that this new directive fundamentally addresses the greatest challenge we currently face in the process of organ donations and transplants , which is the shortage of organs faced by patients who are waiting for them .
In the context of providing the best health protection for European Union citizens , our goal is to ensure that human organs designated for transplantation are safe and of a high quality .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety voted on the draft report on 16 March , when it was adopted by a clear majority in the context of the rapporteur 's recommendations .
Subsequently , we completed three intensive interinstitutional trialogues involving Parliament , the Commission and the Council , under the leadership of the Spanish Presidency .
I would especially like to highlight the following points , which were key to our discussion .
First , the principles applying to organ donation .
Voluntary and payment-free donation is a fundamental principle which must not be challenged in any way or under any circumstances .
The altruistic nature of donation must be preserved so that we can prevent any form of commercialisation or financial motivation of donors .
At the same time , the greatest possible protection must be ensured for living donors .
Here , I would like to mention the lively discussion provoked by the topic of organ donation by living donors .
On the one hand , this method remains complementary to the acquisition of organs from dead donors but , on the other , it is an alternative with remarkable potential .
Of course , it is not our intention to prevent progress in this area , but we must ensure that the donation of organs by living donors who do not have a genetic or family connection with the recipient is always voluntary and payment free .
The principle of non-payment does not apply to cases of so-called compensation , where a living donor may receive a contribution in line with the expenditure related to donation .
However , Member States must precisely define the conditions under which such contributions can be made , so that we can avoid any kind of financial incentive or profit for potential donors .
Other important matters in the context of principles include allocation criteria - ensuring that organs are not taken from a person before the legal acknowledgement of death , and the fully-informed consent of the donor .
We defended these in the introductory parts of the provision known as the recitals .
The second principle includes traceability , protection of personal data and confidentiality .
Member States must ensure that all organs which are taken , allocated and transplanted on their territory can be traced from the donor to the recipient and back again .
This concept has replaced the original proposal for anonymity , which is inimical to the safety of the process .
Personal data must remain confidential .
The third principle is the framework for quality and safety .
We expressed clear agreement that Member States should set up a national framework which will set out all stages of the process organisationally , from donation to transplantation .
The Member States will subsequently inform the Commission about the activities and results achieved in the context of fulfilling this regulation within three years of it entering into effect .
Here , we are expecting great progress , especially in the case of countries where the system is not sufficiently well developed and which may significantly increase the number of transplants through the adoption of appropriate systemic measures .
I would especially like to underline the role of the transplant coordinator or coordination team , the importance of which is beyond question .
It has proved its worth in many countries where operations run smoothly .
I would like to end by mentioning criteria such as the organisation and performance of collections , the specification of roles for competent authorities , the involvement of third countries , the swapping of organs with third countries and the safety of the process .
We approved the so-called delegated acts under provisions based on the Treaty of Lisbon ( I will finish shortly ) .
Finally , I would like to emphasise how hugely important it is to increase public awareness , and I would therefore like to call on the Commission to encourage the Member States to promote organ donation via special programmes .
I would like to thank everyone who contributed to the successful course of the negotiations , and especially to applaud the efficient and constructive approach of the Spanish Presidency .
Madam President , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , Commissioner , it is 43 years since Dr Christiaan Barnard said the sentence ' Jesus , dit kan werk ' , which in Afrikaans means ' Jesus , this is going to work ' , as he watched in disbelief as the heart he had just transplanted was beating .
In that time , it has become common practice to transplant a useful organ from a person who no longer needs it to another who needs it in order to live .
It is , however , also true that this has not yet prevented 56 000 Europeans from being on the waiting list , and has not prevented the possibility that 12 of those people will have died by the end of this debate because they do not have the organ that they need .
Therein lies the challenge for Parliament which , in this plenary sitting , has to adopt both the directive , which was explained so well by Dr Mikolášik , and also the action plan .
There is no doubt that we need to offer clear and efficient channels of support for the European public so that no European dies due to a lack of organs as a result of shortcomings in the transplant system .
Europeans living longer , a reduction in traffic accidents and advances in science are , of course , to be celebrated , but they also mean that more organs need to be available as there are more people who need them .
The response from Europeans when they are asked whether they are willing to donate organs in order to save the life of a fellow citizen is very strong and very positive .
The reason that this is often not directly reflected in the number of transplants carried out in each country is undoubtedly because we need to improve essential aspects of our transplant system such as coordination , information , professional training and educating the public on this issue .
In some countries , we have examples that show that when coordination and training are at optimum level , the number of transplants per million people increases .
If you will allow me , I will quote the example of Spain , where a model has been established that must be used as a benchmark .
In addition to the guarantees of quality and safety in transplants and the complementary , free and voluntary nature of transplants from living donors established by the directive , there are the recommendations established by the action plan on the need for continuous training for professionals , and for society to be provided with information and education on this issue , without which it is difficult to work .
All of this forms the basis for optimising what we could call a harmonised European transplant system shared by all the Member States as an instrument for achieving the objective that we have set ourselves .
Our objective is simply to reach the point where no European dies because he lacks an organ that he needs in order to live due to systems that have not been perfected .
In 21st century Europe , we cannot allow a lack of coordination or of optimised systems to cause an organ to be lost so that another European cannot benefit from it .
This is what the adoption of this directive and action plan is achieving , which is the result of hard work .
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the willingness and cooperation shown by both the rapporteurs - in this case Mr Mikolášik - and the shadow rapporteurs .
I would also like to highlight the major impetus that the Spanish Presidency - represented by the Spanish Ministry of Health and Dr Matesanz , as Director of the Spanish National Transplant Organisation - have given to this directive and to the action plan , because we have been able to count on them at all times .
I would like to stress that those who have worked so hard deserve our thanks and ask you to repay them by unanimously adopting this report .
As a Member , I am thankful for the work that has been done , and as a European I am thankful that this step is being taken to save the lives of all the citizens of the Union who might need it at any time .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be appearing before Parliament 's plenary sitting to take part in the joint debate on organ donation and transplantation .
This is certainly an important debate , firstly because it has a direct impact on people 's lives and on the health of thousands of Europeans .
In this respect , I would like to remind you that , despite the constant increase in the number of donations and transplantations in recent years , it is estimated that currently there are 56 000 patients in the European Union on the waiting list for the right organ , and many of them die before receiving it .
Secondly , it is an important debate because it enables us to enhance the generosity and solidarity of our society .
Allow me to give you an example : currently in the European Union , there are 18 donors for every million inhabitants .
If we were able to increase this figure to equal the highest figures , such as 34 in Spain or more than 30 in Portugal , 20 000 more lives would be saved in Europe .
Likewise , promoting organ donation by living donors across the European Union to the levels in Scandinavian countries , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands would free a further 2 000 people from dialysis every year .
We should never forget , ladies and gentlemen , that without donors , there can be no transplants .
The debate this afternoon is going to enable us to give a definitive boost to the launch of a common Union strategy for achieving the best structure in the world for organ donation and transplantation .
Moreover , Article 168 of the recent Treaty of Lisbon gives us the opportunity to create this common , high quality and safe framework for the process of donation and transplantation .
We now have two important Commission initiatives on this , which were presented in 2008 , and on which the Council , along with Parliament , has worked very hard and very generously in recent months .
The first is the proposal for a directive regulating the quality and safety aspects of organs intended for transplantation .
As I said , this directive establishes a common legal framework which must enable us to limit certain risks in all the stages of the process of using organs for treatment , from donation to transplantation .
This involves guaranteeing the quality and safety of the organs but also protecting donors and recipients by appointing the competent authorities .
Secondly , we also have an action plan that helps to strengthen cooperation between the Member States , the objectives of which are threefold : first , to increase the availability of organs ; second , to improve efficiency and accessibility to the transplant system ; and third , to improve quality and safety .
Ladies and gentlemen , these two initiatives give us a common framework , which is a European framework that incorporates not only the best shared elements , but also the best of good organisational and welfare practice that the different Member States have been building up in this field .
In other words , it is a framework based on quality , security and innovation .
We are doing so by establishing a European model for donation and transplantation around values and principles that we all share : solidarity , fairness and cohesion , which are the symbols of the Union 's identity .
This will help to achieve self-sufficiency in organ donation and therefore to combat transplant tourism .
I am sure you will agree with me that the entry into force of this directive and Parliament 's support for the action plan will , in themselves , boost the exchange of organs between the Member States and promote donation .
Firstly , we are establishing an EU framework to give Europeans equal access to health in general and to transplant treatment in particular .
Secondly , this more efficient Union framework will directly benefit patients who , due to their characteristics , have a smaller chance of finding an organ that suits their needs .
As a result , there will be a reduction in the number of organs wasted due to the absence of a suitable recipient in a particular geographical area .
Ladies and gentlemen , before I conclude , the Spanish Presidency would like to thank the Czech and Swedish presidencies for the work that they did in beginning the negotiations in 2009 , creating the circumstances for significant progress thanks to the cooperation of the Member States and the Commission .
The Spanish Presidency would also like to thank Parliament for its hard work and particularly the rapporteurs , Mr Mikolášik and Mr Perello , for the work that they have done to promote the necessary agreement and consensus .

It is through the joint work of all the Union 's institutions that we have to reach an agreement that will enable us to launch a European service which , on the one hand , will give 500 million people the best guarantees of quality and safety and , on the other , will promote equal access to the treatment on which so many lives depend every year , and also the solidarity of our society .
Let us enhance what the European Union means today .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , 56 000 Europeans are waiting for an organ transplant in Europe ; for many of these people , a successful transplant is a matter of life and death .
This is why we are here today : to ensure high quality and safe organ transplantation across Europe .
This is what the Commission 's proposal for a directive and the action plan are about .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Dr Mikolášik , and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent work on the proposed directive on the quality and safety of organs .
I would also like to thank Mr Perello Rodriguez for his supportive own-initiative report on the action plan on organ donation and transplantation .
Let me recall that the key objectives of these two initiatives are to improve quality and safety for human organs for transplantation , to increase organ availability and to make transplantation systems more efficient and accessible .
The proposal for a directive sets the legal framework for quality and safety requirements , and the action plan focuses on increasing the availability of organs , and the efficiency of transportation systems .
The six-year action plan sets out 10 priority actions to reinforce cooperation between Member States through joint actions and the sharing of best practices .
I note the wishes of Parliament to include in the action plan activities which could not become legal obligations in the directive under Article 168 of the treaty , in particular , regarding criteria for allocating organs , recording the wishes of potential donors and issues related to medical practices .
The Commission is willing to support the Member States in addressing these issues of importance to Parliament .
With regard to the directive , I am very pleased that we are now close to a first-reading agreement following swift and constructive dialogue between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I believe that this is the first agreement to be reached at first reading since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I am convinced that the text with the amendments proposed includes Parliament 's key concerns as set out in Dr Mikolášik 's report .
Allow me to comment on a few specific issues .
I strongly support strengthening the principles of voluntary and unpaid donation , which are essential for ensuring the quality and safety of organs .
I also welcome clarification that the principle of non-payment shall not prevent living donors from receiving compensation , provided that this is strictly limited to covering the expenses and loss of income related to the donation .
I fully share Parliament 's concern as regards combating organ trafficking .
However , the scope of the proposal is limited to quality and safety as stipulated in the public health article of the treaty .
In this context , I welcome the text stating that the directive will indirectly contribute to combating organ trafficking , for example , through the authorisation of transplantation centres , the establishment of conditions of procurement and systems of traceability of organs .
I also understand Parliament 's concern about transparent , non-discriminatory and scientific criteria for organ allocation .
Although the matter falls outside the EU 's sphere of responsibility , I can accept the inclusion of this principle in a recital .
I also welcome the fact that the text proposed recognises that living donation coexists with deceased donation in most Member States .
Living donation increases the number of available organs and I welcome the text strengthening the efforts to protect living donors as a means to guarantee quality and safety of organs for transplantation .
Moving on , as regards the provisions dealing with consent systems and certification of death , these issues are governed by national law .
However , in the spirit of compromise , the Commission can accept the additional clarifications proposed .
I also note Parliament 's wish to include in the action plan activities which cannot be covered by the directive , in particular , regarding criteria for allocating organs , recording the wishes of potential donors and issues relating to medical practices .
The Commission is willing to support the Member States to address these issues .
Let me also raise another issue : adopting a law is the first step .
What really matters is that the law is implemented .
This is why the Commission insists that Member States report how they transpose directives into national law : the ' correlation tables ' .
Parliament has always supported this .
I regret that , for the very first time , Parliament does not support inclusion in the directive of the obligation for Member States to report on transposition .
Finally , several amendments align the proposals to the comitology provisions of the Lisbon Treaty .
I welcome the possibility granted to the Commission to adopt , in clearly defined cases , delegated acts under the urgency procedure in this regard .
I declare that the European Commission undertakes to keep the European Parliament and the Council fully informed on the possibility of a delegated act being adopted under the urgency procedure .
As soon as the Commission services foresee that a delegated act might be adopted under the urgency procedure , they will informally warn the secretariats of the European Parliament and the Council .
I also declare on behalf of the Commission that the provisions of this directive shall be without prejudice to any future position of the institutions as regards the implementation of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , or individual legislative acts containing such provisions .
To conclude , let me state that the Commission is prepared to support the compromise package .

Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Mikolášik for such excellent and very constructive cooperation on this important report .
There are many challenges in the area of the donation and transplantation of human organs .
We have a responsibility and must live up to the expectations of the great number of people on the waiting lists who live in uncertainty from one day to the next , as they await the new life that a new organ can bring .
The line between life and death does not come any clearer than this .
The tasks of the European Parliament also include conducting a determined battle against the despicable trade in human organs .
That is also something that we are doing .
By laying down clear ethical and safety rules , we can better ensure people 's self-evident right to their body , their integrity and their self-determination .
I am pleased that the views advanced by the Committee on Legal Affairs have been taken account of .
It is hard to paint a finer picture of our common purpose than that of safeguarding people 's lives in our various Member States .
This report portrays that picture very clearly .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , yes , it is true , this is a question of life and death .
That is precisely the reason why this debate is quite so emotionally charged .
There are completely different systems for organ transplantation in the different countries of Europe and for how people give their consent or non-consent , whether people 's own organs may be used or whether family members can consent to a transplant .
In future , under this report , those countries with very restrictive systems ought to take a very close look at the examples of other countries in order also to observe the positive effects .
Since , when so many people are waiting for transplants , that must be a signal to us , not only to create more opportunities and greater accessibility , but also to guarantee quality , safety and accessibility .
That would also provide an important tool to combat the trading of organs - a truly ignoble activity - and make possible the better regulation of living transplants , which really must take place without payment .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Spanish are the champions of Europe at football , most people know that , and it is nice , but it is not as important as the fact that the Spanish are also the champions of Europe when it comes to organ transplantation .
The key to the Spanish model , we should all understand this quite clearly , is the organisation in the hospitals .
In other European countries organs , I am sorry to say , are lost , not because the family members were unwilling to give consent , or because the victim does not have a donor card or had stated that they did not want to donate their organs , but , for most organs in Europe that are lost , it is quite simply due to the fact that the doctors do not have enough time to deal with this matter .
Spain has organised this much better with its transplant coordinators .
Wherever this system is adopted , more people can be saved and more people can live a healthy life without having to suffer dialysis and other difficult experiences .
That is why we should really press home this point in the Perello report to the Member States .
The directive deals , above all , with quality and safety , but also with the effects on people who are waiting for organs .
This is because , at present , an organ in one Member State may not be used because no matching recipient can be found fast enough .
If we have common quality and safety standards , we can also improve cross-border organ exchange in order to help people .
That means that this , too , is an important point .
Another very important element in the directive is that we must combat the trade in organs .
This is a subject that we must not simply ignore .
For that reason , a few other Members and I have also invited an expert who has investigated organ trading and the deliberate killing of people in China for organs to transplant to come and speak to us tomorrow .
I would ask all my fellow Members to also take an interest in this topic .
With the directive and the action plan , we have sent a clear signal .
Voluntary and unpaid donation is laid down in a legally binding way and I would like to thank everyone who has helped us to achieve these goals .
Madam President , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to agree with the preceding speakers and open with the words ' life is beautiful ' .
This is a sentence I hear again and again from a former colleague of mine , Vice-Governor Ernst Höger , who suffered a serious heart condition as a result of a tick bite but had the good fortune , in December 2004 , to benefit from a matching heart donation .
Ernst Höger is still alive and kicking , he walks among us , full of life and full of energy and he tells us that ' life is beautiful ' .
We have heard the figures today : 55-60 000 Europeans are waiting for the opportunity to be able to tell us in future , like Ernst Höger , that ' life is beautiful ' .
Twelve of them are lost to us every day because our systems have simply not progressed to the stage where we can get the organs to the people who need them from another location where they become available in time .
That is why it is our task to put that into practice .
I believe that this action plan is something really important , that we must ensure the security of organ donations and transplants , that we must also give the living donors , who we also need just as much - I say that thinking purely of the many dialysis patients - the certainty of the best medical standard , and that we must be absolutely vehement in our fight against any trade in organs - in other words , voluntary and unpaid donation is the absolutely essential thing .
We must guarantee the consent of donors .
We must develop Europe 's systems so that we can close the major gap between the one donation per million citizens in many Member States and the nearly 40 donations per million in Spain , our European champions .
We should aim , together with our national health care systems , to implement these action plans as soon as possible and to guarantee the highest standard so that the 55 000 who are currently waiting can say that ' life is beautiful ' .
Madam President , tomorrow we are expecting to have this directive on organ donation and transplantation , which is essential .
In Europe , some 60 000 patients awaiting a heart , lung , liver or kidney have been waiting for this law for years .
Twelve of them die every day because they have waited too long .
Like those who spoke earlier , I would like to stress the excellent result that we have achieved , which would not have been possible without cooperation between our rapporteurs , Mr Perello Rodriguez and Mr Mikolášik , the shadow rapporteurs , of whom I am one , and the Spanish Presidency .
I would like to take this opportunity to praise Dr Matesanz , who was our excellent guide during our visit to Madrid .

Let us not mistake the objective here .
The main priority is indeed to increase the number of organ donations in Europe and , therefore , of course , at the same time , to make European men and women more aware of donation , as the disparities speak for themselves , they are quite blatant : there are 34 deceased donors per million inhabitants in Spain , 27 in my country , Belgium , and just one single donor in Romania .
Therefore , we also have to educate people about this issue of donation ; enable potential donors to access information ; break down administrative barriers , which is essential ; establish throughout the 27 Member States a national authority in charge of controlling the quality and safety of organs , from extraction from the donor to transplantation ; and then also inspire - as has been said - better examples of organisation , such as exist , once again , in Spain , where progress is linked to a kind of early warning system , a constant warning throughout the chain , from the death of the donor to transplantation .
Our directive 's compromise , our famous Amendment 106 , which sums up all our efforts , sends out the right message to patients , the message of hope , by authorising - and this was sometimes at the end of very in-depth discussions - the use of a non-optimal organ in cases of extreme urgency , especially by encouraging living donations , where this is possible of course .
Here I am essentially talking about kidney or liver donations , donations which are necessary , which are fast expanding , which are encouraged by practitioners and specialists , and which , at the moment , still only account , on average , for 5 % of donations .
Do more and cooperate more : that is the rationale behind the action plan that has been guided by Mr Perello Rodriguez .
One example is my proposal for online enrolment in a register , in a national or a European donor register , with the idea of adding a reference to a person 's identity card or driving licence identifying him as a donor and therefore allowing matters to proceed more swiftly , where necessary .
I would just like to sum up for a second by saying that we have done an excellent job and that we preferred the ethics of hope to the ethics of prohibition .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to Mr Mikolášik and Mr Perello Rodriguez for their quite excellent work .
The hardest question in the talks related to living donors .
On the one hand , there are long patient waiting lists for a kidney transplant and , on the other , there is the need to protect living donors and prevent the illegal trade in organs and the extreme exploitation of poor people that is associated with it .
We did not achieve the sort of good result that we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would have liked .
The safest solution as far as the human rights of donors are concerned would be to insist that Member States impose a strict national system to prevent the illegal trade in organs , if donations from living persons are to be allowed outside the sphere of family members and close relations .
Although the legislative text negotiated is rather less robust in its objectives , I hope that all the EU countries will take strict measures to weed out the illegal organ trade .
According to the Council of Europe , 5-10 % of transplanted kidneys come from the illegal trade in organs , and that means thousands of victims a year .
Voluntary donations that are free of charge are also the safest option , even for the recipients of organs .
There can be no crimes associated with the trade in organs unless there are middlemen and the demand .
It has been appalling to read reports about how organs are bought in poor countries in regions such as Africa , Asia and even eastern Europe .
The most shocking have been the reports that describe people actually being killed .
For example , Australian organ transplant surgeons have condemned the practice in China of killing prisoners for their organs .
We in Europe must do all we can to avoid creating a market for this kind of criminality .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Jiménez , the lack of organs for transplantation is a major problem .
It has already been referred to several times and it is a major problem that is raising questions for us , both about public health and about associated matters , such as the strengthening of the grey market and of organ trafficking ; this last is in no way good for our health systems or our citizens .
We must therefore fight this crime , and one way of doing so that seems more than important and more than relevant to me is through legislation and proposals such as those that we are discussing here today .
That is why I want to focus on the most important issues raised by these two proposals .
The system that we have had up to now is one with enormous inequalities , because it lacks these two proposals .
Inequalities between Member States , inequalities between existing systems , inequalities in access to organs , inequalities between members of the public : I believe that we cannot put up with these inequalities .
It is therefore important to reduce them further and these proposals seek to do exactly that .
Nonetheless , I think that a European system that maintains some of the specificities of some countries , so that they are not obliged to have more restrictive systems , is the response to this problem .
The work that has been carried out by the rapporteurs , Mr Mikolášik and Mr Perello Rodriguez , is extremely important and contributes to solving the problem that we are facing .
If we are talking about proposals that are based on , and supported by , issues such as donation , volunteering , gratuitousness , confidentiality , safeguarding of data , traceability , accountability - and here I think that Parliament 's interest in helping until the patient recovers and not just in donating is important - and cooperation between Member States , we are on the right track .
However , in relation to donations between living people , I must just mention that I am pleased that this enlargement with rights has been included .
Obviously guaranteeing all rights and all conditions , but it is very important to have gone beyond the restricted circle of the conventional family because , if not , that would be another way for us to have other forms of inequality .
Therefore , promoting donation as the main source of transplantation , as well as protecting the data and security of patients , seems to me to be more than enough reason for us to all be together this morning and vote in favour of these two proposals that are extremely important for the European Union .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I hope that no one here ever needs to make use of this directive .
Twenty seven EU countries means 27 different sets of regulations plus people from countries outside the Union who have been illegally let in and who , because they are poor , are willing to donate a kidney for very little money .
Unfortunately , in recent years , we have seen a number of examples of botched work that has affected both patients and donors .
We therefore need coordination at EU level and , of course , we must ensure that both recipient and donor receive the best possible treatment .
In a couple of EU Member States , you are born a donor , whereas in most countries , you can only donate by making an active personal decision to do so .
Thus , we are in a situation where we have 27 different statutory regulations and insurance schemes , which does not exactly promote opportunities for cooperation .
It is an extremely complicated subject that we are talking about , because we must also ensure that the quality of organs is a top priority .
For health reasons alone , it is important for us to take up the issue of illegal donation , as we often do not know the donor and hence , his or her state of health .
It would be very unfortunate if we were to end up with kidneys , hearts and other organs coming from donors with contagious diseases , infections , leukaemia or worse .
We therefore need to screen the organs concerned before they are used .
We need to be sure that interventions are carried out safely , in other words , that the personnel responsible for the operation itself are well trained in their field and that the highest level of monitoring is carried out .


( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , I would first of all like to highlight the work done by the rapporteurs - Mr Mikolášik and Mr Perello - and all the work that they have done to reach the best possible compromise for a transplant policy in the European Union .
I would also like to highlight the contribution made by the Spanish Presidency and by Dr Matesanz , the Director of the Spanish National Transplant Organisation , because Spain is currently the world leader in terms of donations , with 34.4 for every million inhabitants .
This is solely due to the constant improvement in organisation and to the measures that have been taken to raise awareness among the population about organ donation .
We need to achieve this for the whole of the European Union : increase the number of donations , ensure that all transplants are done to the same quality standards , and also promote cooperation between all the Member States .
We also need to ensure that every donation is voluntary and not rewarded , with the exceptions listed by Commissioner Dalli , in order to combat organ trafficking , which is entirely linked to a scarcity of organs .
The action plan can contribute to this by helping to solve the shortage of organs and improving public access to transplants .
The solution that has been reached for living donors is very important , as we cannot forget that living donations are complementary and have been shown to be effective even if there is no genetic relationship between the donor and the recipient .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , to encourage , coordinate and supervise organ donation : those are our objectives , and that is why it is very important that we be gathered together here to enable the development of organ donation and transplantation in Europe .
Currently , 60 000 people - European men and women - are awaiting transplants in Europe and , according to our estimates , 12 people die every day for want of a transplant , because , while 81 % of Europeans say they are in favour of organ donor cards , only 12 % possess one .
It is , therefore , first of all , a question of harmonising practices by following the example of Spain , the star pupil of the 27 .
Organ donation rates vary considerably from one country to another .
It is therefore a question of harmonisation .
As you indicated earlier , Commissioner , the challenge is also to create a European network of organ donors , which would allow us to better satisfy the needs of European citizens .
It is also a question of improving cooperation among all the Member States .
We must ensure that we can establish national authorities that will be responsible for controlling organ quality and safety , from extraction from the donor to transplantation .
For example , in France , a person waiting for a liver transplant could thus receive a compatible organ from Germany or Italy , knowing that minimum common standards are applied throughout Europe .
It is also a matter of reaffirming , as has been indicated , the free and voluntary nature of donation as a more effective way of combating organ trafficking and transplantation tourism and thus , of stopping rich patients from going abroad - to China , for example - to receive a transplant .
Finally , I welcome the action plan aimed at developing transplants in Europe , on which we will also vote today , and I am delighted with the work of the rapporteurs and , in particular , with the report by Mr Perello Rodriguez .
I would first like to express my astonishment that a representative of my group has been interrupted in the introductory part of a speech on behalf of the group .
It was clearly just an error of some kind .
In my speech , I would like to praise the work of both rapporteurs , which I consider to be very valuable .
If there is one area in health care and public health that is genuinely European , then it is surely transplants .
This standard is a logical and very welcome step .
I would also like to applaud the rapporteurs for leaving out the ethical element , which will naturally fall within the scope of the Member States .
As has already been said here , there is a different approach and , in my own country , for example , we use the previously mentioned principle of assumed consent .
Some countries , on the other hand , require explicit consent .
In my opinion , this is a foundation stone which can improve and expand the scope of the existing Intertransplant , and if it has been said here that this is clearly the first standard that can be adopted at first reading following adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , then I am pleased about that .
However , I am even more pleased that this is a topic which is genuinely European .
I value that highly .
As far as the list of speakers is concerned , the cause is being looked into .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , increasing the availability of organs , improving their quality and access to them and making the public more aware of these issues : these are the demands of the European Parliamentary Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in order to reduce the waiting lists for transplants .
We therefore need to promote biotechnological research and organ circulation within the European Union , but we also need to introduce a European donor card , prevent transplant tourism , and strengthen our opposition to the illegal trafficking of organs , by imposing strict penalties upon those responsible .
In order to avoid illegal practices , living donations must be considered only as a last resort , when there are no other possible options , such as post-mortem donation .
The living donor must not receive remuneration of any kind , other than compensation to cover inconveniences following the operation , to be determined by national regulations .
Member States should also approve or maintain strict legal measures over transplants and living donors who are not blood relatives , in order to make the system transparent and to rule out the possibility of illicit organ sales or forced donations .
They must also ensure the reimbursement of social costs for living donors and protect them against discrimination , especially by insurance systems .
Parliament emphasises , however , that living donations must be considered complementary to donations after death .
Organ donation must remain strictly non-commercial , supporting the measures aimed at protecting donors and ensuring that organ donation occurs on a voluntary basis , for altruistic reasons .
Mr Ouzký , many thanks once again for bringing this to our attention .
We have looked into it .
It was a problem in the allocation caused by the computer system .
You will thus be listed in the minutes as the speaker for your group .
I hope that this resolves the issue .
Thank you for pointing it out .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , today we find ourselves discussing organ transplants , which is , without doubt , one of the most positive aspects of progress in the sphere of health , but which also opens up a series of problems concerning the rights of the donor and the patient , which must be dealt with on ethical , social , legal and economic levels .
It is a question of embarking on a virtuous path that addresses the serious imbalance between the need for and the quantity of organs available , without damaging the principle of free , voluntary donation .
The aim must be that of preventing all forms of commercialisation and illegal trafficking , ensuring the quality and safety of organs destined for transplants and introducing measures that combine confidentiality and traceability .
It goes without saying that , in the context of cross-border exchanges and significant differences between the transplant systems used in different Member States , these objectives can only be reached by promoting coordination and cooperation .
On this note , I think it is very important to establish a European database and to adopt common quality and safety standards .
We must , however , be careful not to introduce pointlessly rigid rules or create further bureaucratic burdens which compromise a process that is currently taking place correctly and efficiently .
This would not only fly in the face of our aims ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( BG ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing a topic which , by its very nature , directly affects a limited number of people , compared to other issues which are important to health care in the European Union .
On the other hand , it is a subject of heightened interest for two basic reasons .
The first reason is that transplants are perceived as a crowning achievement of modern medicine .
The second reason is that , in practice , all citizens are potential donors , which raises many questions of a different nature .
In addition , I want to emphasise that human life is priceless and that every conceivable effort must be made to save such a life .
Statistics show that the situation differs greatly among the various Member States .
In some countries , a good structure has been set up across the whole chain , whereas in other countries , health care systems are experiencing enormous difficulties and transplants are more likely to come under the heading of ' exotic medicine ' .
Patients requiring transplants in these countries are forced to resort to transplant tourism , clearly aware of the high risk involved and that they are infringing the law and ethics as their life is often saved at the cost of another life taken or destroyed through violence .
It is important to avoid the commercialisation of organ donation and to guarantee that the donation of organs from live donors is completely free , while obviously ensuring the provision of all the necessary care and compensation for loss of earnings .
It is particularly important to set up a transparent system for monitoring organs within the European Union , including after transplantation as well .
I believe that the proposed directive will improve access to organs for European citizens requiring a transplant , increase trust in the donor system and encourage the exchange of good practices which can be applied at supranational level .
Madam President , we all support directives that help save lives , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work with a report that seems simple in principle but is , in fact , complicated in detail .
In the area of post-mortem donations , there are issues of a delicate nature to be addressed , such as ethics , the deceased family 's positioning , the question of whether donor cards should be compulsory and , indeed , whether there should be a European donor card .
All these areas need to be treated with respect as there is no right or wrong approach .
The area of living donations has been the most challenging .
There is an important red line that cannot be crossed and this line ensures that living donations can be made freely and with no financial gain .
The directive has achieved the balance between ensuring a good quality of post mortem donations , while recognising the need for living donations .
Its strength is in its recognition that post-mortem donations alone cannot achieve the supply of organs needed and therefore has set up controls and guidelines to ensure that when living donations are made , they are done in a correct manner , protecting both donor and recipient and ensuring that it is done on a free and voluntary basis .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , myself , have a staff member who was reliant on an organ transplant .
I have seen how pleased he was that he was able to benefit from this .
However , I also saw how he waited and how his quality of life was restricted .
It is therefore important that we adopt this proposal now .
A thousand patients still die in Germany every year - and this is a fact - because no organ is available , and it is therefore important to rectify this shortcoming and to guarantee quality .
There is a high social relevance to this .
In Europe , we have the best conditions to be able to achieve a significant improvement , thanks to the existence of the internal market and the European institutions .
Let us make use of those conditions .
I am very pleased that we have stipulated in the directive that donations must be voluntary and unpaid , thus ensuring that human dignity is maintained .
As far as the fall in donors is concerned , I would like to ask the Commission - it has already proven this several times - to generate a culture of discussion and information in Europe so that acceptance amongst citizens is reinforced .
I really do not believe that we need to harmonise the differing systems .
What we need to do is coordinate them and I think that the appointment of a transplant coordinator in hospitals is an important step .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Madam President , Mrs Jiménez , Commissioner , the ability to replace deteriorated human organs with those of another person , preventing it from being rejected , is one of the great successes of contemporary medicine .
European benchmarking shows differences .
It shows that average countries like Portugal do very well in such comparisons and that larger countries such as Spain are today recognised as leaders in terms of organisation and best practices .
There are some principles and practices to be safeguarded .
First , the strengthening of any scientific knowledge and information that leads increasing numbers of donors to donate whilst alive and making post mortem donation general .
Second , the banning of commercial donations not only in the Member States but outside them too , banning transplant tourism and fighting organ trafficking .
Third , the proactive promotion of donation in hospitals as a way of overcoming shortages .
Lastly , Madam President , guaranteeing equal access to transplants for all those who need and qualify for one under harmonised clinical criteria , obeying the principle of universal access to health : a paradigm of social Europe of which we are proud .
Congratulations to the rapporteurs on their work .
Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank both rapporteurs , who have worked very hard on these reports and have produced between them an excellent body of work and , within , a real plan for organ donation and transplantation throughout Europe .
We are all well aware of the figures - thousands of people across Europe require organ transplants every year .
In light of this , I am glad to see that we are going to make concerted efforts to boost the numbers of organ-donor registers by encouraging different forms of registration schemes and strengthening our cross-border cooperation so that the best matches between donors and recipients can be made .
For me , the key issue is raising awareness and I believe these reports will help achieve this .
Can I also say that I am glad to see that we have highlighted in these reports the key principles that organ donation should always be altruistic , voluntary and unpaid .
This is important if we are to encourage people to donate and ensure the quality and safety of the system as a whole .
Many lives have been saved .
Many more can be .
I commend this report .
( EL ) Madam President , the directive we are debating today will concern more and more people over coming years , as medical technology and genetics progress .
We literally cannot forecast today the number of transplants that will , at some point , be covered by this directive , which may become much more important than we imagine .
That is why it is very good that the text has solid foundations based on altruism and voluntary donation and requires the Member States to adopt very strict procedures for the whole endeavour .
However , one drawback of the compromise on which we will be called to vote is that it waters down controls in comparison with the text we initially voted on , saying that there will either be a control or an ' audit ' , whereas the initial text made provision both for control and evaluation of organisations which will carry out transplants and provide organs .
This is a weakness and I hope and believe that it is not serious .
However , I consider that it is important to point it out , because transparency is the key to the issue of transplants .
( PL ) Madam President , transplantation and transplantology need our strong support and , as a matter of priority , they need better organisation and coordination as part of health care services .
However , it is also extremely important to increase the trust of society in this branch of medicine , especially because every so often , news comes to the attention of public opinion in Europe about a variety of irregularities , including the illegal trafficking of organs from unknown sources .
As Public Prosecutor General in Poland , I supervised an investigation in which a series of irregularities in obtaining organs was found , including illegal payments made to doctors , which motivated them to look for information about donors with suspected brain death .
For supplying information about a single donor , doctors in Poland could earn more than one month 's salary .
In the matter of transplantation , society must be sure that everything is being done in accordance with the law , transparently and without any hidden interests , and that this noble medical procedure is not being used as a cover for considerations other than that of saving human life .
Trust is absolutely essential .
( FR ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , today we are having a debate that clearly shows that the evidence is alarming and that , in order to rise to this challenge , we must strengthen the cross-border exchange of organs so as to make the link between donors and receivers .
It also shows that , given the length of waiting lists , the absence of such action will mean that there is very little chance of patients receiving the organs they need .
Common binding standards on the quality and safety of donations in the 27 Member States absolutely must be adopted in order to improve cross-border exchanges and to increase donation rates .
That is why a European framework on the issue is required .
Of course , we must be extremely vigilant as regards the issue of illegal organ trafficking .
All measures must be implemented to combat mafia-style networks and transplantation tourism .
However , care must be taken not to hinder donations from living donors , which must be a matter of free and informed choice .
We must guarantee the principle of free transplants and prevent any pressure from being put on potential donors .
We must therefore encourage those patients who want to freely give their organs to save lives , because the risks of rejection during these transplants are significantly lower than in cases where the organs come from deceased donors .
I would also like to warn those who , for ethical reasons , would like to limit organ donations from living donors in Europe , by arguing that there are risks of trafficking .
The donation of organs from living donors must , above all , be very strictly regulated , and that is the only solution .

( MT ) Madam President , as the Commissioner mentioned , there are around 56 000 persons awaiting organ transplant surgery within the European Union .
Many of these cases , as has already been said , can mean the difference between life and death and therefore , I believe that these are important developments that merit further discussion .
The measures will not directly add to the number of organs to be transplanted , yet the implementation of common practices within the Member States should increase the level of trust and reliability between these countries which , in turn , will lead to an increase in organ donations both within and amongst countries .
Some of the problems mentioned in the report , such as organ trafficking , cannot be directly addressed .
However , I appreciate the rapporteur 's efforts in increasing awareness on this issue and I hope that these are annexed to the final document in a non-binding manner .
To conclude , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Dalli and the rapporteurs for the good work carried out on this sensitive topic .
( RO ) Transplants and organ donation save and prolong the lives of thousands of European citizens every year .
It is unfortunate that thousands of other patients die while waiting for a transplant , even though there are compatible donors available in the European Union .
This is a difficult and controversial issue which raises important questions .
Parliament confirms through this report a common viewpoint , which is that any commercial element in this process which may lead to the sale and purchase of organs is illegal .
It is vital for us to approve and implement an effective system as quickly as possible , not only because we will save patients ' lives , but also because such a system will reduce the request for organs which , otherwise , will be obtained illegally for profit and even against the donors ' will .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate everyone on this initiative , because it means improving the life expectancy of many people and making solidarity and fraternity into something more than just words .
The Basque Country - Euskadi - has the world record for organ donation .
In 2009 , we had a rate of 38.5 donations for every million inhabitants .
This means that every year , we carry out 60 kidney transplants and 30 liver transplants for every million inhabitants .
In the United States , the figures are 54.7 and 21.4 ; in Europe , they are 35.1 and 13.4 ; and in Spain they are 48.8 and 24.6 .

This success is due to the protocol used in hospitals in order to secure donations and a process of organisation and awareness raising , which are the two ideas that we need to support .
It is also due to the work begun in 1986 with the creation of the regional transplant coordination system : another example of how the regions can make their contribution to Europe .
( NL ) Approximately two years ago , the European Parliament adopted the Adamou report by an overwhelming majority .
The report discussed the policies at EU level in the field of organ donation and transplantation for the first time .
It was my very great pleasure to cooperate on this as one of the shadow rapporteurs .
Today , I note to my great satisfaction that the rapporteur , Mr Mikolášik , and his shadow rapporteurs , have done a splendid job and , even in this short period of time , have succeeded in achieving an agreement with the Council at first reading .
For the most part , the key points of the report from two years ago have been incorporated and built upon .
I hope , therefore , that this directive and action plan will result in an increase in the number of organ donors in the European Union , so that patients no longer need to end up on waiting lists .
Madam President , I would like to have some guidance from the rapporteur on two issues .
One is the issue of the ' presumption of consent ' system and the ' presumption of the lack of consent ' system .
As I understand it , these two systems still coexist in Member States .
In one system , it is presumed that the deceased donor would have consented to the transplantation .
It seems to be quite obvious that this is a much more effective system from the point of view of the number of transplantations made available .
Should it not be recommended to every Member State to use the presumption of consent system ?
The other thing is anonymity versus traceability .
There seems to be a kind of controversy between the two .
What are the issues here ?
What is anonymity and traceability ?

( SV ) Madam President , around 95 % of us say that we would want an organ transplant if it would extend our life .
No more than roughly half of us are prepared to donate organs , however .
We therefore need to influence public opinion in this area .
Can coordination be improved ?
Absolutely .
A heart that is removed from the body of a person who has died is viable for only four hours .
That is how it was .
Today , however , it is viable for up to 24 hours if we decide to utilise the modern medical technology that has been developed for transplantation .
We also now have medical knowledge that enables us to ' cleanse ' or recondition lungs , to put it simply - so that they can be used for transplantation in ways that were inconceivable in the past .
It is a known fact that the lungs live on for two hours after death has occurred .
Let us push for factual knowledge to be exploited in practice .
I believe it is a basic prerequisite if this coordination is to become a reality and not just something that we talk about .
( PL ) Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak .
I would like to come back to what is , in my opinion , a fundamental matter .
In different Member States of the European Union , very different methods are used for identifying potential donors .
In some countries , written consent is required from a potential donor , while in other countries , it is assumed that if there is no objection , an organ can be taken from that donor .
These measures do , of course , have a fundamental influence on the number of donors .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the representative of the European Commission if the Commission should not support more actively the second solution , where written consent is not required ?
A situation in which organs can be taken from those who did not express their objection to this would be enough to create a radical increase in the number of donors .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , more than 55 000 patients are on waiting lists for an organ transplant .
Nearly 10 people a day die whilst waiting .
Organ transplantation - yes , of course , but truly only voluntarily , with a declaration of consent and without payment , in order to be able to counter the illegal trade in organs and , of course , based on the highest possible quality and safety for those involved .
( PL ) I am pleased that the question of organ donation and transplantation is a priority for the Spanish Presidency , because it can be said that this is a matter of life and death .
Despite the fact that every year , the number of transplants rises , the number of those waiting for a transplant is not falling .
In spite of growing social awareness , a huge disproportion is noticeable between Member States in terms of donation and transplantology .
Therefore , besides establishing a European model for donation and transplantation which will use the best practices and solutions , it is very important to improve social awareness and acceptance .
This is why I am pleased that the model for the proposed measures is Spain , which has achieved the best effects , both in terms of numbers of donors and numbers of transplants performed , but also in gaining huge social support for the idea of organ transplantation and donation .
( ES ) Madam President , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , allow me to start by telling you that I come from Cantabria , a small region of Spain with a rate of 61 donations per million inhabitants , the highest in Spain and in Europe .

I would like to congratulate Mr Perello and Mr Mikolášik on this report and for supporting this proposal for a directive that has come as a response to the scarcity of organs in the European Union .
The success of the Spanish case is a model that can be useful to the rest of the European Union with elements such as the competent national authorities , traceability of organs and living donors .
I would also like to congratulate the Spanish Presidency on its firm support for this issue as one of its priorities .
Lades and gentlemen , as you are aware , nearly 56 000 patients are currently on the waiting lists .
Donation rates and the availability of organs vary considerably between European countries .
The lack of organs is a key factor affecting transplant programmes .
The good practice that can be achieved produces much greater benefits in some Member States than in others .
For this reason - I will now conclude - the adoption of this report is essential for improving this situation in all the Member States
( IT ) Madam President , Mrs Jiménez García-Herrera , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these days , people are often denied the right to have a transplant .
The denial of this right is perhaps the most problematic condition as far as social welfare is concerned , not least on account of its psychological consequences , and yet there remains a chronic discrepancy between the number of people on the waiting list and the number of patients who receive a transplant .
Moreover , the donation procedure is very sensitive with regard to health and legal issues , and is often weakened by procedures that are generally cumbersome and slow , when instead we should be reinforcing the welfare response .
The European Union must therefore commit to ensuring real solidarity and voluntary action that does not make the procedures any less rigorous , by improving the professional nature and the culture of donation itself .
Adopting common quality standards is therefore a definite step forwards , which must be viewed favourably as part of a goal to which the World Health Organisation can contribute further .
( DE ) Madam President , I have followed this debate very closely .
Words draw pictures in people 's minds .
Today , we have repeatedly heard about the illegal trade in organs - about an illegal activity and about trade .
I believe that this directive quite clearly states that the trade in organs is itself an illegal activity .
We must not send out the signal that trade in organs could be legal in some circumstances .
I would ask Members to emphasise , including when dealing with the media , that we want organ donation , in other words , an activity where one party has a will to help someone to live longer but there is no payback except for gratitude .
Thus , there cannot be any illegal trade in organs because no trade in organs is allowed .
There is only organ donation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all of the political groups and everyone who has spoken for the support and the constructive tone of their speeches .
I would also like to express my satisfaction , because with this agreement that we are achieving here today , in this debate , we are concluding a process .
In addition to the difficulty of legislating on technical aspects that could vary as science progresses , we have had to tackle the practical difficulties of applying the Treaty of Lisbon in this six month term .
The Spanish Presidency would therefore very sincerely like to thank all the European institutions - Parliament , the Commission and the Council - and all the Member States for their cooperation in completing this exercise .
It has been an exercise involving , firstly , flexibility and adaptation and , secondly , responsibility and a desire for consensus , which has been expressed this afternoon .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have succeeded in making the Union more effective and relevant to the public , and we should be pleased with this .
However , as you are aware , the work does not end with the adoption of this directive .
On the contrary : we need to continue to work towards ensuring that the spirit of protecting public health that we have sought and achieved is maintained when it is transposed .
We need to continue to work to generate more solidarity and maintain the social value desired by everyone who has been involved in creating and launching this directive .
We also have a great deal of work left to do in the context of the action plan , which offers us a unique opportunity for continuous learning , adaptation and improvement .
Thank you once again to all the parliamentary groups for their support , their tone and their constructive attitude .
Together , we are going to achieve this .
We have already achieved it .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , following the very good collaboration between the Commission , Parliament and Council , I am convinced that we have now reached agreement on all the key issues .
I would like to again congratulate and thank Dr Mikolášik and Mr Perello Rodriguez for their contribution .
I believe that by ensuring high quality and safety standards for human organs , the proposed directive will be of great benefit to European patients .
The directive will provide a comparable safety standard across the Union and increased trust in transplantation systems .
I am convinced that the proposed directive strikes the right balance between citizens ' data protection and organ traceability , and indirectly contributes to the fight against organ trafficking .
This is not the solution to all the problems in the area of organ transplantation ; this directive provides the framework , clarifies the boundaries of responsibilities and sets some standards .
However , more needs to be done in the area of organising our hospitals , collecting and disseminating information , proper characterisation of organs and action against illegal trafficking .
In the latter context , traceability will go some way to redress this , but this depends on the enforcement exercised in Member States .
Member States are being given a great deal of flexibility , and we hope that all Member States will give this issue the importance it deserves .
The competent authorities that they need to set up should be adequately equipped and resourced to ensure proper data collection and control , traceability , supervised standards , characterisation of organs and in transplantation and to conduct effective vigilance to report adverse events and reactions which will help all of us to minimise risk in the future .
President , Minister-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members , from the contributions of the honourable Members during this debate , it is evident that the compromise text which is on the table today responds to everybody 's concerns .
Thank you for your input , your cooperation and your support .
Analytical Table of the Amendments on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation
- C6-0480 / 2008 -
Rapporteur : Mr Miroslav Mikolášik ( PPE )
Amendments :
Directly acceptable : amendment 106 ( Text as a whole , Block No 1 , compromise amendment ) .
The Commission is in favour of the adoption of the compromise text by the colegislators
I would like to thank you for your contributions to this discussion and to express the firm belief , which I think we all shared during the negotiations , that this directive goes beyond political controversy , because it is about people , about patients and about saving lives .
In my opinion , more organs and more successfully cured patients will mean that more people return to a full life , to their families and to new jobs or back to existing jobs , making a fundamental change to their quality of life .
Openness , accessibility , safety , quality , availability , altruism , more living donors , payment-free and voluntary donation - these are the principles we have all incorporated into this directive .
I believe that this directive will also provide more organs , thanks to better cooperation and cross-border swaps between individual countries , and that it will link EU Member States together in a new and fundamental way .
Through this directive , I believe we will all contribute something that we resolved upon at the outset : more consensus , more love , more cooperation and especially more happy patients .
Madam President , the fact that , during the difficult crisis period that Europe and the world are going through at the moment , Parliament has been able to adopt the first directive since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon at first reading says a great deal about this House 's sensitivity .
It also increases confidence in democratic institutions and shows that the Members of this House want to move forward and make progress at the same pace as science and with the same level of willingness and strength of solidarity as European society .
I do not know if we have done everything too well or if we could have done something more , but I do want to clear up any doubts that may have arisen .
What I am sure about is that if we fulfil everything that we are going to adopt in this House , we will be giving people longer lives and preventing any organ trafficking crimes from being committed in the Union .
These crimes may be committed anywhere else in the world , but that is absolutely not the case in the European Union .
Therefore , if , as a result of any speech , any of these doubts has remained in anyone 's mind , as fellow Members have said , I want to clear them up .
That was not our task .
We have tried to respect everyone 's conscience , the measures of ethics and morality , without losing sight of the fundamental objective : that not a single European should be left without the transplant they need to live , because we can achieve more transplants , and therefore less organ trafficking .
Therefore - and I will conclude now - I do not know if we have succeeded in saving everyone 's conscience with the work we have done , but I am totally convinced that we are going to save many lives .
That was our task and that is what we have done .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 May 2010 .
( The sitting was suspended at 16.25 and resumed at 16.30 )

Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I welcome the new legislation to regulate quality and safety standards of organ donation in the EU . In particular , the introduction of practical measures to help ensure that live saving organs are not wasted , such as the creation of a pan European organ database .
The new law will save many lives and optimise the organs donated by allowing Member States to share organs .
Before this legislation , if there was no suitable recipient in a particular Member State , the organ went unused .
Now , the organ can be given to one of the 56 000 EU citizens awaiting transplants .
This regulation constitutes an important framework which needs to be developed upon by the respective Member States .
With reference to Ireland , we need an independent body to monitor the transplantation and harvesting of donated organs .
At present , Ireland and Malta are the only two countries in EU without a national transplant authority to maximise organ usage .
In order to eliminate transplant patient waiting lists , one of the primary aims of the resolution , we need to raise the profile of organ donation among EU citizens - in Ireland , this could be done by the introduction of a government supported awareness programme .
Institutional aspects of accession by the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms - Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Kampala , Uganda ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Ramón Jáuregui Atondo , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on institutional aspects of accession by the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , and
the Council and Commission statements on the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Kampala , Uganda .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , I think this is an important day .
I know that there are many important days in this House , but I sincerely believe that since the Treaty of Lisbon was adopted on 1 December 2009 , the mandate for the European Union to sign up to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been one of the big headlines of the process of European integration .
I therefore think that we are witnessing the culmination of a long-held aspiration that is part of the historical process of European integration , because human dignity , human rights , democracy and the rule of law are part of the DNA of what has largely been the historical process of European integration .
The report that we will adopt tomorrow is realising this mandate , which the European Union has had since the Treaty of Lisbon required accession to the convention .
I would like to summarise the content of this report based on three main ideas .
First of all , I would like to point out that it is not only the Member States that protect human rights .
Now it is the European Union that protects human rights , with its new legal personality under the Treaty of Lisbon ; it is Union law and it is the development of an EU state that Member States can achieve .
They can do so if they submit to the principles of the European Convention and to a court that is external to the Union and to the Member States and guarantees the fulfilment of those principles at all times and in all places .
The second idea is providing the European public with a new law and a new court : the right of Europeans to apply to this new court in order to guarantee fulfilment of the rights established by the convention in relation to the European Union or the Member States when they are implementing Union law .
Even the European Union 's activities involving foreign policy , policing , security outside our borders and international cooperation are subject to the principles of the European Convention on Human Rights .
What does this mean ?
In my opinion , ladies and gentlemen , it means a major step forward , historically speaking , in the process of integration and in building the most essential notion of the European idea of human dignity which , as we said before , responds to the demands of the European public .
It also means strengthening the European system for protecting fundamental rights because , alongside the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Treaty of Lisbon , it creates a setting , a legal protection framework that is almost perfect and is therefore the most advanced in the world .
It also strengthens the Union 's credibility in the eyes of third countries , as the European Union has always demanded the fulfilment of human rights in its bilateral relations .
This report sets out institutional and legal aspects that I am not going to describe now .
What I do want to do is point out that here and now , a process is beginning , since , along with this report that has been drafted jointly with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Commission now has a position , a negotiating framework that will enable it to come back to Parliament to adopt this agreement and will enable the Member States to ratify accession to the European Convention .
I would like to thank Mrs Reding for the swiftness with which the Commission adopted the mandate for negotiations , and the European Council , which will do so shortly .
I would also like to thank Mrs Gál and Mr Preda for their cooperation in the two other committees .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that this is headline news .

Madam President , as Mr Jáuregui was saying , the debate that we are going to have now , along with the one that we have just had , is extraordinarily important .
I think humanity is taking a historical step forward when defending human rights becomes not just the responsibility of states , which are the traditional political actors and the traditional political players of the last few centuries , but something which , in terms of defending humanity , goes beyond the borders of states and establishes a series of mechanisms and institutional guarantees in order to better defend their universal values .
The European Convention on Human Rights , which is probably one of the greatest treasures that Europe possesses , and the International Criminal Court , which goes beyond Europe , are examples of this step forward that is being taken in our times towards the globalisation and defence of human rights .
With regard to the European Convention on Human Rights , there is little to add to the speech made by Mr Jáuregui and to his excellent report , which was drafted along with the rapporteurs for the opinion , Mr Preda and Mrs Gál , on the issue of the European Union signing the European Convention on Human Rights .

I would like to reiterate many of the things that Mr Jáuregui said , and point out that signing the convention constitutes an element of European integration , which therefore strengthens the European Union .
Moreover , it is going to join forces with the major new element brought in by the Treaty of Lisbon , which is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , and they are going to work together .
This is one of the tasks - not only political tasks , but also technical tasks - of the European Court of Human Rights and the Court of Justice of the European Union , without impinging even slightly on their jurisdiction .
Moreover , this initiative , which is provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon , also increases the European Union 's credibility in defending human rights , as we are asking not European Union countries but European countries to contribute to strengthening the European Convention on Human Rights .
In other words , we are asking them to guarantee that the rights laid down in the convention are respected and protected and , in this way , the European Union itself , not just its Member States , is going to be subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights .
This increases our credibility , as Mr Jáuregui 's report very rightly states .
With regard to the International Criminal Court , I think that this is a time that we are also going to describe as ' historic ' and of major political significance , because in a few days , the review conference of the Rome Statute is going to meet .
This is the only compulsory conference that must meet to review the Rome Statute if necessary and evaluate the extremely important step forward that is the International Criminal Court .
This is therefore an extremely significant event , which today is being examined in the Political and Security Committee and tomorrow is going to be discussed in the Permanent Representatives Committee ( Coreper ) .
We hope that next week , the Council resolution will be adopted so that we can join in the very positive evaluation of the International Criminal Court given by other states , such as the Latin American states that are part of the Union of South American Nations ( Unasur ) .
We are talking about an International Criminal Court that represents a commitment to defend human rights , and therefore to prosecute crimes against humanity at universal level .
This is a commitment that has been made by the European Union and by its Member States .
I would like to remind you that there was a common position in 2003 , there was an action plan in 2004 , and there was also an agreement by the European Union on cooperation with the Court in 2006 .
All the Member States of the European Union are now parties to the Rome Statute , and therefore submit to the International Criminal Court .
I think this is extremely important in order to highlight the role that the International Criminal Court plays in the world and the European Union 's commitment to strengthening it .
The International Criminal Court is currently essentially working on the continent of Africa , but the Kampala conference is telling the African people that we are not against Africa : quite the contrary , we are with Africa .
This is also why this review conference is very important .
It is open to all states , along with civil society and international and regional organisations , and is going to enable us to evaluate the state of international justice at a time when the International Criminal Court is becoming established as the only permanent international criminal court .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I agree with all the speakers and with all those Members who have been working on the subject .
The accession of the EU to the European Convention on Human Rights is a step of constitutional importance .
It will complete the system of protection of fundamental rights within the Union , and you know perfectly well that the Lisbon Treaty does not make this an option but a destination .
I therefore welcome the fact that Parliament takes such a great interest in this file - and has from the very beginning , by the way - which is evidenced by the resolution which Parliament has put on the table .
In particular , I would like to thank the rapporteurs of the Committee on Constitutional Rights and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for their excellent cooperation on the file .
I would like to thank them for the hearing which was organised and which was of real help and great use in bringing this file forward .
The draft report presented by Mr Jáuregui Atondo is , to a very large extent , in line with the position of the Commission .
Let me just mention three points which , in my view , are very important .
Firstly , the Commission shares the position that accession by the EU to the additional protocols of the European Convention - which , by the way , have not been ratified by all Member States - is also very desirable .
Indeed , many of these protocols are of potential relevance as regards the exercise of the Union 's powers , and certain guarantees enshrined in these protocols are also reflected in the Charter .
The negotiation directives should therefore mandate the Commission to negotiate a provision ensuring that the Union may accede to any of the additional protocols .
The decision then to which protocols we will de facto accede , on top of the convention itself , will have to be taken unanimously by the Council after obtaining the consent of Parliament .
In the Commission 's view , such decisions should preferably encompass all additional protocols and should be taken together with the decision concluding the accession agreement itself .
Secondly , it is important to deal with the specific situation of the Union as a distinct legal entity vested with autonomous powers that is going to become a contracting Party to a mechanism initially designed for States only .
Therefore , a number of limited and technical procedural adaptations to the convention are necessary with regard to the specific nature of Union law .
Among those is the so-called ' co-respondent mechanism ' to take account of the decentralised implementation of Union law by Member States .
By that mechanism , the Union will receive the right to join the proceedings as a co-respondent in cases brought against Member States when Union law is at stake .
I am glad to see that Parliament 's report also argues in favour of this .
Thirdly , I fully subscribe to the report which recommends participation by representatives of the Union in the bodies of the convention on an equal footing with those of the contracting parties .
Such participation is indeed a key element in the smooth integration and insertion of the Union into the system of the convention .
You have understood this now to mean , in particular , the presence in the Strasbourg Court of a judge elected from each contracting party .
The Commission is therefore strongly in favour of having a permanent full-time judge elected for the Union , who enjoys the same status and has the same duties as his peers .
An ad hoc judge , who would intervene only in cases brought against the Union or involving Union law , would , in our opinion , not be sufficient .
As for the method of electing a Union judge , the normal procedure provided for in the convention should apply .
This means that the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council will elect a judge from a proposal for three candidates presented by the European Union , and I agree with the draft report that an appropriate number of Members of Parliament should be allowed to participate in sessions of the Assembly when it elects the judges of the European Court .
The procedure for drawing up the list of the three candidates is not a matter for the accession agreement : it is a matter for us .
We have to do this by internal legal rules , and the idea that Parliament should be involved in a way similar to that provided for by Article 255 regarding the selection of candidates for the Court of Justice is a very interesting one which deserves close examination .
Honourable Members , the Spanish Presidency attaches very high priority to this dossier , as you know , and the Spanish Presidency would like to reach an agreement before the end of June .
If the Council could reach an agreement by then - which I hope it will - this will allow us to then start accession negotiations after summer .
As I already said two weeks ago in Brussels , I will ensure that the Commission - as the Union 's negotiator - keeps Parliament fully informed throughout the negotiation process .
This all relates to European affairs , but we also have the question of international human rights on the agenda .
As you know , 138 states took a step forward in 1998 when they adopted the Rome Statute creating , for the first time in history , a permanent international court to ensure that perpetrators of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes are brought to account .
The Court started to operate in 2003 and now , seven years later , we have the review conference in Kampala , which invites us to conduct an early analysis of the Court 's activities , of the challenges that lie ahead and of the effectiveness of EU support .
As regards the activities of the Court , we know that the Court is fully operational , but is still in its infancy .
No judicial cycle has been completed , but the ICC is considering the situation in five countries : one trial has started , another trial is going to start on 5 July and one further case is in the pre-trial stage - all for DAR and DRC .
Let us not forget that this is only a court of last resort , so the primary responsibility lies with the states themselves .
In most cases , the Court acts as a catalyst for states to investigate and prosecute cases before national courts .
At the same time , in its short life , the Court has been a powerful deterrent for future atrocities because perpetrators now know that justice will prevail and , in this sense , the Court faces challenges .
The ratification by Bangladesh brought the number of State Parties to the Rome Statute to 111 .
However , it is very clear that we have to go for universal acceptance of the Statute and of the Court .
The Court needs the participation and the cooperation of all State Parties and non-Parties , as well as international and regional organisations .
The Court cannot perform its functions without the states arresting those for whom an arrest warrant has been issued by the ICC ; nor if the witnesses cannot be protected ; nor if there are no prisons for those who have been condemned , and that is why the EU supported the Court over the last ten years to help solve these problems .
We , as the EU , have , from the outset , been staunch supporters of the establishment of the Court as an essential mechanism in the new international order designed to end impunity which , as you know , has seen millions of people in recent history subjected to crimes but only a handful of those responsible brought to justice .
The EU considers that an effective ICC is an indispensable instrument for the international community to combat this impunity and to promote a rule-based international order .
That is why we have been supporting the Court using the various instruments at our disposal that the Minister has already mentioned .
The common position was translated into an action plan .
We were the first organisation to enter into a cooperation and assistance agreement with the Court in 2006 , and we give the ICC full political and diplomatic support with démarches , political dialogues and statements .
The inclusion of ICC clauses in international agreements is now standard practice for the European Union .
Since 2000 , the European Initiative - later entitled the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights - has contributed EUR 29 million to support the Court directly or indirectly , notably through global civil society campaigns .
The EU has also adopted several decisions in the justice , freedom and security area with a view to strengthening cooperation among Member States in the investigation and prosecution of Rome Statute crimes at national level , so we do our best in order to advance the system .
The system needs further perfection , but it needs strong engagement by all nations around the globe for this to happen .
I am going to refer to Mr Jáuregui Atondo 's report .
I wish to begin by congratulating him for drafting this excellent report which , in my view , provides a comprehensive description of the benefits and challenges arising from the European Union 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
From the perspective of the opinion which I drafted for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I would like to emphasise the main benefit of the EU 's accession to the ECHR .
This step may seem nowadays , in the post-Lisbon period , to be completely obvious , but it has been hoped for on a regular basis during the last 30 years .
I consider that accession to the ECHR will boost the EU 's credibility in any human rights dialogue with third countries , confirming to all once again that the European Union is , above all , a community based on law .
The EU 's institutions , as well as those of the Member States of the Council of Europe , will therefore be subject to external , independent control by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , based on the statement : ' a single standard in human rights , a single Court ' .
From the perspective of having a single standard in human rights , I must emphasise that accession to the ECHR offers , at the same time , an opportunity for the EU to accede to other Council of Europe treaties as well .
I mean , of course , the supplementary protocols , the revised European Social Charter which , as you are aware , complements and reinforces this protection at pan-European level .
I also believe that the European authorities ' increased involvement in the bodies of the Council of Europe specialising in the protection of human rights is a logical consequence of this single standard of protection .
Another point which I also emphasised in the opinion that I drafted for the Committee on Foreign Affairs is that a balance also needs to be found between , on the one hand , preserving the specific features of the European judicial system and , on the other , preserving the system of jurisdiction in Strasbourg , which has shown its effectiveness in protecting human rights at a pan-European level .
Ladies and gentlemen , first of all , allow me to thank the person responsible for the report of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Jáuregui Atondo , for his cooperation .
I believe that the close cooperation between the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , along with the Subcommittee on Human Rights that supplemented our work , has successfully addressed the series of questions relating to our accession to the convention , and has correctly indicated the emerging questions that remain to be clarified .
I personally , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , resolved first of all to focus - and this was ultimately confirmed by the Committee - on ensuring that our accession does indeed represent added value for citizens of the European Union and that the latter are aware of these values and opportunities , although we should also avoid raising exaggerated expectations .
There are countless crucial questions that must be clarified in the coming period in the course of the negotiations ; these include the relationship between the Strasbourg and the Luxembourg courts , since there will be no change in the system of jurisdiction in either of these courts .
I consider it important to emphasise that reforming the functioning of the Strasbourg court coincides with the accession , and this should be a significant consideration .
I would also like to stress that this accession will be successful only if it truly reinforces the current institutions , and the Member States ' judicial systems must take the necessary steps to this end .
The EU 's accession to the convention is a unique experiment , but it must not jeopardise what is already in place as regards the enforcement of human rights .
It is very important that we are aware that it will be successful if it reinforces already existing institutions and truly provides added value for citizens .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , the review conference of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) is a long awaited and important event in the evolution of the Court itself and , more broadly , international criminal justice .
The review conference is a good opportunity for the stakeholders to consider the existing deficiencies of the ICC and propose possible changes or directions for reform .
I would like to mention several issues that EU Member States , as well as the EP delegation , should have on the agenda .
One of the issues is certainly the position of our transatlantic partners on the ICC .
I would like to point out that the lack of participation of the United States in the ICC is the single most important factor reducing the relevance and authority of the ICC .
It would therefore be very useful if our American partners could express more clearly their current position and commitment to the ICC .
I would also like to urge the EU to insist on discussing - and hopefully revising - Article 124 , also known as the transitional provision , of the Rome Statute , which allows states to choose not to have their nationals subject to the ICC 's jurisdiction over war crimes for a seven-year period after the ratification of the Statute .
This is a regrettable loophole that should be removed from the Rome Statute .
Last but not least , I would like to point out that the EU should strive for the widest ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute in relations with those countries that have not yet done so .
It must be an objective of the EU during the enlargement negotiations and accession phases of the new EU Member States .
It should be high on the agenda in our dealings with Russia as well , especially taking into account the fact that we are currently negotiating the modalities of the partnership agreement with our Russian partners .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on the European Union membership of the Human Rights Convention , which benefits European citizens : due to this convention , there will be a new court , external to the European Union , to ensure that the rights of European citizens are always respected by the European Union and Member States .
Under the principle of democracy , the European Union and its Member States should always have the right to be able to defend themselves .
I therefore believe it is crucial that every nation belonging to the convention should have a judge to explain the context of every appeal , just as I think it important that the European Parliament should have an informal body to coordinate information exchanges between Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council , and that Parliament should also be consulted during the negotiation process .
I would also like to add that European citizens have the right to understand the mechanisms governing this membership , just as they have the right to know what their rights are .
Therefore , I believe it is essential for the Council of Europe and the European Union to consider establishing guidelines , with a clear explanation of all the effects and implications that membership will entail .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the accession of the EU to the ECHR has been a long time coming .
It is an essential piece of the jigsaw whose final picture is to be a superior rights regime fostered by the Court of Justice and enjoying the external supervision of the Court at Strasbourg .
It is a necessarily complex measure because it is a quid pro quo for making binding the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It signals an important fresh consensus between those like the traditional British , who have favoured the intergovernmental Council of Europe approach , and federalists such as me who have favoured the supranational approach .
Such a twinning is extremely appropriate at this time of coalition politics in the UK between the British Liberal Democrat and Conservative parties .
Madam President , the adoption of the Rome Statute and the establishment of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) is a success story .
There are many examples that show this , but the crucial thing is that , for the first time in history , it is now possible for high-ranking representatives of a State - civilian or military - to be called to account for having ordered war crimes or crimes against humanity .
The EU has supported the establishment and the work of the ICC in numerous and very positive ways and it must continue , in future , to support and reinforce the Court and to protect its independence .
The forthcoming review conference in Kampala will take stock and ask what has been successful and what needs to be improved .
Now is exactly the time to clearly recognise that the States must strive at the national level to adopt laws or implement existing laws consistently so as to support the ICC .
Many are still slow to act when it comes to arresting high-ranking people for whom an arrest warrant has been issued .
Commissioner Reding has pointed this out .
Often , the fear of diplomatic difficulties carries more weight than the understanding that the ICC needs tangible support in order to be effective .
The conference in Kampala needs to work on the definition of the term ' war of aggression ' .
A dedicated working group from the States that are party to the Rome Statute has done some successful preparatory work on this and has already submitted a suitable text , which can also be found in our resolution .
We call on the Commission and the Member States to work intensively for the incorporation of this definition into the Statute and thus its inclusion within the competence of the Court .
In so doing , the strictest attention must be paid to ensuring that no restrictions are introduced in connection with the Court 's independence .
Allow me , in closing , to also emphasise just how important the call for the EU to be represented at the conference by the highest-ranking people possible is .
That would be a signal of our support for the International Criminal Court , as well as a positive example for other governments .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , my Group is committed to protecting human rights , but we are not convinced that allowing the EU to sign the convention is wise .
Given that every Member State is already a signatory to the convention , what benefit is there to the EU signing as well ?
I should be very pleased if someone in this Chamber could give me a practical example of how the human rights of one of my constituents will be better protected as a result of the EU signing the convention .
At present , Member States are not required to make the convention directly applicable within their domestic law .
I want to be reassured that if the EU signs the convention , that position will not change .
I do not want the power of the British Parliament to change the way we decide to protect human rights to be undermined .
My suspicion is that one of the motives behind this proposal is a desire to enhance the status of the EU to show it is a player on the international stage .
In my view , that is a very good reason not to permit the EU to sign the convention .
Madam President , my group very much welcomes the accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is , no doubt , Europe 's most important human rights instrument and the importance of the Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights - maybe even for Mr Fox - is clear from the fact that it handles an average of 30 000 complaints a year .
In 2009 , incidentally , there were 57 000 , and the Court issued 2 000 judgments that year or , more accurately , it had to pronounce these judgments .
In the shape of the Court of Justice , the European Union , too , has a court , but , unlike the European Court of Human Rights , the Court of Justice is not solely responsible for protecting fundamental rights , and it is also not completely wrong to establish at this point that the Court of Justice did not , in the past , occupy the sole leading role in evolving European fundamental rights .
Both the Council of Europe and the EU are calling the forthcoming accession historic , and I think we in the plenary will give a majority backing to this in our vote .
I , hope , first and foremost , that it will indeed prove itself to be historic for Europe 's citizens , as it will create an area of applicable human rights to which not only 47 governments , but also the institutions of the European Union , are bound .
In that way , the EU will be sending a strong signal to the citizens of Europe that it is not above the law when it comes to human rights and that they , the citizens , can bring an action if the Community institutions should infringe their human rights .
The specific form of the accession process itself will certainly create some problems , and it is therefore important that we find the best solutions for the extremely difficult technical and legal problems quickly and constructively and with open-mindedness and creativity .
Madam President , it is easy to see the benefits of the EU 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
It will benefit those people who have been employed in the EU and have been fired for refusing to put their signature to false accounts and becoming whistle blowers .
They can bring cases of this nature before the European Court of Human Rights under Article 6 .
It will benefit fellow Members here in Parliament who receive extortionate fines for expressing their opinions freely and who have nowhere to go to appeal against this .
Such cases can be brought before the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg under Article 10 .
It is thus easy to see the benefits .
The reason that my group and I are nevertheless opposed to the EU 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights is the fact that the disadvantages clearly outweigh the advantages .
For example , there is no doubt that the Court of Justice , in particular , would use the accession to once again extend the EU 's powers .
In ever more areas - the social sphere , the policy on aliens and fundamental freedoms - we will see how it will be possible to use accession to the Convention on Human Rights as yet another argument in favour of more decisions being taken at EU level , which means fewer decisions being taken by the Member States .
We do not want to see a situation where Member States are not able to determine their own policy on aliens or issues concerning their freedoms , the freedom of expression and everything else covered by the convention .
These must remain national matters and therefore , the EU should not go down this route .
Madam President , the rapporteur states in his report that the accession to the ECHR will afford citizens protection against the actions of the Union .
I would be far more interested in protecting the residents of my constituency , the West Midlands in the UK , against the action of the Convention on Human Rights .
Of course , in the UK , we incorporated this into our law in 1998 , allowing the ECHR to have effect in all our courts .
In the manifesto of the new Conservative government , it was promised that they would repeal the Human Rights Act but , as they should have known , Lisbon made the EU a legal entity and the EU has greater powers than the electorate of the United Kingdom .
We are reminded of George Orwell .
The writing is on the wall and , as we know , some people are more equal than others when it comes to human rights .
Earlier this month , my constituents in Meriden and Hatton suffered invasions by so-called ' travellers ' , who have broken the peace and who are building unauthorised and possibly illegal developments on what little remains of our precious green-belt land .
Thanks to the Convention on Human Rights , these travellers have special protected rights .
They have priority in health care and education , all at the expense of local taxpayers !
The rapporteur wants us to involve our national courts and ministries of justice in this process .
I say that the Convention on Human Rights has done enough damage already .
Perhaps the rapporteur would like to visit my constituency and witness at first hand the desecration of our land .
Perhaps he would like to speak to the hardworking villagers who have seen the value of their homes plummet .
He can inspect the lines of police drafted in to keep the peace and , of course , preserve the special rights of the travellers .
He could even enjoy the spectacle of 90 lorries laden with gravel churning up the country lanes where parents walk with their children .
He might help residents as they rush to install security equipment in anticipation of the surge in criminal activity that often accompanies such developments .
Of course , these are but small tragedies and are nothing when compared to the important political project that is the European Union , but let us consider that when we propose special rights on one group of citizens , we automatically degrade the rights of others .
The Convention on Human Rights has degraded the rights of my constituents .
It should not be up to unelected officials to decide who is special and who is not .
We have a newly elected government in the UK which has made promises in this area .
In the name of democracy , let them carry out those promises !
( ES ) Madam President , more than 20 years ago - in fact 23 years ago - I was fortunate enough to witness the signing of an agreement in the other parliament building between the then President of the European Commission , Jacques Delors , and the Secretary General of the Council of Europe , Marcelino Oreja , for what were then the European Communities to sign up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
That was 23 years ago .
This reminds me of the answer that the poet Heinrich Heine gave when he was asked , ' Where would you like to die ? '
He replied , ' In England , because there everything happens 100 years later ' .
Based on some speeches that we have heard , it seems that everything happens 200 years later , Madam President .
I trust , however , that Mr Duff 's influence in the new Liberal Democrat-Conservative coalition government will improve this situation .
Therefore , Madam President , my Group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , has been in favour of this accession for a long time now , and we warmly welcome the excellent report by Mr Jáuregui .
It is his first report and I am sure that it will not be his last .
We are doing so because we feel that it will increase guarantees for the public , because what we are doing is giving more guarantees to people that the European Union legislation applied by the Member States and European Union laws is in line with the set of rights recognised in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
This report opens the way for resolving many of the technical legal problems that are going to arise , because we must not forget that the convention was designed to be ratified and applied by Member States .
Whatever the propaganda from some sides of this House , the European Union is not a state or a super-state .
It is an international organisation , and therefore , there are difficulties in adjusting an international organisation to something that was made for states .
Mrs Giannakou , who was our shadow rapporteur and did an excellent job for which I sincerely thank her , will talk about the specific issues .
All I want to do now is join Vice-President Reding in calling for the Council to give the Commission a mandate to negotiate swiftly , and I am sure that my friend , Mr López Garrido , will ensure that this is the case .
This will mean , Madam President , that soon we will be able to celebrate the European Union signing up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .

( ES ) Madam President , I would like to join in congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Jáuregui , and the rapporteurs for opinion , who have worked on drafting this report .
I do so , above all , in order to highlight the fact that in the same way that we have been dealing with the economic crisis in the Monetary Union during this year of Parliament 's mandate , this is the time to say that Europe will not be built through the internal market or the single currency , but through the people .
The rights of the people are strengthened by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , this ' bill of rights ' that must take into account the political and public dimension of European integration .
They are also strengthened by the mandate in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union to sign up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
This does not diminish any of the fundamental rights guaranteed to European citizens by the legislation of the Member States due to the fact that they are citizens of those Member States .
On the contrary , it multiplies , strengthens and increases the rights that we all have as participants and players in a joint project .
I also wish to highlight , as Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the fact that we have discussed all the problems - which will arise - with incorporating the European Convention on Human Rights within that shared culture of strengthening and guaranteeing rights and citizenship .
We have organised extremely fruitful visits to the Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of Human Rights , and we have called a third conference on 21 June which is going to be attended by important specialists and judges from the European Court of Human Rights and the Court of Justice of the European Union in order to put together a joint , advance response to what the legal guarantee should be for citizenship rights .
A British legal expert named Hart wrote that there are no rights without legal guarantee , and there is no legal guarantee without judges , in the same way that there can be no Europe without citizens and there are no European citizens if they are not aware that European integration makes us grow and strengthens the fundamental rights that we already have as members of the EU Member States .
Madam President , as we review the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court , let us be reminded that its creation truly marks a success for liberal democracy and a commitment to effective international law .
With all EU Member States ratifying to comply with the Rome Statute , we set out on the next chapter of meeting our ambitions and responsibilities in the field of human rights , peace and justice .
A critical evaluation is important , but the ICC is already an important institution in ensuring that these fundamental values are not just European but universal .
It is a last resort , as Commissioner Reding said , but an important one .
The EU and Member States should continue their commitment to the ICC , or the principles it seeks to ensure , by adopting the EU guidelines on the ICC .
It is a primary obligation to investigate and prosecute those who commit war crimes , genocide and crimes against humanity .
With the Lisbon Treaty , we are working towards an effective common foreign EU policy .
The High Representative should actively promote the accession to the Rome Statute of other global players - China , India , Russia and important candidate Member States , such as Turkey - but , also , the long-term ally of the EU , the United States , should be engaged in a dialogue of contributing to global justice and should seriously consider joining its ally .
As a Dutch European , I would like to reassure our citizens that the ' Hague Invasion Act ' will never be invoked .
The EU needs to work constructively with Turkey and the US to stop impunity in Iran , which is one of the most urgent cases of aggressors and where execution , rape and torture are brought upon citizens by their own government on a daily and systematic basis .
We need to work on the true globalisation or universalisation of human rights , justice and the rule of law , and the ICC is an important instrument to meet this goal .
Support for this Court needs to be globalised as well .
The European Parliament has been working constructively and is united on this subject .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are working towards here today is the extension of law at the supranational level .
The importance of this can be seen from a glance at the terrible history of my own country , along with a glance at the human rights infringements currently taking place .
In reality , Germans did not carry out the most horrific crimes in history because they broke laws , but because they drafted laws that made the unethical legal and that , for example , made the murder of Jews , Communists , Christians , homosexuals and others a legal obligation .
If such people and , above all , those who ordered these actions later say that they only did what the law stated at the time and it was not possible to prosecute them later on , that would demonstrate an unbelievable weakness in the law and in humanity .
For that reason , what we have done here with the International Criminal Court represents a major step forwards in that all such people will know , in future , that there is a judge beyond national law and that , for the rest of their lives , they will have to live with the fact that they will be held to account .
That is a major step forward , just like the European Union 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , something which we , and I personally , championed for quite some time .
I am pleased that we will be able to implement this together here today and I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Jáuregui Atondo , for his outstanding report .
Madam President , my national party , the British Conservatives - for those who do not know , I am a Conservative - has expressed serious concerns in the past about the ICC and its enforcement of international criminal jurisprudence , as encapsulated in the Rome Statute , in the areas of crimes against humanity , war crimes and genocide .
However , the 10th anniversary of the Statute 's entry into force does offer us now an opportunity to make a clear assessment of the role of the ICC and , in my view , the Court has , to its credit , stuck rigidly to its brief , eschewing mischievous prosecutions and seeking to arraign only the most serious tyrants .
The Court 's Chief Prosecutor , Luis Moreno-Ocampo , has skilfully helped the Court to strengthen its impartiality globally .
The aggressive pursuit of politically motivated cases has , thankfully , failed to materialise , which was one of the big worries of our American allies .
Britain joined the ICC under the previous Labour administration .
Perhaps the recent establishment of a Conservative-Liberal coalition in the UK last week offers us now a chance to reassess Britain 's relationship with the ICC and , at Kampala , to amend some of the disputed areas , like command responsibility .
We cannot allow the UK 's vital national interests to be compromised by the ICC but , at the same time , we should also recognise that in certain circumstances , the ICC may have a constructive role to play in ending a climate of impunity for genocidal dictators .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk at the same time about accession to the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) and about accession to the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) .
First of all , I would like to thank our rapporteurs for the quality of their reports and for their willingness to integrate everyone 's proposals in a great spirit of consensus .
In addition to everything that has been said in favour of this accession , I would like to stress two points that I feel are important : the establishing of a control outside the Union and the extraterritoriality of the convention ; in other words , its application to all the acts of the Union , including outside EU territory .
Allow me to express the hope that the ' human rights and democracy ' clauses will thus make a little more sense .
Therefore , not only must the Commission 's negotiating mandate relate to the convention itself , to all the protocols and agreements already enshrined by the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but we must make a commitment very quickly to accede to all the legal instruments of the ECHR in order to have a coherent system for the protection of human rights .
As for the ICC , I would like to express two wishes .
Firstly , I would like the European Union to be particularly vigilant as regards the rights of victims and of their legal representatives .
That implies ad hoc legal assistance affording access to specialist external lawyers .
I have one other wish , Commissioner : that the Union will use all of its weight , all of its energy , to ensure that the Member States as a whole adapt their law to international law .
France , in particular , has not yet done this .
I regret this , just as I regret that some large countries , such as the United States , are not participating in the implementation of this international law in the area of crimes against humanity .
Madam President , the European Union signing up to the Council of Europe 's Convention on Human Rights will be followed by legislation that will make the convention part of European Union law , as well as being another organisation 's document as an external benchmark .
That means that the EU 's Court in Luxembourg will have the jurisdiction to interpret and enforce two potentially competing documents - the EU 's Charter and the Council 's Convention .
I have asked several experts in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs what would happen if there should be a conflict between the two documents or between different sections of the same document .
Which document or which section would take precedence ?
I was told , first of all , that the document or section that granted the greater amount of freedom would take precedence over the one that granted the lesser amount of freedom .
I later asked what would be decided if there should be two parties to a dispute and each claimed different but competing , and possibly contradictory , rights - for example , the right to practise one 's religion without being offended and the right of freedom of expression involving criticism of the tenets of followers of a religion .
This is not entirely theoretical as the case of the Danish cartoons illustrates .
This was the case of the dog that did not bark or rather the expert who did not venture an opinion .
The silence was as deafening as it was clear for all to hear and to understand .
Free speech will always be sacrificed because that is the EU 's default position .
Denying free speech is what the EU does best !
We are talking about two different categories of right - the political right of freedom of expression against prosecution by the state and the right not to be offended by criticism .
The right not to be offended is considered to be much more important than the right to debate a matter of public interest .
Should there be no restrictions on freedom of speech ?
There should be restrictions on those who incite violence , but criticism that falls short of that should be free from interference from the criminal law .


( EL ) I wish , in particular , to congratulate Mr Jáuregui Atondo on his report and on our excellent cooperation and , of course , Mr Preda and Mrs Gál , on their contribution from two different committees .
The material accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights and hence , to the jurisdiction of the Court is , of course , based on the fact that the Union acquired its own legal personality under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Of course , some people are wondering why , having incorporated the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we need to accede to the jurisdiction of the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
First of all , the Court in Strasbourg has , in the sense of res judicata , acquired much broader capabilities than those provided for under fundamental rights , as both the Presidency and Commissioner Reding have hinted .
Secondly , this somehow forges a link between the European Union and what is happening in Europe as a whole , and hence with the countries of the Council of Europe .
Of course , some people are wondering if this will cause more general complications , but the report stresses that there should not be any transnational appeals , nor is one Court above or below the other .
Each court will have jurisdiction for the powers vested in it , as will the European Union , therefore , for the Court in Luxembourg .
I consider that accession to the European Convention on Human Rights is an important step , as it is the procedure for accession to the protocols relating to corresponding powers ; this will , of course , give the European Parliament the facility to become actively involved in negotiations and to help select a judge through the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
Madam President , I am proud to be chairing this Parliament 's delegation to the review conference for the International Criminal Court , to celebrate how its establishment has helped build global justice and fight impunity for crimes against humanity and to represent our European Union 's determination , in our common foreign and security policy , to work towards the Court 's universal jurisdiction .
In calling for better access to justice for victims , we should acknowledge that 15 of the 24 countries worldwide who have contributed to the Trust Fund for Victims are our own EU Member States - but we should also note with humility that that means 12 EU Members have not given such funding and that 14 of our countries have neither designated national contact points nor responded to the annual survey , as required by the Charter .
Universal jurisdiction abroad starts with universal implementation here at home and , Madam President , I have to regret that one of the first decisions of the UK 's new coalition government is to go to the review conference to oppose jurisdiction for the crime of aggression and to resist Belgium 's proposal to include the use of prohibited weapons in internal conflict as a war crime .
Aggression , the unlawful use of force against another state , was prosecuted by the Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals at the end of the Second World War , and I find it hard to understand why the ICC should not be used to prosecute the war crimes of the 21st century .
Meanwhile , how they justify saying that the use of poison gas or dumdum bullets is illegal if going across a border but not if staying within it , I do not understand .
They are saying that when Saddam Hussein gassed the Marsh Arabs , or when demonstrators in Gaza are shot with bullets that intentionally break into shrapnel inside their bodies , the perpetrators are able to do so free from the fear of being held to account .
Quite simply , they are wrong .
( FR ) Madam President , conceived as it was to try the authors of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes , the long-awaited International Criminal Court is an initial response to those victims who have too often and , sadly , in vain , demanded compensation and justice .
Prior to its creation , many of us wanted the Court to have a preventative role .
Indeed , could an international body authorised to punish the authors of crimes as heinous as those perpetrated in Bosnia , Rwanda , Cambodia and Darfur not dissuade a given dictator-executioner , who knew that once his crimes had been committed , he would no longer feel safe outside the borders of his country , where he was able to act with complete impunity ?
In this regard , I would like to ask the Commission and the Council whether they believe the objective of prevention has been achieved .
For example , could the Commission tell me if , in its opinion , the arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court against President Omar al-Bashir constitutes part of the solution or part of the problem ?
Personally , I continue to believe that it is part of the solution .
Be that as it may , what lessons will be learnt from the short period in which the Court has been in existence ?
Having taken these lessons on board , does the Commission intend - and this is my final question - to table amendments during the ICC review conference in Kampala , which will be an opportunity to table and , if necessary , adopt amendments to the text that constitutes the Court 's legal basis ?
( PL ) When we accede to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights , we must , at all costs , avoid a number of serious dangers .
We have a significant problem related to competition between two courts : the one in Strasbourg and the European Court of Justice .
The fact that two documents will be in force - the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the European Convention - will create problems .
It will be very difficult to explain to our citizens which court is the right one for their complaint .
As a result , there will be a rise in the number of instances of refusal to examine a case due to a conflict of jurisdiction of courts and the legal grounds involved .
There is also a danger that accession by the Union to the European Convention will reduce respect for the constitutional traditions of Member States which form the general principles of law today .
In particular , accession by the Union to the convention should not be a means of circumventing the protocol to the Treaty of Lisbon which guarantees the United Kingdom and Poland exemption from any unexpected effects of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I am very sorry that I have only one minute for this important topic , so please allow me , no matter how short the time is , to inform you that there is a terrible flood devastating Northern Hungary , Slovakia and Poland as we speak .
The lives of hundreds of people are at stake .
We should reassure them from this Chamber in the European Parliament in Strasbourg that we are in solidarity with them and sympathise with the victims , and that we hope that this destructive flood will recede as soon as possible .
I ask the leaders of the European Parliament to offer assistance to the victims , should this become necessary .
At the moment , there are several dozen towns in northern Hungary that are entirely under water .
We hope that fate and God will have mercy on these disaster-stricken regions .
The main problem with this report is that it is important for all of us present , as MEPs , to raise human rights to a higher dimension , namely the protection of human rights .
Accession to the convention , however , does not increase protection for human rights .
It is only the ideology of a United States of Europe that emerges , which we do not support , since sovereign countries , the Member States , have already signed up to the convention .
We also oppose the notion that this symbolic decision should be taken as suggesting that we are part of a large empire .

( IT ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this membership is surely a sign of one of the European Union 's missions : the mission to defend and promote human rights .
A mission that is already fully formulated and borne out by history , by the fact that individual Member States already belong to the European Council convention , by the reiteration that the general principles of the convention and Member States ' constitutions are now part of European law .
So this symbolic gesture is extremely important .
However , translating this ideal concept into substantive legal rules is not so simple : this report refers chiefly and ultimately only to institutional questions , and is completely acceptable .
I must say that I also thank Mr Atondo , and am bound to report that the AFCO Committee on Constitutional Affairs - which I chair - has approved this document almost unanimously .
We are therefore satisfied with this document , and I will not dwell on individual elements of it , because we fully support everything that the President of the Council and the Commissioner have said .
I would like to make just one suggestion , since the statement about the institutional presence of European Members of Parliament within the European Council Parliamentary Assembly when meeting to appoint the judge and the judges is somewhat vague : I would say that there is a small problem with the relationship between the population of Europe , of the European Union , and the populations of other countries .
Luckily , the regulation governing membership and representation in the European Council Parliamentary Assembly already states that there can be no fewer than two per State , and no more than 18 altogether .
Given the importance of the European Union , I suggest that we should draw the line at 18 .
I must conclude , however , and so I will finish by saying that this resolution exposes a problem that it is worth examining in more depth , in other words , the problem that we have already highlighted many times of the relationship between the Courts .
I believe we must reflect a little more upon this problem but , above all , on the problem of the European spirit : we are the European Union and , as stated in Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon , we are founded on human dignity and human rights - and equality is founded on human dignity .
In Europe , we are not united on this point , and so we must reflect carefully on this concept of human dignity , its limits and what it covers .
That is not the subject of this decision and this very welcome report , however .
I thank the rapporteur .
( EL ) Madam President , the European Union is , and remains , an ardent supporter of the International Criminal Court and its role in defending the universality of human rights .
We all hope that the review conference of the Rome Statute in Kampala will be a real milestone in the further development of the Court .
The international community is being called up to strengthen the validity of the institution and to safeguard the protection and further strengthening of the independence and efficacy of international criminal justice .
Within the framework of the review process , various proposals have already been presented , of which the most important is indubitably that relating to the crime of aggression .
What is paramount today , however , is to make it clear that the European Parliament wishes to stress that heinous crimes against humanity cannot go unpunished .
What we want is clarity of law and cooperation from as many Member States of the international community as possible , so as to put an end to impunity through fair and impartial process .
War criminals must be absolutely certain that they will have to account for their actions .
It is this certainty of punishment that can help to prevent similar actions in the future and pave the way for reconciliation following violent clashes .
We therefore affirm our absolute support for the purpose of the Court and our devotion to human rights and international humanitarian law and wish the review conference in Uganda every success .
( PL ) The review conference of the International Criminal Court will be an important opportunity to commit Member States of the Union to values which , to us , are crucial .
Fortunately , there is a general conviction among Europeans that the greatest crimes must be judged , and the perpetrators punished .
In view of this , it is good that the review conference will take place in Africa .
Africa is a continent where many crimes have not yet been punished .
The Court is currently conducting investigations in five African countries : Kenya , the Democratic Republic of Congo , Sudan , Uganda and the Central African Republic .
The impunity of those who commit terrible crimes against their own citizens and against other people regardless of their citizenship must be ended .
The role of the Court in this matter is crucial .
If the Court had existed 70 years ago , perhaps the Katyń Massacre would never have happened .
The existence of an effective court can , of itself , have a preventative effect .
European states should strengthen the Court in its basic roles : investigation and prosecution of war crimes , genocide and crimes against humanity .
It is important that more states accede to the Rome Statute , because the effectiveness of the Court is dependent on cooperation between states and international organisations .
Therefore , all State Parties of the Rome Statute should join in such cooperation , because otherwise , that effectiveness will not be achieved .
( PT ) There are important items on the agenda of the Kampala conference such as the crime of aggression .
However , bringing the accused Omar al-Bashir to trial is currently the most significant step in consolidating the universal jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) .
It was thanks to pressure from the European Union that the Security Council of the United Nations referred the crimes in Darfur to the ICC .
The arrest warrants issued by the ICC include one for the current Head of State of Sudan for crimes against humanity and war crimes .
The European Union must act in accordance with the assessment of its observers in the Sudanese elections , who concluded that the elections had not complied with international standards .
Even if Omar al-Bashir had been elected legitimately , the European Union should still be demanding that he be brought to justice .
The European Union cannot continue to give contradictory signals .
It is imperative that President Omar al-Bashir be handed over to the ICC .
That will send a powerful signal to discourage other dictators from using violence against their peoples ; failure in this case will have the opposite effect .
Madam President , I will speak on the Union 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
I want to underline that I am going to speak as a lawyer .
I would like to draw attention to the role of the Court of Justice in the construction of the European Union 's accession to the European Convention .
In particular , the requirement in the European Convention on Human Rights that the applicant must exhaust domestic remedies before applying to the European Court of Human Rights must be transposed into a procedure which would give the Court of Justice in every case the opportunity to decide as the last domestic remedy before the Strasbourg Court looks into the matter .
I mainly refer to the cases where Member States apply EU law and Member States are sued by individual applicants following the application of that EU law .
The Court in Luxembourg must first be given the possibility to apply the convention in such cases .
Let us not forget that the Court in Luxembourg has been applying the convention for years .
In relation to this , I would like to recall the European Court of Human Rights ' finding in the case of Bosphorus Airlines vs. Ireland in 2005 .
I quote , ' The protection of fundamental rights by Community law can be considered to be equivalent to that of the convention system ' .
Along with my colleagues , I welcome the Union 's accession to the convention but , at the same time , I ask for a very careful analysis of the procedure we put in place , as we need to protect citizens ' interests and , at the same time , to preserve what is working well .
( PT ) I would stress that it is with great satisfaction - shall we say - that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and its Portuguese Members are seeing the start of Europe 's process of accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
In the end , in a country like Portugal - which has always been at the forefront of human rights with the abolition of slavery in Portugal as soon as 1761 and which was a pioneer in abolishing the death penalty - we could clearly only be interested in supporting this accession process .
I would like , however , to call attention to the fact that we believe it to be very important for Parliament to monitor the EU 's process of accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
We consider this to be essential from a technical , legal and political point of view , because Parliament itself is a House of human rights and one in which human rights are of great importance .
I would also like it to be noted , Members , that we consider it very important that we are in contact with many third states ; this is a very important signal that we are giving to the members of the Council of Europe ( the entry of the European Union to the Council of Europe ) who are not Member States .
For these members of the Council of Europe , it is a signal of strengthening , of a commitment by the European Union to the situation and levels of democracy and respect for fundamental rights .
( SL ) Honourable representatives of the Commission and the Council , it has been some time since human rights and freedoms were confined to the level of the individual nation state .
This renders superfluous the fundamental dilemma of whether the European Union should be based on intergovernmental agreements or whether it should become some sort of a supranational state .
I think that the EU 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights is a step towards extending human freedom and the freedom of the individual .
This move will also bring added value and we must make it our goal to make the European Union a zone where standards of human freedom are the highest in the world .
That said , I do not think that the European Union will become a realm of freedom all of a sudden just because it has acceded to the convention .
On the contrary , there will still be breaches of human rights and freedoms , but it is important that these rights and freedoms are not under systematic and systemic threat .
We must strengthen the functioning of the courts and other structures and delimit their competences , and on this note I would like to bring my speech to a close .
( PL ) I would like to say something about the subject of today 's proceedings .
It should be borne in mind that , unfortunately , Africa is a continent where there have been numerous cases of crime and genocide on a frequent basis .
The European Union must not be passive in this situation .
Fortunately , the International Criminal Court in Kampala is becoming increasingly significant in measures being taken against these crimes .
Criminals must know they will never go unpunished anywhere .
In relation to this , I am among those who are decidedly in favour of the Union giving its support to the work of the Court .
I do not suppose we can raise any doubts about this , today .
I think we should discuss and think about what to do for the Court in Kampala to work still more efficiently and effectively .
( SK ) As has already been mentioned , the accession of the EU to this convention is , above all , a symbolic gesture .
Despite this , I believe that it can only strengthen the integration process , and that it is a further step towards the political unification of the European Union .
In addition to the symbolism , this legal measure also has practical significance for EU human rights policy .
On a formal level , it will also eliminate double standards .
The Union , that is to say , was not previously obliged to observe human rights .
From now on , however , EU laws will be subject to external judicial checks , which will monitor compliance with the convention .
A further practical benefit of the EU 's accession to the convention will be a guarantee of protection not only for EU citizens and other persons in the EU , but also for all individuals falling within the jurisdiction of the Union outside its territory .
Personally , I am pleased with the idea that the aim of the Union will be to observe the clauses of the convention fully in all of its external relations and activities .
It is important that the submitted report mentions the possible technical and administrative complications of the whole process , and suggests how to reduce the complexity as much as possible .
The EU , as a non-state member acceding to a convention that was designed for states , should take care not to demand needless changes to the convention or to its judicial system .
The European Court of Human Rights is already overstretched enough .
Moreover , needless complications might undermine the legitimacy and popularity of the process of EU accession to the convention .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have been a Member of the European Parliament for nearly a year now , and I am beginning to get used to what is impossible to get used to , namely , that the debate on every single report follows the same script .
There are some 20 or 30 of us present in this Chamber out of almost 800 MEPs , with a few of us who are not even here out of a sense of duty , but simply because we do not wish to vote according to the party line but based on personal conviction and sound information , and who all have had the same experience .
We ask questions but never receive any answers to them , save perhaps for some general statements .
I sincerely ask the Commissioner responsible for human rights to make an exception this time and give a precise answer to my question .
The question is what added value and benefit are derived from the perspective of European citizens by the European Union 's accession to the same Convention on Human Rights that every single EU Member State has already joined .
I ask that you kindly provide a single example that shows what new contribution this accession will make to the citizens of Europe in terms of protecting their human rights .
I thank you in advance for finally making an exception to the general rule for once .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , becoming a member of the European Court of Human Rights represents a crucial step in the Union 's growth : the two systems of guarantee will strengthen the protection of individual fundamental rights , both within and outside our 27 countries , if we consider all the member countries of the European Council .
This is therefore an opportunity not to be wasted , and one for which we have waited many years .
The doctrine and law , both of the Court of Justice and of the Strasbourg Court , have , for some time now , been working towards this moment , or rather paving the way for this goal , because for me it is a goal : it is a goal for all of us .
I am therefore compelled to mention the importance of membership for all Union citizens , who will thus be able to refer cases to the Strasbourg Court against a European institution or a Member State because of the wider protection they enjoy .
I conclude , in the knowledge that the independence of the two courts remains unchanged , as is clearly explained and ratified in the report - more than that , I congratulate my colleague on this report - and accords with all of our wishes , with the obvious exception of cooperation between the two institutions , which respect their own areas of responsibility .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to clarify two things .
Firstly , the articles that are in the Charter of Fundamental Rights that are also in the European Convention on Human Rights are the same and mean the same thing : Articles 52 and 53 of the Charter ; there is therefore no contradiction .
Secondly , the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights is supranational .
Therefore , if someone wants to apply to it due to a European Union decision or the application of Union law , they will first have to apply to the Court of Justice of the European Union for a preliminary ruling .
I understand that Europhobes always want to vote against Europe , but at least out of parliamentary courtesy , they should read Mr Jáuregui 's report , which sets everything out clearly .
Madam President , in relation to the first point regarding the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , I would like to join in congratulating the rapporteurs and also the Commission for the way in which it has very quickly put forward a draft mandate for negotiation .
I would also like to welcome the speech by Mr Duff , who said quite clearly that the government that has been formed in the United Kingdom between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats is absolutely in favour of the European Union signing the European Union Convention on Human Rights , and therefore of complying with the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , some of Mr Duff 's compatriots said exactly the opposite : representatives of the European Conservatives and Reformists and the representative of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group - who is not British - along with Mrs Sinclaire and subsequently Mrs Morvai , who said quite clearly , ' Why does the European Union need to sign the European Convention on Human Rights if the Member States are already parties to it ? '
What has happened is that the Member States have transferred some of their competences and powers to the European Union , so they are not exercised by the Member States but by the European Union .
The European Union could therefore theoretically infringe the European Convention on Human Rights .
This is the case unless it is considered that the European Union does not have any power or any competences whatsoever , but it does have powers and competences that have been transferred by the Member States .
This means that it is not enough for the Member States to have signed the convention .
The Union needs to sign it too in order to complete the protection of human rights throughout the whole of the European Union .
I do not understand how people such as the representatives of the two groups that I mentioned , who have demonstrated their obvious euroscepticism , are refusing supranational control over the European Union .
It is absolutely contradictory for someone who wants the European Union to be controlled or considers that everything that the European Union does is bad or that wretched bureaucrats are doing everything badly to be refusing supranational control over the European Union .
This is absolutely contradictory .
There will be other reasons to do with human rights or to do with an international organisation that defends human rights being more legitimate , stronger and more solid .
There may be other reasons , but not the ones being given .
I believe that the need to sign the convention is very clear , and I also believe that it needs to be done with the speed with which the Commission has already begun to act .
As Mr Méndez de Vigo said , the Commission has acted quickly and the Council needs to do the same .
I am sure that the mandate for starting negotiations will be adopted on 4 June at the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council in Brussels , so he does not need to worry .
With regard to the issue of the International Criminal Court , I think that the review conference is a very important meeting .
It is a very important meeting which the Presidency , on behalf of which I am speaking , is going to attend in order to clearly establish and reaffirm that the Member States have to cooperate with the International Criminal Court , and that they are going to work along those lines , naturally based on the principle of complementarity , which is a basic principle of operation of the Criminal Court .
I agree with one of the major objectives of this conference , which is to introduce the crime of aggression , and also with removing from the Rome Statute the possibility of delaying for seven years before handing over possible or alleged war criminals .
I also agree with the issue being debated - a proposal put forward by Belgium - as to whether the use of certain weapons in conflicts can constitute a war crime in itself .
In any case , the Presidency will make a statement supporting the Criminal Court and will also give an evaluation of what the Criminal Court has meant .
I also presume that many Members will be at the debates at the Kampala conference .
I therefore believe that this is a very important conference , with great political , symbolic and legal significance ; decisions will be taken that affect legal texts .
I am , of course , very grateful to Parliament for holding this debate today , which has enabled us to reaffirm our common values and also to recall that basically , when we talk about the International Criminal Court , we are talking about people who have suffered the atrocities that the Rome Statute seeks to prosecute , and that it is ultimately about fighting impunity and making it clear that in the 21st century , there is no room for impunity .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Convention on Human Rights are extraordinary texts .
They are the basis of the values on which we have been building our society and our European Union .
I think they are much too important and much too historical to give way to party political polemics .
I must say that I am very proud indeed that , at this moment in the construction of the European Union , we can go ahead by putting the Charter of Fundamental Rights into practice and by acceding to the Convention on Human Rights .
When I hear what your rapporteur , Diego López Garrido , and your co-rapporteurs , Cristian Dan Preda and Kinga Gál , have said in your name in this Parliament , I know that you are also very conscious about the historical task which is now in our hands .
The added value of the accession has been very well explained in those texts and in the contributions of many of the Members .
The Member States have all signed up to the Convention but they have also - as the Minister-in-Office of the Council just explained - transferred substantial competences to the European Union .
It is therefore normal that the European Union , when it acts as a European Union , will be subject to the same external control of the specialised Court on Human Rights as are the Member States .
To give one very concrete example , there could be a decision of the European Commission against an industry in the area of competition law which could be potentially challenged directly before the Court in Strasbourg , which is something that is difficult to do today .
As you have already pointed out , there will be a lot of very concrete examples : concrete examples which will help the citizens because - and this is something new - they will now have a double guarantee .
The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg will judge on the basis of the Charter of Fundamental Rights which , by the way , is binding for all Member States .
That should be clearly stated once and for all .
I cannot understand how somebody who has an elected mandate and has been elected by citizens can call into question the rights of those citizens .
It is better for citizens to have twice the rights than to have zero rights .
Here , we are giving them twice the rights , and that is what Europe is about .
Europe is about rights for European citizens and I am very proud that this House is standing for those rights .
Yes , we will now have the bills of rights where the citizens will know that they can go to the courts in order to have their rights taken seriously .
The question of whether or not we shall now be part of the Convention on Human Rights is not a question anymore because Article 6 of the treaty obliges the EU to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights .
So I do not think we should discuss this any further because that is simply done .
We should also know that this accession will leave the position of the individual Member States , vis-à-vis the convention , completely unaffected as long as there is no European law at stake .
This will continue to be the case .
The individual relationship between a Member State and the convention will stay exactly the same as it is .
Now there will be supplementary guarantees concerning the EU law .
Of course the issue of the risk of conflicting jurisprudence has to be analysed .
It is being analysed and I am grateful to the rapporteur who has taken this issue on board .
We have so far seen that these conflicts are considered to be minimal because the convention is already part of the norms which the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg takes into account today and the convention will operate as a minimum standard .
The Commission expects case-law of Strasbourg and of Luxembourg to develop harmoniously and converge in the coming years .
I now move to more specific questions .
On litigation : that is not an issue for the European Court of Human Rights or of the European Court of Justice .
For the moment , that is an issue for the British system of litigation , and I have already started to discuss this with the British Government to see if they could review this system of litigation , which can , in certain cases , when it comes to the freedom of the press for instance , become very harmful indeed .
The European Parliament has so far , under the leadership of its rapporteurs , done very good work .
I count on Parliament to continue to participate in a process which will certainly be a difficult process , a long process , where we have to solve the technical problems - and technical problems can become very political indeed - so I count on Parliament to continue to participate in this very difficult task .
As for relations between the European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , I leave that in the hands of Parliament .
If you need a helping hand , I will be there to help you in that respect , but it is a matter for the parliamentarians themselves to see that they find a common ground and I believe that it should not be that difficult .
Concerning the ICC , this Parliament has already received the Prosecutor , Mr Moreno-Ocampo , and the President of the Court , Mr Song .
I think this was a very strong political signal from the European Parliament that Parliament is taking seriously human rights , not only within Europe , but also outside Europe .
We also believe that the Kampala conference is the most important international conference devoted to international justice in a decade .
We have to make it count .
There again , I count on Parliament also because I know that Members will be present and will be speaking up in Kampala .
We know that the EU has played and will play an important role by integrating the outcomes of the conference into its policies on international justice , on its assistance to third states and , most of all , into all the negotiations which will take place in the coming months and years .
In particular , we will continue to support national capacity building in order to strengthen and enable national jurisdictions to conduct credible and effective national investigations and trials of Rome Statute crimes .
Our policy in this respect remains unchanged and undiminished , but we now have a new tool , and the new tool is the Lisbon Treaty , which gives us a new capacity to be more consistent and more effective in our support to the Court .
In line with the encouragement by Parliament and expressed in the resolution and during the debate , the High Representative / Vice-President and her services will continue resolutely to promote universal accession to the Rome Statute .
We will do that systematically in all our discussions with partners outside of Europe .
There were two very specific questions which I would like to answer briefly .
The first was whether an arrest warrant against President al-Bashir is a part of the solution or part of the problem .
The Commission clearly sees this as part of a long-term solution because this arrest warrant shows that , with the establishment of the Court , justice has become imminent .
Whoever the person is , even if this person is a Head of State , and even if this arrest warrant is not immediately enforced , it will not disappear because the ICC is a permanent court , so let me assure you that the EU will continue to call on Sudan to cooperate fully with the Court .
On the question of whether the Commission will present amendments in the Kampala meeting , here the answer is ' no ' because the EU , as such , is not a party - it is the Member States who will negotiate the amendments .
However , the Commission will play an active role in the stock-taking part of the conference , and we count fully on the Spanish Presidency to lead the European nations so that their voice will make a big difference in this conference .

Madam President , I would like to express my thanks to all those who have spoken , because the vast majority of them have expressed a very favourable position regarding the accession agreement that we are going to vote on tomorrow ; in fact , it has almost been unanimous .
I would especially like to thank Mrs Reding for giving us the opportunity to continue working together , as there are very complex negotiations to come and I believe that Parliament needs to be very close to those negotiations .
I would like to answer a few questions and clarify a few things very quickly .
Accession is not a symbolic act , ladies and gentlemen : it has legal value .
Some are asking what the point is , and what it adds .
I will give you an example .
Let us suppose that a competition for European Union staff discriminates against Hungarian lawyers , for example , for some technical reason or any reason at all .
Where do the Hungarian lawyers take their complaint ?
To the Court of Justice of the European Union .
What does accession add ?
The opportunity for these lawyers to take their complaint to the European Court of Human Rights if their right to equality has not been recognised by the Court of Justice of the European Union .
It is a new court , it is a new opportunity for guaranteeing fundamental human rights , for example , the right to equality .
It is therefore clear that this event does not make a symbolic contribution but a legal contribution .
I would like to clarify two things , ladies and gentlemen .
Members have expressed their desire for the negotiations not to be limited to accession to the European Convention on Human Rights , but for the protocols that the convention has been building up over the years to be incorporated , especially those that refer to the rights acknowledged by the Charter of Fundamental Rights , as that will provide equivalence between the two documents .
Finally , Parliament is also calling for accession to Convention and Council of Europe bodies and authorities , because this will enable recognition of the universal human rights protection system , including the Turin European Social Charter .
I have received one motion for a resolution at the end of the debate .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 19 May 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon creates the legal framework for the European Union 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights ( ECHR ) , thereby making the EU the 48th signatory to the convention .
The EU 's accession to the ECHR will supplement the level of protection established by the Treaty of Lisbon through the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has binding legal force .
The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg will acquire the authority to exercise judicial control over the acts of the EU 's institutions , bodies and agencies , including decisions made by the European Court of Justice , with regard to compliance with the convention , thereby creating an additional layer of judicial control over fundamental rights within the EU .
Following the EU 's accession , the convention will provide the minimum standard of protection for human rights and fundamental freedoms in Europe and will be applied on a mandatory basis , especially in situations where the level of protection provided by the EU is lower than that offered within the convention .
I believe that both Member States and the Commission will have to prepare information briefings which will provide explanations about all the implications and effects of accession so that the EU 's citizens are fully aware of the significance of this process .
The European Union 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is a logical step following on from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and enhances the depth of integration and creation of a common political area .
The EU 's accession to the ECHR will provide greater coherence between the European Union and the countries belonging to the Council of Europe and its pan-European human rights system .
In my opinion , the most important upshot of accession to the ECHR is that it will provide citizens with protection against the actions of the EU , similar to the protection they enjoy against the actions of all Member States .
This is a substantial development , given that Member States have transferred important powers to the European Union .
It is logical to have the option of appeal to the European Court of Human Rights concerning decisions made by the EU as a whole .
As we talk about European citizenship , we must also provide it with specific content , which includes offering this option .
I hope that this additional instrument made available to European citizens will be easily accessible and , in particular , that the decision to accede to this convention will help create a more coherent framework for human rights within the European Union .
In connection with the forthcoming negotiations on accession by the Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , I would like to draw attention to the matter of external relations .
This is an area which will be particularly affected by the Union 's accession to the convention .
Why ?
Firstly , I will permit myself to remind us that under the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Court of Justice has very limited jurisdiction in the area of foreign policy .
Accession to the convention will partly make up for these limitations by ensuring external judicial supervision of all aspects of the Union 's activity .
The Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg will gain the right to assess how the Union observes fundamental rights in all areas of its activity , and so also in foreign policy .
Secondly , it is not necessary to remind anyone how often discussion on the subject of the necessity to observe human rights comes up in the Union 's relations with third countries , including in the forum of the European Parliament .
Accession to the convention will , therefore , give the Union credibility in dialogue with third countries on human rights .
There is no doubt that by submitting to the supervision of the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , the Union has the opportunity to strengthen the human rights aspect of foreign policy and security and , in so doing , to promote the idea of human rights more effectively around the world , to the extent that the EU treats its own human rights obligations seriously .
Let us hope that this is how it will be .
( PL ) Accession by the European Union to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is , without doubt , a step in the right direction on the road to ensuring our citizens equal and fair privileges .
We must make sure its principles are upheld in all Member States .
This will also improve legislative cohesion between the Union and the countries of the Council of Europe , and will increase the number of institutions to which citizens will be able to appeal if their rights have been breached .
It will also raise the significance and credibility of numerous initiatives of the European Parliament in the area of the protection of fundamental freedoms , which are the right of every person .
However , let us not forget that as well as upholding the rights of the people of third countries , the Union should first take care that these rights are not broken in the Member States .
There is a country in the European Union where , for nearly 20 years , the human rights and fundamental freedoms of about 20 % of the population have been violated .
Regardless of this fact , Latvia was accepted into the European Union in 2004 .
At the time that Latvia 's accession negotiations were taking place , the Latvian Government promised the then EU Enlargement Commissioner , Günther Verheugen , to solve the non-citizen problem , but to this day , regardless of those promises , the question has not been resolved .
As a result , there are approximately 340 000 non-citizens living in EU territory .
In Latvia , they are second-class people , who are not allowed to work in the public sector , or hold official posts even in districts where more than 60 % of the population are non-citizens .
There is a city in Latvia , Daugavpils , where more than 90 % of the population is Russian-speaking .
Despite this fact , the use of Russian as an official language in the city is forbidden , and 30 % of the population do not have the vote in local elections .
Local councillors , elected in a Russian-speaking city , are not allowed to use their mother tongue in meetings .
Funny though it may be , to this very day , the European Commission has found neither the necessary arguments nor the time to influence the Latvian Government to bring to an end discrimination on grounds of language .
It is essential to set up a working group to investigate the situation in Latvia without delay , otherwise I do not see the point of the EU 's being a party to the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
We must make it known clearly and unambiguously that there is a country within the European Union where the rights of more than 25 % of the population have been cynically violated over many years .
When we talk about accession of the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights , we are talking about work which has been going on for 10 years now and about many fears concerning , inter alia , competition between the Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights .
This will certainly lead to problems in the area of jurisdiction and the autonomy of the Court of Justice .
I think , however , that what we have achieved after those 10 years can mean complementarity of the two systems , so perhaps we should depart from such hierarchical thinking .
The Court of Justice has , for a long time , been following the work of the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg and vice versa .
Both these systems coexist and there is no competition between them , so perhaps those fears are unjustified .
We need accession to the convention for symbolic reasons but , above all , we need the convention because it will complement the system of protection of human rights in the European Union and will give it greater credibility in the eyes of its citizens , for they will gain protection against the European Union and its institutions , and not only against the Member States , as has been the case until now .
So we should be glad that the system will be strengthened .
However , we do need a certain loyalty , so that we do not undermine the credibility of the system .
This is why we propose that Member States do not prosecute each other on matters of EU law by using the possibilities afforded by the convention .
Stockholm Action Plan ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Stockholm Action Plan .
The previous debate was very interesting , but we have exceeded our allocated time , so I ask all those who are about to speak to stick closely to the time allocated .
Madam President , the European area of freedom , security and justice is one of the European Union 's greatest achievements .
It is one of the advances in cooperation between Member States , civil cooperation , criminal cooperation and internal security .
It is one of the most important results of the European project and one of the results that has come closest to achieving what the European Union always fails to achieve , which is relating to the public .
It is definitely this aspect of the Union 's policies that its citizens feel adds the most value in the most important aspects of their daily life , in enjoying their freedoms , for example , security .
This is undoubtedly one of the great achievements of the area of freedom , security and justice .
There were even some decisions adopted by the Council in this area of freedom , security and justice before the Treaty of Lisbon - when the area was practically intergovernmental - which concern the subject we were debating before : the investigation of crimes of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes at national level .
For example , the Council decisions of 13 June 2002 and 8 May 2003 established the capacity for the Member States to cooperate at national , intergovernmental level to prosecute these crimes , which fortunately - and we all remember the case of General Pinochet - are even part of the legislation in some Member States .
For example Spain , not to mention other countries , has what is called universal justice , which means crimes that are so serious that even if they have been committed outside a country they can be tried there , if possible , even if that means going beyond the sacred principle of territoriality in criminal law .
This principle has been waived in practice by some states where crimes that are particularly intolerable and deeply damaging to the dignity of humanity itself can be prosecuted even outside the territory in which they are committed .
One aspect of this area of freedom , security and justice is what has been called the Stockholm Programme , at a time when the Treaty of Lisbon is already opening up this area not only to the intergovernmental sphere but also to the sphere that is strictly and clearly the EU .
It is clearly particular to the EU method and therefore gives Parliament and the Court of Justice leading roles that they did not have before .
The Stockholm Programme is extremely important , which is why we welcome its adoption by the Council in December 2009 and subsequently by the European Council .
It is a programme that sets out a clear programme of work for the European Union and its Member States , and places the interests and needs of the people at the heart of its priorities for the next few years .
It is therefore an extremely important programme .
The programme establishes - and if you will allow me I will refer once again to the previous debate - the obligation for the Member States to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the prosecution of crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity , so that they do not go unpunished .
This is part of the Stockholm Programme that was adopted at the end of last year under the Swedish Presidency .
We are therefore talking about an extremely important programme , which must be implemented and set out in detail .
In this respect , we recognise the importance of the communication from the Commission entitled ' Delivering an area of freedom , security and justice for Europe 's citizens - Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm Programme ' , which presents initiatives to help implement the programme .
The Stockholm Programme enables us to build on previous achievements and face new challenges , taking advantage of the new opportunities presented by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is a new era .
Institutionally , it is probably , to a greater extent , a genuine revolution - if you will allow me to speak so emphatically - because it is a genuine legal and institutional revolution for an area of freedom , security and justice that was previously entirely in the intergovernmental sphere to now clearly move into the EU sphere .
This is initially taking shape in the important Stockholm Programme .
The Council acknowledges the importance that Parliament has as the colegislator , as an institutional partner , in relation to the majority of the measures that we are going to adopt in the next five years .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , you know it already , but let me briefly present you with the action plan of the Commission , entitled ' Delivering an area of freedom , security and justice for Europe 's citizens ' , an action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme .
This action plan is a guide for very concrete measures to be taken during the next five years .
But first let me go back a step : it has been proven by events of the last weeks and months that there is a shared sense of urgency to confront the economic and social situation of Europe , as well as a very clear expectation from our citizens that the EU must act rapidly and decisively .
You will recall the adoption of the work programme of the Commission at the end of March , the content of which showed that the Commission not only has the intention but is already taking action .
It focused , among other things , on the need for the EU to build a citizens ' agenda which puts the people at the heart of European action .
The action plan in the area of justice and home affairs is the first strategic initiative of the new Commission in order to put this work programme into practice ; it follows very closely the mandates , as well as the broader philosophy , of the Stockholm Programme , and it takes into consideration the proposals and suggestions by Parliament and by the Council .
The challenge of ensuring the respect for fundamental rights and freedoms , while also integrating and guaranteeing security in Europe , is addressed here in what we think to be a comprehensive way .
The set of initiatives laid down are a roadmap - a roadmap to a free and secure Europe .
We believe that you cannot separate freedom from security : they are two sides of the same coin ; they are all related to the citizens and this is one way of getting citizens more acquainted with Europe .
The action plan will guide us in delivering an ambitious set of very concrete measures in a field where the added value of Europe will be very visible to our citizens .
It is also a powerful message reiterating what we have been discussing before , that the Treaty of Lisbon and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights are actions for the citizens .
As all these actions are interlinked , indispensable and consistent with the scale of ambition which have been fixed in the Treaty of Lisbon and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we have to reach this ambitious outcome as quickly as possible in line with citizens ' expectations .
That is also why Parliament should not view this action plan as being carved in stone ; there might be unexpected events , and if there are such unexpected events , the Commission will certainly make use of its right of initiative in order to help solve the problems .
That is why we have the intention - and this will be important for Parliament - to submit a mid-term review of the implementation of the Stockholm Programme in 2012 , in order to ensure that the programme remains in line with European and global developments .
But , as the Minister-in-Office of the Council already has rightly said , this action plan is not only about what the European Commission is going to propose .
It is also very much about what the Member States are going to do : how the Member States are going to take their initiatives where subsidiarity is at stake ; how they are going to implement European Union decisions in their national law ; and how they are going to collaborate with other Member States .
Therefore , this action plan will only be a success story in the end if all the institutions play their role , and I am very confident that Parliament will help us to advance quickly on the right road .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Commission for its timely presentation of a very concrete action plan to empower European citizens .
I have been very active in the discussions in Parliament because I truly believe that the Stockholm Programme is the best way forward to a citizen-centred Europe : a Europe for citizens , with the people .
I therefore invite the Commission to stick to the vision of the Stockholm Programme when presenting the specific proposals for the next five years .
The programme adopted represents a real balance between providing security to citizens while respecting their rights , freedoms and integrity , and strengthening their citizenship .
On the action plan , I particularly welcome the measures presented recently to combat trafficking in human beings and child abuse and to increase the protection of unaccompanied minors - to mention just a few .
I also welcome the fact that the action plan includes a strategy to combat female genital mutilation , domestic violence and violence against women .
I nevertheless wish that this proposal could have been presented earlier than scheduled , Madam Commissioner .
We also need to encourage the participation of citizens during the process and ensure the transparency of decision making and the openness of documents .
I hope that the measures will be presented in a user friendly way .
To conclude , I look forward to continuing working with my colleagues in Parliament , and with the Commission and the Council , to really deliver an area of freedom , security and justice , and make it a reality .
I would like to make a few general and a few specific remarks regarding the plan .
Of course we consider the Stockholm Programme to be very important .
It is precisely for this reason that the action plan has been somewhat disappointing , since its ambitions do not truly reflect the importance this Parliament has attached to it or the size of the majority with which it voted on amendments on several topics .
We see that the most important or many important points in the plan have been deferred until 2013-2014 , and as regards this year , we can already see a certain level of slippage .
It seems to be a general problem as well that cooperation between the Commission and Parliament with regard to international treaties has not yet been clarified .
Although the feedback has improved considerably , such as the feedback on the SWIFT and TFTP negotiations with the US , there are still some points that have yet to be clarified .
I wish to make a few concrete proposals : we regret that hate speech does not appear in the draft legislation but only the reports and the framework decision referring to implementation appear among the plans .
Likewise , the provision of information on human rights is not sufficiently categorical .
We know that implementation is related to the degree to which people are aware of their rights .
In connection with immigration , I would like to mention that cooperation has begun but there seems to be an inadequate level of ambition .
There are two other important issues .
The first concerns reciprocity on visas , where new , effective solutions are needed due to both the reintroduction of the visa requirement and inequalities .
The second concerns the free movement of labour where it is important to put an end to the discrimination that continues to exist against new Member States .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the Stockholm Programme is undoubtedly ambitious , but we still need to adopt an action plan that would implement it in the most efficient way .
Efficiency means not only a suitable timetable , but it also refers to the content of the legislation that we will adopt in the coming years and to the institutions that will be built upon in the future .
If we want the Union to be more coherent , we have to work towards a level of trust and mutual recognition in the judicial area or on police cooperation , similar to the principle which has governed the EU single market .
To achieve it , we need to shift our views on our legal traditions , which should no longer be perceived , used or misused to prevent us having minimum standards , particularly in criminal law .
Our citizens demand and deserve better protection against terrorism and against organised or trans-border crime .
It is our duty to provide for this protection , but we have to do it while fully respecting not only the rights of the victims but also those of the defendants as well .
This is why minimal procedural standards must apply to all EU Member States and if we need to be bold for these , we shall be .
We will be bold when entrusting Eurojust with more power or when we have to protect the data of our citizens or when we will have to regulate on the asylum package .
My political group is determined to constructively work with the Commission and the Council and , at the same time , to persistently fight for the protection of human rights .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , listening to the Commissioner and the Council representative on the Stockholm Programme , some questions come to mind .
It is now close to the end of the Spanish Presidency , with five weeks to go .
At the beginning , we heard great ideas from the Spanish Presidency on asylum , migration , the Anti-Discrimination Directive and the emancipation of women , but I must say that , with five weeks to go , I wonder where the concrete results and proposals are .
The Commission and Parliament did their work on asylum and migration , and we are really waiting for the Council to act .
It is not only - as Commissioner Reding said - the individual Member State that needs to implement its laws .
It is the Council that needs to come up with ideas on Dublin , on the Reception Directive , on the Eurodac system and on the Qualification Directive .
We really are waiting for it .
The Anti-Discrimination Directive is something this plenary voted for and the Greens are really waiting for that .
Turning to the Commission on that issue , equality and anti-discrimination are , of course , fundamental basics in the Stockholm Programme , but why did the Commission not choose to make same-sex partnerships a priority for this action plan ?
You said people would be put at the centre .
Organising same-sex partnerships is putting people at the centre .
Could you give me an explanation as to why ?
With regard to Europol , in the pre-Lisbon era , Europol was submitted to a minimum of scrutiny by Parliament , and that is still the case , although we now have the Lisbon Treaty .
For example , the competence to enter into negotiations for cooperation agreements with third countries is based on Council decisions that date from a couple of years back .
It is rumoured that Europol is now discussing a treaty with Israel , and who knows what other countries are being approached for treaties .
The Lisbon Treaty gives Parliament a new role , and I would like the Commission to act upon it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 170 measures in five years , numbers that are too ambitious for a programme devoid of any real connotation , especially when it comes to certain issues .
Where immigration is concerned , the programme is embarrassingly weak when you look beyond the official documents : what is the point of promising to strengthen bodies and agencies if there is then no political strategy ?
A truly useful strategy that must be based on some firm points : the fight against illegal immigration along the southern border , ensuring that responsibilities for opposing illegal immigration are shared between all European States , a policy of agreements with third countries , especially the recognition that immigration is not a resource at a time of crisis .
Parliament 's homepage tells us that more than 20 % of young people in Europe are unemployed .
On a continent where 25 million people are out of work , the Commissioner for Home Affairs says that the issue of immigration must be based on solidarity .
Instead , what is really needed is joined-up reasoning and realism : today , our priority is giving work to our citizens !
All the rest is do-gooding rhetoric that does not help immigrants to integrate , and certainly does not help our people .
( ES ) Madam President , we are talking about more than 360 actions in five years .
From my perspective , the presentation of the action plan should have been given more time in Parliament in order to give Members the opportunity to debate and , more importantly , to amend the proposals .
Let us look at some examples : combating radicalisation ; monitoring terrorist funding and the possibility of creating a European Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ( TFTP ) ; the coordination of the Joint Situation Centre ( SitCen ) , Europol and Eurojust in the fight against terror and organised crime ; combating the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes ; amending the Frontex Regulation ; and the viability of creating a European border guards system .
Along with what I have mentioned , there is a great deal more that has been said .
These are very important issues that would have been worthy of a different parliamentary format .
In addition it is notable that in relation to protecting the victims of crime , the plan only proposes one measure : creating a global instrument for protecting victims , which will include victims of terrorism .
I believe - and this would be an amendment that I have not been able to table due to the rules - that the creation of a special instrument to protect the victims of terrorism should be an inalienable priority for the European Union .
I would like to stress that this is my view .
To conclude , Mrs Reding , with reference to Europol , I would like to know why a Council decision is going to be replaced by a Europol regulation by 2013 .
( SK ) There are several areas in the action plan of the Stockholm Programme I would like to talk about , and as we have to move on , I will name these problem areas .
I definitely consider the EU 's common asylum system to be a problem area , which we have discussed together at least several times here , where , on the one hand , the Commission talks of the need for legal migrants or immigrants to be successfully integrated into the common system but , on the other , the action plan displays very little ambition in this direction .
Likewise , it appears that we do not expect a proposal for the unified processing of asylum applications until 2014 , and therefore no mutual recognition of the rights of refugees between EU Member States either .
Your plans are nonetheless quite concrete in the area of restricting the influx and movement of immigrants or migrants , for example , seasonal workers .
So , to be brief , there is no progressive and fair common asylum system in sight , and the plan specifies rather repressive measures .
I would like to mention at least two more areas .
The first is the sad fact that , even in the Commission 's own words , progress over the mutual recognition of registered same-sex partnerships within an EU framework is not a priority , and the sidetracking of this topic really concerns me .
The final area I would like to mention is the rights of corporations .
The Stockholm Action Plan often mentions citizens and their rights , but very clearly emphasises the freedom of business without sufficient regulations , which is at least surprising , particularly in the context of the current financial and economic crisis .
Madam President , for me , the best bit of the action plan is the list of five concrete measures regarding rights of the individual in criminal proceedings that comprise the roadmap endorsed by the Stockholm Programme .
I speak as rapporteur on the first of these measures on interpretation and translation for defendants on which , I am pleased to say , I reached provisional agreement with the Spanish Presidency this very morning and I hope that our respective institutions will endorse that result .
I do thank Commissioner Reding for her staunch support as we drew solidly on the Commission proposal and Commission representatives made a full contribution , so my personal thanks to her .
We are finally , a decade overdue , but finally building the mutual trust necessary for mutual recognition .
My support for the European arrest warrant is qualified by my dismay and indeed anger at some miscarriages of justice and the way it currently operates such as in the cases of Gary Mann and Andrew Symeou that I am involved in .
If we had these measures in place a decade ago , I believe those miscarriages of justice would not be happening .
( MT ) Madam President , I agree with those who say that the Common European Market , the single market , is probably the largest project the European Union has ever undertaken .
I believe that this project , which favours European citizens , is the next big task for the European Union .
It is interesting that the single market began in 1992 , the same year in which we adopted the Maastricht Treaty that introduced the concept of European citizenship .
By means of this action plan , we are now creating a space within which European citizenship can be exercised .
This can be done in several areas : human rights , civil rights , access to justice and the right of freedom of movement within the European Union .
The European Union can also serve as an example in a number of fields , namely , trafficking , combating paedophilia , children 's rights , cyber crime , and of course , immigration and asylum matters .
Nonetheless , I believe that this project requires three things : Firstly , a political stamp will give it importance and meaning for our citizens .
Secondly , respecting the subsidiarity principle , because there are certain important areas that cannot relinquish the right to employ subsidiarity .
Thirdly , deadlines : these must be honoured in this action plan , otherwise it will all come to nothing .
( ES ) Madam President , as the Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I was the co-author of the resolution adopted on the Stockholm Programme in November , along with Mr Casini and Mr Berlinguer .

I would like to point out that I said at the time that the Stockholm Programme was not going to make Parliament 's life easier in the area of freedom , security and justice but , on the contrary , it was going to make it much harder .
I want to say here that some of the requirements in the resolution that was adopted have not been reflected by being clearly set out in the action plan proposed by the Commission .
Therefore , as I am aware of the limitations of parliamentary debate and parliamentary intervention in the debate on the action plan , I do wish to point out that paragraphs 148 to 150 of the parliamentary resolution contained some precise indications regarding extremely important issues .
Many of these have been stated , from victim protection to the institutions and agencies related to Schengen , Europol , Eurojust , Frontex and the European Asylum Support Office and its pending new regulations , but there were also some regulations on substantial and fundamental problems , such as data protection and the clause to combat discrimination .
The interdependence of data protection and security has certainly been debated in Parliament , in particular , during the debate on the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ( TFTP ) , and the debate highlighted the need for Europe to make its own commitment to an appropriate balance between security and privacy .
What is really important , however , is that the Commission now has five years of work ahead of it to implement each of the links in the action plan for the Stockholm Programme step by step .
I therefore call on it to really work very hard with Parliament to take into account all of the commitments relating to paragraphs 148 and 150 of the resolution , keeping in mind that if the Commission does not work diligently and closely with Parliament , it will be vigilant and it will make proposals .
It will , of course , also work with the Council , which can adopt initiatives that might deserve to be considered and dealt with by Parliament .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , I , in turn , wish to say how pleased I am to be talking about this action plan , the roadmap , as Mrs Reding called it , for implementing the Stockholm Programme .
It deals with a host of fundamental issues , and rather than compile a random list in the very little time I have , I will simply focus on those points that will cause some frustration - one on form and one on substance - to talk about this issue .
In terms of form , as we have said in this debate , we have set ourselves some very precise deadlines for the implementation of the measures , and I would like us to try our best to take concrete action , so that we are not simply paying lip service to ideals .
To that end , in terms of substance , we must address two main points in order to make a success of this implementation .
We must define some priorities .
On the question of substance , Mrs Reding spoke of added value .
I suggest that we press ahead with some points that we consider more urgent than others : firstly , on legal cooperation , so that we are on the same page in legal terms , with , of course , a kind of Erasmus for judges , but why not a kind of Erasmus for all the legal professions and another for the police professions ?
Then , the second point in terms of substance , and a key priority , is that of taking every possible measure to ensure the rights of children , to protect them , and to combat cyber crime , child pornography and sexual exploitation .
( EL ) The big word missing from immigration programmes is the word ' solidarity ' .
Today , we voted on the resettlement of asylum seekers from third countries in Europe , but the Commission programme refuses to promote a similar provision for the settlement of asylum seekers from one country of Europe to another or for money .
Whatever happened to solidarity ?
Over 100 000 illegal immigrants arrive in Greece from Turkey every year .
Whatever happened to the Europe-Turkey agreement on the return of these illegal immigrants ?
It is being side-stepped and is barely even mentioned in our programme .
Whatever happened to the agreement being negotiated by Frontex with Turkey today ?
Can you assure us that it will not directly or indirectly dispute the sovereign rights of Greece , and hence of Europe , on the borders ?
Finally , of course , there is the huge obligation of solidarity towards immigrants themselves called ' integration ' .
Without the integration of immigrants , there is no way that 40 million people who have come to live among us will be able to do so on equal terms .
We may be building time bombs .
Programmes are needed , money is needed and , at the moment , the Commission does not have them .
( ES ) ( Start of speech with microphone switched off ) I feel that a Europe in which the borders have disappeared and in which there is an increasing amount of supranational crime needs to have more ambition from the point of view of responding to the problem of supranational crime .

I believe that we need to have greater ambition in terms of police coordination , in other words , Europol ; judicial coordination , in other words , Eurojust ; the European public prosecutor ; the technical standardisation of criminal investigations ; unifying criminal trial law ; and in terms of bringing the respective criminal legal systems closer together .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there is little ambition and too much national resistance , and I urge you , especially in the Council , to overcome the pro-sovereignty tendency of the Member States , and to unify our criminal justice systems in order to effectively combat insecurity and supranational crime .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the opportunity offered by the Stockholm Programme is definitely an important one : a high number of positive actions that the Commission must implement , carving out a real common space for freedom , justice and security .
Achieving these aims , however , requires a method of cooperation between European institutions , and between these institutions and the Member States , which are an indispensable instrument of true cooperation .
Issues such as the regulation of migratory flows according to objective criteria of fairness , the dignity of people in today 's overcrowded prisons , the welfare of those who are rehabilitated after drug addiction , the revitalisation of agencies , the opposition to organised crime at cross-border level , make this genuine cooperation truly necessary .
The activities of our Parliament are obviously centred on this challenge , and also provide strong and definite stimulus for the Commission and other Community institutions , as well as for Member States .
Madam President , Dame Sarah Ludford said that she had some concerns about miscarriages of justice in relation to the European Arrest Warrant , in the cases of Andrew Symeou and Gary Mann .
That is an understatement if ever there was one !
The European Arrest Warrant is a gross miscarriage of justice in itself .
Extradition has been reduced to a mere bureaucratic formality .
British courts have been stripped of their ability to protect British citizens from unjust arrest and imprisonment when they are extradited to a foreign country .
I know because I sat in the appeal court in the case of Andrew Symeou when two Senior Law Lords were unable to prevent the extradition of Mr Symeou , even though it was obvious to everybody in the court that the evidence was either non-existent or fabricated by the police .
But of course , that is the whole point , because the court is not allowed to look at the evidence ; they have no right .

Dame Sarah and the Lib Dems can cry crocodile tears now over cases like Mr Symeou , but they have to bear responsibility for the human misery which they have caused .
( EL ) Madam President , it was with real satisfaction that we voted in the Stockholm Programme for provisions which refer to solidarity on immigration issues and in the fight against illegal immigration .
I read in the action plan that the Commission will create an instrument in 2011 to evaluate national asylum systems , so that it can provide better assistance to the Member States in terms of each one 's capabilities and needs .
At the same time , however , we have given the go-ahead in this Parliament for the European Asylum Support Office to start operating in Malta .
The question is this : will the European Asylum Support Office have anything to do with this mechanism and , via this mechanism , with the evaluation carried out ?
Has provision been made for an internal resettlement programme for refugees in order to even out the pressures between the Member States ?
Madam President , I would like to refer to the mechanism to assess corruption in the Member States - the mechanism that is provided for in the action plan .
We have a Council decision for the Stockholm Programme , which refers to this matter , and we have the Commission action plan on implementing the Stockholm Programme .
They both refer to an evaluation of the anti-corruption efforts in the Member States .
Therefore , we need strong political will and commitment from the Member States for such a mechanism to come into place .
I say this because we all know that , so far , the domestic efforts have not been effective in all Member States , to say the least .
Secondly , the deadline for the communication in the action plan on the Union 's policy and mechanism against corruption is 2011 .
I would like to suggest having it done before the end of 2010 .
This would better respond to the need of combating corruption in the Union , as corruption is also seen as a cause of the economic crisis .
Therefore , it would be a measure to stop and prevent it .

Madam President , what is really at the heart of this debate on the European area of freedom , security and justice is something that I think was rightly said by Mr Busuttil when he was talking about European citizenship .
What we are talking about here is the composition of that European citizenship , which we need to deepen .
This is certainly one of the focuses of the new political phase beginning in Europe with the Treaty of Lisbon , and it has , of course , been one of the focuses for the Spanish Presidency .
There was a very clear and direct question on this to the Council from Mrs Sargentini , on what had been done by the Spanish Presidency during this period and what is in place for the future .
I thank her for this very direct question , and I am going to try to structure my response around some points that all relate to European citizenship and the content of rights , freedoms , securities and justice : in short , the status of European citizens in the 21st century .
With regard to freedoms , we were talking earlier about accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
This is one of the Spanish Presidency 's priorities .
I refer to the extensive debate that we had earlier .
I also believe that , in relation to freedoms and rights , we need to talk about the directive on rights to interpretation and translation in criminal proceedings .
As you know , work is under way on this directive .
We are waiting for the European Commission to make a proposal in general terms on the very specific directive mentioned by Mrs Sargentini : the non-discrimination directive .
This is a very ambitious and very important directive .
The Presidency of the Council does , of course , support it , and we are awaiting the Commission 's initiative .
Issues surrounding victims have been a concern and a priority for the Spanish Presidency , especially victims of gender violence .
I would like to say to you that during this period , progress has been made on the directive to combat people trafficking .
With regard to the directive to combat sexual abuse , we are working on reaching a common position in June .
Work is also being done on a legislative initiative to combat gender violence : the European Protection Order , which is currently being debated in various parliamentary committees : the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Gender violence is undoubtedly the biggest scourge that exists with the greatest number of victims in European societies .
The Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council ( EPSCO ) also adopted the European Observatory on Violence against Women and the helpline for victims last month .
Regarding security issues , the internal security strategy was adopted in the March European Council .
In relation to this , the constitution has been adopted for the Standing Committee on operational cooperation on internal security .
There have been agreements with the United States on security issues , and agreements are in progress : the Toledo Declaration on security and civil aviation ; the SWIFT issue , which is very well known to parliament , on which there is a mandate for negotiating a political agreement with the United States as soon as possible .
We are also working with the United States on a joint declaration on the fight against terrorism and an agreement on data protection .
With regard to civil cooperation , we hope to agree the Rome III Regulation , a law that applies to marriages .
In relation to the subject of immigration and asylum , which has also been mentioned in many speeches , it should be said that the Spanish Presidency is responsible for the first evaluation of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which it is going to prepare in cooperation with the Commission .
At the same time , also in cooperation with the Commission , a returns programme is under way for unaccompanied minors .
Also , in relation to asylum , the Frontex operations are being maintained , and work is being done on a European programme for refugees and on the resettlement of refugees , and also with some countries on repatriation programmes .
In addition to those , there is the European Refugee Fund , which should be ready by 2011 : the Tavares report from Parliament provides for it to be adopted by then .
So , there are various important initiatives under way in relation to immigration .
I would like to add to this response with a debate that has been taken up very constructively by the Commission - specifically by Commissioner Reding - on the European public prosecutor , which is provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I think this is a debate that we need to have .
It would be very interesting , not only , as the Treaty of Lisbon says , to protect the economic interests of the Union , which is , of course , a very topical subject .
It would also be very interesting at a later stage in order to be able to prosecute transnational crimes .
It is also a debate that has been launched by the Spanish Presidency of the European Union .
These are some of the specific elements that are being launched or have been launched during the Spanish Presidency , in cooperation with the Commission and Parliament .
We believe that it is absolutely crucial for us to have credibility in terms of building an open , safe Europe that protects its people .
This is the spirit in which the Spanish Presidency wants to continue , along with the trio of presidencies that will be operated by our partners : Belgium and Hungary .
This is the Spanish Presidency 's intention , and we are , of course , counting on the cooperation of the European Parliament , which we have .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , everybody is talking about the Stockholm Programme .
That is a Christmas tree with several hundred wishes .
I would like everybody to speak about the reality .
How were these Christmas tree wishes treated before the Lisbon Treaty ?
Behind closed doors , without much consideration for the citizens and what they want , wish for and expect ; in the third pillar , where ministers of the interior were asking neither the European Parliament nor the Commission , and where the European Court of Justice had no possibility to intervene .
That is where we are starting from : an impossible situation . Where de minimis decisions were not even carried out at national level , where citizens did not have the means or the instruments to go to court , to protest and to seek justice .
Fortunately , we now have the Lisbon Treaty .
There is no third pillar any more .
There are Commission proposals , codecision , implementation at Member State level , control by the European Court of Justice , but that means also that things cannot be done instantly any more .
Rules and proposals have to follow the normal way , under which you parliamentarians have asked the Commission to conduct its work .
First , a thorough analysis of what is feasible , what is good , what has added value .
Second , public consultation , in order to know whether the ideas that we put on the table will be accepted or not by civil society , by industry , by the Member States , by the national parliaments , which are now a player in all these questions and which conduct the subsidiarity test .
And then , impact assessments , in order to see if what we are doing is the right way .
And , only then , we have the definite proposal from the Commission .
If you want the Commission to continue to do as has been done over the last number of years , just tell me , and I will come with a proposal every week .
And do you know what will happen with those proposals ?
They will first be blocked in the national parliaments , and rightly so , because we have to come with serious proposals based on the legal assumptions that what we are doing is strong , is feasible and can be implemented in the Member States .
I do not want the first proposal we make to be challenged before the Court of Justice and before the Court of Human Rights .
I would like to lead all of us to the way where the citizens will understand that the added value of what we are doing here is of real benefit to them in practical terms .
Yes , as the Commissioner responsible for women 's affairs , I have heard this Parliament discussing what we need to do , most of all in order to give legal certainty to women in all our Member States , that when they have a problem of violence , they will get justice and not the illusion that they hope they will get justice and then they get nowhere and end up with nothing .
So here we really have to work together .
There are hundreds of measures which have to be ' Lisbonised ' , which have to be taken out of the hole and brought into the light of day , which have to be adapted to the real rules of law - hundreds of measures that do not work .
The arrest warrant : Ms Ludford was just speaking about this .
Of course it is not carried out in the Member States because the construction around the mutual recognition and the mutual trust , which is at the basis of the mutual recognition , has not been built up .
Colleagues , you cannot do all this without having mutual trust .
I am sorry , I cannot by decree insert mutual trust in the heads of the judges all over Europe !
We have to build this mutual trust with the legislation and with the measures to boost the rights of citizens in all our Member States , so that the judges also implement the rules we have been looking for and , yes , we are advancing very quickly on this .
An action plan , well , the colleague is not there any more , but an action plan for combating the violence against women .
In 2011 , a comprehensive text about protecting the victims , all kinds of victims - for me there is not a victim here , a victim there and a third category of victims - all kinds of victims have to be considered .
Yes , we have been working on data protection ; when fortunately you , Parliament , said no to the way things have been working before Lisbon was implemented .
We will not continue like this any more and , yes , Chairman of the committee , you know that your committee and the other committees are fully integrated in the way we are preceding .
We will have many things to do together : very technical questions , which will have a very important impact on our society .
We will have to do something ; we will have to explain to the citizens what we are doing .
Because that is also a part of the whole thing and it is not the easiest part of the whole issue .
Yes , we have to take measures , for instance , on illegal immigration and asylum and , as you have seen , my colleague , Cecilia Malmström , has very concrete proposals on illegal immigration , on border controls , on legal migration .
Yes , it would be important if the Parliament could , together with the Council , adopt the existing proposals , the asylum package , the simple permit proposal , the joint resettlement programme , the mutual recognition and the just adopted action plan for unaccompanied minors .
There is an awful lot in the pipeline .
It is not about who is going to do what because certain things you simply cannot do .
Here is an example : you asked for the Anti-Discrimination Directive .
The Anti-Discrimination Directive , I am sorry to say , is a question that has to be solved by unanimity and it is blocked in the Council .
So what do you want me to do - not me , because it was before my time - the Commission has put anti-discrimination on the table , unanimity is blocked in the Council ?
So speak to the Council ; speak with those who are blocking it .
Same-sex couples : well you know perfectly well that it is the prerogative of subsidiarity , the competence of Member States to regulate the way they treat same-sex couples .
Where the European Union comes in is the cross-border treatment of these same-sex couples .
But I cannot do the work for France , for Italy , for Poland , for Romania , for Greece and for Luxembourg ; that has to be done by those Member States alone .
I can see there is no discrimination if those people , from wherever they come , are exercising their rights to cross-border mobility , and that is what we are going to do .
We have started already to see that , in terms of mobility , in terms of citizens rights , in terms of collaboration between the legal systems , in terms of eliminating the borders that still exist in this single market , which , sorry to say , is not a single market when it comes to citizens .
That is why I am very happy ; I have read the report by Mario Monti .
There are many elements in this report , which say where we have to move .
You know what is my bible ?
The report , which was drawn up by one of your Members , contains all the elements on the free movement of citizens and all the problems that have to be solved .
Now what I propose to you is to take them , one by one , and solve them , one by one , in full cooperation with you .
When I put on the table a proposal , and you have seen how it goes , you will have so many proposals that you will have to work at night - I do not know if it is permitted under employment rules and human rights , but I will not care for your human rights as Members of Parliament .
We will work until we have solved these problems - there are hundreds of problems to be solved and I cannot do it alone .
I need your very constructive help .
I know I will get this help but help me to work on one element after the other , even if it has to be one element per week .
It is going to be on your table .
I am willing to come to your committees as often as you call me , Madam President , and we will discuss this over , element by element .
In five years ' time , with your help , we will have changed this continent .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0211 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Communication providing for a higher target for greenhouse gas emission cuts
A few days ago , the Commission released to the media a communication to Parliament , the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions in which it raised the possibility of increasing the target for greenhouse gas emission cuts to be met by 2020 under the climate and energy package from 20 % to 30 % .
A number of remarks need to be made on this proposal .
First , lowering the costs involved in cutting emissions would give a much-needed breather to national budgets , which the Member States are currently struggling to balance .
Second , greenhouse gas emission levels have been falling sharply as a result of the recession , although they may be expected to rise again as we emerge from the crisis and production is scaled up .
As a result , the cost of making cuts will rise again .
Third , it is questionable whether this is the appropriate moment to raise the target , as this would precipitate a fresh increase in reduction costs , which , at a time when we are just starting to emerge from recession , could meet with understandable resistance from the business world .
What is the Commission 's reaction to the above remarks ?
Member of the Commission . - I will promise to start answering very briefly because the document to which the honourable Member refers is not a document adopted by the Commission and its release was not authorised , but later this month , the Commission intends to adopt the Communication to the Council and the Parliament assessing the benefits and the costs of the EU stepping up to a target of 30 % reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
This communication was actually requested by the Environment Council in its conclusions dated 15 March this year .
So , needless to say , we have had a very short time , but we think it is an important debate ; afterwards , there will , of course , be a lot of details that we have to look at more closely .
In addition , this communication will present , as requested under the ETS Directive , an analysis of the situation of energy intensive sectors that it has been determined are exposed to a risk of carbon leakage in the light of the outcome of Copenhagen .
But let me just say one thing very clearly .
It is not the intention of the Commission to take a decision to go to 30 % the day after this communication has been presented .
It is just one step to try to ensure that , when we have the discussions on these reduction targets , we have a very informed foundation to take this discussion forward from .
That is the purpose of this - to give us the analysis , the costs , the figures and the calculations , so that we can have an informed debate .
I really hope that Parliament will also take part in this debate .
The document indicates that increased greenhouse gas emission cuts in Central and Eastern Europe will be of fundamental significance for achievement of the new target .
It is true the Commission does note that such measures will require significant financial outlays , but it wants to look for this money in the structural funds for these countries .
In other words , this would depend on redirecting means earmarked for other purposes , in particular , for reducing disparities in development between European Union Member States and the standard of living in these states , and would , for example , take place at the cost of development of the road infrastructure in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Member of the Commission . - I hope the honourable Member will respect the fact that I will not go into detail about one draft out of many that has been leaked .
It would not be appropriate for me to do so .
I said during my hearing at the European Parliament that we should take care that when we spend European Union money for different purposes , we also ensure that the different projects - infrastructure was mentioned for instance - are being climate-proofed .
I do not , however , think that anybody can give an answer at this stage as to exactly how we would do that if we were to go to a 30 % reduction by 2020 .
Instead , we are trying to provide an analysis and invite the Members of Parliament and the Council , among others , to take part in the debate .
( RO ) We voted today on the report on the amendment to the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive .
This is only the beginning of a new process where we can actually cut emissions and energy consumption in buildings significantly .
As my fellow Member has also said , we still need funds .
I hope that we have your support for a significant increase in the allocation rate from the ERDF for energy efficiency in housing , as well as for the creation of a fund , starting in 2014 , for improving energy efficiency in the industrial sector too .
Commissioner , does not the original question demonstrate the scale of the problem you face when addressing this issue ?
Many Members here and many governments represented in the Council just do not accept the need for urgent action to prevent climate change .
It is easy for them to sign up to pious resolutions at a time of economic prosperity , but , now that is not the case , they are reluctant to sign up to practical action .
Do you not need to address the problem of climate change denial if you are to raise our ambitions ?
Member of the Commission . - Firstly , I would like to study whatever you have agreed today on energy efficiency in buildings .
There are many ways to cope with improved efforts there .
There are also some alternative financial models that can be used so that it would be in the interest of those taking care of the buildings to make them much more energy efficient .
There will be many ways of doing that - not necessarily requiring funds - and I would be happy to look into that .
I agree very much with the questioner that one of the areas where we can do so much more in Europe would be within the field of energy efficiency and buildings .
There is such a huge potential there and it is just stupid that we use a lot of energy that none of us really benefit from because we are not using it efficiently enough .
In response to Chris Davies , and regarding climate change deniers : I try to address it when I meet it .
Despite all the discussions - and particularly in the United Kingdom you have a huge discussion on this with East Anglia and , although the IPCC should be better at correcting errors when they find them - to this day , I have seen nothing that really goes against the main finding of science , namely that we have to address this issue and we have to be serious about it .
I think there are so many other reasons - which climate sceptics should also agree with - that it is so important to do something with energy efficiency and energy technologies .
If Europe is not ambitious here , I am very much afraid that we will lose the growing markets of this century to our competitors .
Carbon leakage is not a case where if we do things , we risk losing jobs .
I am really afraid that if we are too hesitant over the next number of years , we risk losing jobs on a very large scale .
I am very happy to see that the new British Government also seems to be very keen on being ambitious in the field of climate change .
I think that is very crucial to all of us .
Subject : Action by the Commission on copyright
Article 118 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which gives the Union competence to legislate in the field of intellectual property rights , stipulates that : ' in the context of the establishment and functioning of the internal market , the European Parliament and the Council , acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure , shall establish measures for the creation of European intellectual property rights to provide uniform protection of intellectual property rights throughout the Union and for the setting up of centralised Union-wide authorisation , coordination and supervision arrangements ' .
The lack of a single EU legal framework governing copyright is a major barrier to the development of an internal market in copyrighted goods .
What initiatives does the Commission intend to take in the area of copyright , pursuant to Article 118 of the TFEU ?
I would firstly like to thank Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg for her question .
It goes right to the heart of the current debates on copyright and the Internet .
Unfortunately , too often , copyright is presented as an obstacle to the creation of a single digital market .
I think that is unfair .
Copyright allows the creator to sell what he has created and guarantees him a return on his investment .
Moreover , that is not just true in the realm of cultural creation , which Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg knows so well .
It is also true in the field of industry , of creation , of industrial innovation ; a return on the investment , thanks to which the creator will then be able to go on creating other works and new content .
This economic model , which underpins copyright , has existed for many hundreds of years , but rights management has evolved naturally with technologies , radio , television , cable , satellite , and , today , the Internet .
Each time , new technologies have enabled us to switch to new economic models that have led to a change in the use and commercialisation of copyright .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rather than propose some radical copyright amendments , I want to protect creation while also searching for a legal framework that will allow for the emergence of new economic models .
I announced that when I appeared before you on 13 January , and this is precisely the principle that will guide my action .
Furthermore , this is the role that I envisage , with you , for the European legislator .
The digital agenda adopted by the Commission on 19 May , at the dynamic instigation of my colleague and friend , Mrs Kroes , contains my roadmap , which covers copyright and the Internet .
Moreover , this year , I will take three initiatives along these lines .
Firstly , a proposal for a framework directive on collective copyright management .
The idea here is firstly to enable collective management societies to organise themselves better in order to offer new Internet services , such as made-to-measure directories , or one-stop shops .
On the other hand , the aim is also to align the rules on the governance , transparency and supervision of collective management societies so as to allow for more transparent pricing and returns for members of collective management societies .
Secondly , a directive on orphan works : the objective is to create the necessary legal certainty to support the efforts to digitise our cultural heritage .
I am thinking about a European definition of orphan works .
Thirdly , I will present a green paper on audiovisual content and the Internet .
Here , it is a question of analysing the conditions for the emergence in Europe of new video-on-demand services .
In 2011 , we will launch a dialogue with the various interested parties on subjects that have an impact on the emergence of new value-added content services on the Internet so that we can ascertain how to clarify the existing rules .
The idea is to see what role technology can play in identifying and paying for digital content , to identify the issues surrounding the digital media , and to know how to combat the black economy of Internet piracy more effectively .
My method will be simple : I want to listen to the various interested parties while proposing action to you .
I want a Europe that allows for the emergence of new economic models .
I have no preconceived idea of the type of intervention that will be needed , legislative or otherwise .
Neither am I dogmatic or deluded about the chances of finding one-size-fits-all solutions .
However , I would like to use this new process of recovery of the internal market and of the digital agenda - which , incidentally , Mr Monti spoke of in his report - to develop a real economic policy for the cultural sector in Europe .
I welcome the initiatives being taken by the Commission .
I have a supplementary question concerning the 2008 Green Paper entitled ' Copyright in the Knowledge Economy ' , in which the Commission admits that the current system of optional exceptions to copyright protection put in place by the 2001 directive is not fulfilling its purpose , in other words , that it does not facilitate distribution of works protected by copyright and does not reflect a balance between the rights of authors and the rights of people who use their works .
Furthermore , what is important is that mandatory exceptions to copyright protection are highly necessary for libraries , for making works available to blind people and also for distribution of orphan works .
I would like to ask what initiatives the Commission is planning to present in the near future in relation to these exceptions to copyright protection ?
Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , you also asked me about a point that I would like to confirm , about how the Commission will act ; you would like it to make a statement on the use of Article 118 of the treaty .
I can confirm that , on this point , this is not the approach that we have chosen .
Our preferred approach is to create a regulatory framework favouring pan-European copyright licences .
This is a pragmatic approach that would allow us to achieve the desired results in a more effective way than the introduction of a new unique and centralised copyright .
Moreover , I would say that this Green Paper is very important and must enable us to ask many questions , and to move ideas forward .
In particular , I am thinking about the question of the partially sighted .
You wonder why we are not more ambitious as regards the creation of a single European copyright .
The biggest obstacle to the introduction of an EU copyright , Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , is that it would absolutely have to take precedence over national copyright in order to be effective .
In other words , the European Union copyright should prevail over national copyright , which frankly seems difficult to sell , both culturally and politically .
Even if such an approach were accepted by the Member States , it would have a rather limited impact because it could not be applied to old works .
It could only be applied to recently created works .
Therefore , the new copyright would not apply to all pre-existing musical compositions .
I also said why I wanted to work on a directive concerning orphan works .
However , before arriving at a definitive wording of this draft directive , I will be careful to consult those MEPs , yourself included , who are most involved in this issue .
( RO ) I would like to ask you if you are intending to revise the directive on copyright and related rights in the information society .
I am asking this as we need legal certainty .
Unfortunately , exceptions have been interpreted in different ways in different countries , which has resulted in different decisions on the same matter in different Member States .
This is why I believe that it is useful for us to carry out a review , especially in the light of the new Treaty of Lisbon .
Mrs Ţicău , to answer your question very clearly , for the time being , we do not intend to amend the catalogue of exceptions in the 2001 directive .
We have adopted an approach that I believe is pragmatic and progressive , with these three initiatives that I mentioned on collective management , orphan works and the Green Paper , and it is therefore in that framework that we will deal with the concerns you express .
However , we do not intend to amend the catalogue of exceptions .
Subject : The EU 's State aid map
Would the Commission be open to a wholesale review of the EU 's State aid map for the period 2007-2013 ?
While there will be a review this year , is it true that the State aid map review only allows a form of ' exchange ' as opposed to redesignating regions to reflect new economic realities following the financial crisis ?
The current State aid map was agreed based on statistics from 2006 .
The European economy is now radically different .
Would the Commission accept that this fact represents a weakness in the current map and how does it feel it can be addressed ?
Member of the Commission . - I have been asked by Mr Almunia to answer this question .
In order to ensure continuity of the regional development effort , the Commission decided in 2006 that the list of regions designated by Member States as part of the regional aid maps should apply through the whole period 2007 to 2013 .
However , the Commission recognised in its guidelines for national regional aid that situations might arise where adjustments are necessary and , in accordance with point 104 of the guidelines , Member States were therefore offered the possibility to proceed to a mid-term review of the regional aid maps regarding regions designated under Article 107 ( 3 ) ( c ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Three out of seventeen Member States concerned by the mid-term review have decided to use this possibility .
Under the mid-term review , Member States can replace up to half of the regions at present eligible for regional aid by newly designated regions .
Under certain conditions , it is also possible to increase the aid intensities for regions already designated under the original regional aid map .
As part of the mid-term review , the eligibility of the newly designated regions , and of the possible increases in aid intensities , is assessed on the basis of the average of the most recent years of the Eurostat data as regards gross domestic product per capita and unemployment at the relevant NUTS level 3 region .
This helps to ensure regional investment aid is targeted towards the economic development of regions which are disadvantaged in relation to the national average .
The fact that only three of the Member States concerned by the mid-term review have decided to notify amendments to the regional aid maps seems to suggest that the majority of the Member States consider that the economic crisis has not substantially affected the set of regions in need of development aid .
author . - Thank you very much for your reply .
I find it amazing that only three states have actually applied .
It is unbelievable .
I come from a region where we have lost thousands of jobs : Dell - 3 000 jobs ; and , just today , 800 jobs have been lost through the pharmaceutical company Pfizer , 300 of them in my area , which is the south of Ireland , and that has a Gross Grant Equivalent of zero per cent .
Our government has reapplied , and I am hoping that that will change , because , if it does not , it ensures that the government cannot apply really active measures from a state point of view to bring in larger companies .
That to me is very regressive and needs to change .
So I will actively look for the Commission to pursue a different strategy , because I believe that the State aid map is out of date .
Member of the Commission . - It might indeed be strange , as the honourable Member has pointed out , that only three Member States have asked for this mid-term review .
However , that is the case according to the figures we had this morning .
Of course , many Member States and many regions are severely affected by the economic crisis , but maybe some Member States are finding that there are other ways and other means to handle this because , as we have seen , very few have asked for this review .
Seventeen Member States were given the possibility but only three have done so .
I think the honourable Member would agree with me that the basic purpose of the long-term programme is , of course , that we should have continuity for the regions in order to plan for the long term .
There are of course other means of addressing the crisis than this , but I am sure that Commissioner Almunia is willing to discuss this with you further on a later occasion .
Part two
Subject : EU-Ukraine police cooperation
How is cross-border police cooperation developing between the EU and its most important neighbour to the east , Ukraine , and what measures is the Commission planning to take to step up cooperation ?
Member of the Commission . - Thank you , Mr Posselt , for your question on a very important subject .
Cross-border police cooperation with countries which are neighbours of the European Union is primarily a competence of the Member States .
However , the European Union supports bilateral cooperation between the Member States and Ukraine mainly through the operation of Europol .
On 4 December 2009 , an agreement on strategic cooperation between Europol and Ukraine was signed that will allow coordination of the work to fight against international organised and serious crime and terrorism .
However , the strategic agreement does not allow the exchange of personal information on suspects .
That can only be exchanged with countries who have concluded an operational agreement with Europol , and , before such an agreement can be concluded , Ukraine needs to adopt a law on personal data protection and to ratify the 1981 Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data and its Protocol .
This is part of a broader Commission priority to see Ukraine establish a personal data protection regime in line with European standards .
That would allow the establishment of an actual independent data protection supervision authority , which could be supported by technical and expert assistance from the EU .
The EU also supports financial police cooperation with Ukraine through a twinning project , increasing the capacity of the Ukrainian police and the European Union Border Assistance Mission ( EUBAM ) .
And last year EUBAM , with the cooperation of FRONTEX , with OLAF and the South-East European Cooperation Initiative , supported the Nikoniy Joint Border Control Operation to improve cooperation between the Ukrainian and the Moldovan police forces in fighting cross-border crime and irregular migration .
I just wanted to ask what the situation is with regard to supporting police training and reinforcing the justice and interior authorities in Ukraine .
Does this take place as a focal area in the context of the Eastern Partnership , and are the Commission and also the European Police College involved ?
Or does this only take place at the Member State level ?
Member of the Commission . - We are , of course , in constant dialogue with Ukraine on this issue .
My colleague , Commissioner Štefan Füle , has presented a matrix of cooperation and I am very much involved in this as well .
It does cover home affairs in order to see how we can help the Ukrainian authorities to develop on these matters and how we can deepen our cooperation further .
This will also be dealt with in a meeting with the Ukrainian authorities in only a few weeks time .
Police cooperation and education as such are not foreseen in the immediate future but that could , of course , be discussed once Ukraine has carried out the necessary reforms .
We are open to cooperation with them .
They are an important neighbour .
We have lots in common .
We have common challenges concerning cross-border crime , so it would also be good for us if we could engage further in this .
Of course , the Ukrainians also need to improve , but we are there and are ready to help and assist them , and we will see what this will lead to in the longer term .
Subject : Spiralling crime rates in Europe
According to Eurostat data published a few months ago , there has been a major increase in the level of crime and violence in Europe directly linked to the economic crisis and therefore affecting with particular frequency those countries facing the most serious economic problems .
Does the Commission intend to take bolder steps with a view to achieving more effective cooperation between the Member States in preventing and combating crime in Europe , given the need to defend the individual liberties of European citizens ?
Member of the Commission . - The most recent edition of Eurostat crime and criminal justice statistics that was published date back to 29 May ; it covers the period from 1998 to 2007 and it does not indicate the increase described by the honourable MEP .
The Commission nevertheless acknowledges that organised crime is a threat to citizens and the economy throughout the European Union .
The Commission is committed to come up with relevant proposals , and to implement the actions to prevent and to combat various forms of criminal activities , organised or otherwise .
This is why these objectives are part of the Stockholm Programme comprehensive framework for EU action on the citizens , justice , security and migration policy for the next five years .
Recently , the Commission adopted the Stockholm Action Plan and I think my colleague , Vice-President Reding , was here just half an hour ago to present it and discuss it with this plenary .
Furthermore , before the end of this year , the Commission will present a communication on the internal security strategy and that will contain concrete proposals and threat assessments for the coming five years .
Of course , organised crime will be included in this .
Common threats require common responses , so common tools should be effectively used by all Member States , public authorities and private organisations .
Let me mention three types of crime which are truly European and also have an international dimension : trafficking in human beings , cyber crime and identity theft .
The Commission is determined to reinforce cooperation in this and is also preparing operational and legislative proposals on this .
We will do this in cooperation with Member States , with the European Parliament and with NGOs and the private sector .
Dialogue coordination and operations are key words for the future ; sharing best practices , standards , guidelines , developing training and research should increase mutual effectiveness and understanding .
The cooperation with candidate and third countries is important to tackle crimes effectively .
I would like to underline that an ambitious approach in the decision-making process depends on the political willingness of Member States .
The effective and efficient implementation of the adopted measures depends on the national resources allocated to achieve objectives .
The Commission can support Member States by financial programmes to cooperate at a European level .
As you all know , the Lisbon Treaty provides the European Parliament with new competences in this field , and I would like to stress your responsibility and important role in shaping security in the European Union .
I thank the Commissioner for her reply .
I wrote Parliament 's report on the European Central Bank last year and one of the issues I raised was the significant increase in EUR 500 notes , and I think the EUR 200 notes as well , but significantly EUR 500 notes .
I raised the possibility that these were being used for money laundering purposes , for criminal purposes .
I understand now from the United Kingdom that there are real concerns about this .
Could I invite the Commissioner to take up with the European Central Bank the concerns I have raised to see who it is who is using such large quantities of EUR 500 notes ?
I have to say there has to be a reasonable suspicion of tax evasion or perhaps other criminal activity .
Member of the Commission . - I just want to thank the honourable Member for this information .
I will certainly look into it and see whether we can track some patterns in this .
For the moment , I am not in a capacity to answer this but I will certainly look into it and thank you for suggesting this .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
You were informative and honest in this particular reply in terms of the date up to which you have data , in other words , up to 2007 .
This question was put to you by me on 6 April 2010 and on 5 May 2010 .
As you know , three people tragically and needlessly lost their lives during peaceful demonstrations by Greek citizens claiming a better tomorrow .
I shall repeat the question in order to obtain a more specific reply .
Does the Commission plan to make a more systematic intervention and to make recommendations to the Member States on these issues ?
Do you intend to collect data on these issues more directly and quickly , given that the problem appears to be getting worse , especially at this time , in numerous Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission - and I myself - very much deplore the deaths of these three people in the riots recently , as described by the Member .
It is always a tragedy when innocent people are affected by these issues .
We deplore it , and our thoughts are with their families .
As you say , we need to refresh our statistics all the time , and Eurostat is looking at this .
Hopefully , we will be able to have a better assessment some time soon .
We do not plan any initiatives for the moment on this .
These crimes and these deaths are horrible , but the Commission 's competence is limited to cross-border crime and to facilitating cooperation between national authorities and European authorities .
For the moment , there is no initiative planned in this regard .
Subject : A common EU visa policy

Under Article 77 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and pursuant to secondary legislation published on this legal basis , namely Council Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 of 15 March 2001 ( as amended ) determining the list of third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement , Member States are bound to apply a uniform visa policy and reciprocity .
Does the European Commission understand ' common visa policy ' solely to mean laying down uniform rules for third countries within the internal EU area ?
Or is it the case that this article of the Treaty on European Union - in addition to dealing with visa policy towards third countries - can also be understood as binding the European Commission and EU Member States to seek to achieve common conditions for all EU Member States in third countries ?
Member of the Commission . - The visa policy of the European Union is harmonised and it is a common policy .
It is based on three legal instruments applicable to Member States , namely Regulation ( EC ) No 539 / 2001 , listing the third countries whose nationals are subject to visa requirements and those who are not ; secondly , the visa code covering all procedures and conditions for issuing short-stay Schengen visas ; and finally , Regulation ( EC ) No 1683 / 95 establishing the uniform format for visas .
These rules apply to nationals of all third countries subject to visa requirement .
The first Regulation I referred to establishes a list of third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing external borders ; this is the so-called ' negative ' list .
There is also the positive list : those nationals who are exempt from that requirement on the basis of different criteria , amongst which reciprocity is a basic principle .
This Regulation is applicable to all EU Member States except for the United Kingdom and Ireland and also to Iceland , Norway and Switzerland .
In accordance with the principle of reciprocity , the EU considers that , in the case of nationals from third countries who are exempted from the visa requirement for travelling to the EU Member States , the third country should provide reciprocal treatment for the EU citizens by exempting them from the visa requirement when travelling to that country .
When a third country on the positive list maintains or introduces a visa obligation for nationals of one , two or more Member States , the reciprocity mechanisms apply .
This is the framework in which the Commission could take steps to obtain the restoration of the visa-free travel by the third country , or if that is not achievable , to propose retaliatory measures on the temporary restoration of the visa requirement for nationals of that third country .
This system has proven to be quite efficient , as the steps taken by the Commission and drawn up in the periodical reciprocity report show , and under this reciprocity mechanism , applicable since 2005 , 75 cases of non-reciprocity concerning 13 third countries of the positive list were notified by Member States .
Since then , reciprocity has been established with most of these 13 countries , such as Japan , Panama , Singapore , Australia , Uruguay and Costa Rica , and recently the Commission concluded negotiations on a visa waiver with Brazil , and that will be submitted to you and to the Council very soon .
Problems of non-reciprocity continue to exist for certain Member States vis-à-vis the US and Canada , and this is something that we always bring up with these countries .
The mechanism does not apply in case a third country on the negative list maintains or imposes the visa obligation only on nationals of one or more member countries , or when the third country applies different conditions for citizens of different Member States .
The community acquis does not contain rules for such cases and does not provide a specific mechanism , so it is very difficult for the EU to intervene .
Commissioner , if the European Commission is the guarantor of the common visa policy , and if this policy is based primarily on the principle of reciprocity , how long specifically does the Commission intend to go on tolerating the unprecedented , asymmetric visa regime introduced by a third country , namely Canada , against an EU Member State , namely the Czech Republic ?
Member of the Commission . - I am , of course , very familiar with the case that the honourable Member is referring to , and the Commission has been extremely involved in this .
The Canadian authorities have established an office in Prague - that is one condition that we imposed on them - and they are also establishing a roadmap towards restoring visa freedom again .
We have had several high-level meetings with Canada , the Czech Republic and the Commission in order to outline the steps that need to be taken .
The Canadians have said that they will change their law and they will submit it very soon to their Parliament in order to change it .
We are in dialogue with them and with the Czech authorities in order to make sure that the dialogue is still there , that there is a constructive atmosphere , and that we can move towards a solution to this .
It will be discussed again by the Member States in the Council at the beginning of June .
I am sorry that this conflict has not been solved yet but I can assure the honourable Member that we are trying , together with our Czech colleagues , to find a solution to this as soon as possible .
Subject : Unresolved issues in the Turkey-EU Joint Statement of 5 November 2009
Bearing in mind :
the Joint Statement issued by Mr Atalay , the Turkish Minister of the Interior , Mr Barrot , Vice-President of the Commission , and Mr Billström , representing the EU Council Presidency , on 5 November 2009 , in particular , point ( 3 ) which refers to the resumption of the formal negotiations on the Turkey-EC readmission agreement and point ( 5 ) which states that agreement has now been reached at technical level on the working arrangement between Turkey and Frontex ;
the answer given by Ms Malmström , President-in-Office of the Council , to my question No. before the plenary sitting of the European Parliament on 16 December 2009 ; and
the constant harassment of Frontex aircraft by Turkish aircraft ;
Will the Commission say : What stage has been reached in negotiations on point ( 3 ) of the Joint Statement ?
Is there any linkage with the discussions with Frontex ?
Is the harassment of Frontex aircraft linked to Turkey 's refusal explicitly to recognise the EU 's Aegean borders ?
Member of the Commission . - I have a busy agenda today !
I would like to recall that we have had a difficult history in negotiations with Turkey starting already with the mandate in 2002 , but recently there have been very many positive steps .
Last year , the Council conclusion on illegal immigration urged accelerating negotiations with Turkey , and , also last year , my predecessor , Mr Barrot , visited Turkey together with the Swedish Minister Billström .
There was a joint statement at that time moving forward .
Since then , there has been progress .
There have been several talks over the winter , and we are now very close to an agreement in negotiations on the readmission agreement with Turkey .
The Commission is confident that the agreed parts of the text are balanced and that they reflect our needs while addressing Turkey 's concerns .
We are working in order to finalise this text as soon as possible and we are in constant contact with the Turkish authorities .
The aim is to finalise this and to report on the outcome of the negotiations during the June Council .
We will keep Parliament fully informed as it will be asked to grant its consent for conclusion once it is concluded .
On the Frontex arrangement , there is no formal linkage between the negotiation of the working arrangement and the EU-Turkey readmission agreement .
Having said that , the Commission is taking the necessary steps in order to ensure overall coherence in addressing similar issues in both acts .
The Commission is not in a position to comment on the delimitation of the territory or the borders of a given Member State , as these issues are the sole responsibility of the Member States and the applicable provisions of international law .
We would like to encourage Frontex and the host Member State to ensure that adequate information is provided to neighbouring third countries on the deployment of assets such as airborne means close to the borders before a joint operation is launched .
Commissioner , the difficulty in giving a clear reply to a string of similar questions makes me realise that these negotiations are , in any event , difficult and , to my mind , confirms the question that numerous political issues are being raised by the Turkish side which are making it hard to conclude the negotiations .
I would be most obliged if , as soon as these negotiations are concluded , as soon as there is an agreement , you would update us .
I should also like to say the following : during the Turkish Prime Minister 's recent visit to Greece , to Athens , a protocol was signed , a memorandum of cooperation with Greece on illegal immigration issues .
What I want to ask you is this : can this memorandum , this - let us say - readmission agreement between Greece and Turkey replace the agreement between the European Union and Turkey which is being negotiated ?
Member of the Commission . - Without knowing the exact details of the agreement made between Turkey and Greece , I think it shows the constructive mood that we are in as regards the Greek authorities on the one hand and the Turkish on the other .
There is a parallel negotiation going on with Turkey .
We are , as I said , very close to wrapping these negotiations up .
There has been a very constructive atmosphere and I think this shows the necessity for the European Union of achieving this and also the interest on the Turkish side in reaching an agreement with us on re-admission .
This is , of course , to the benefit of everybody .
( EL ) Commissioner , in other replies we have received , you expressly said that Frontex is negotiating technical issues with Turkey .
I understand that .
You recently told us in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , when you came and updated us on matters within your jurisdiction , that the final agreement with Turkey on illegal immigration issues was , as you said today , making good progress and was close to being wrapped up .
In this agreement between the European Union and Turkey , should there not also be provision for Frontex between the European Union and Turkey ?
Is Frontex not a very important factor in combating illegal immigration ?
I do not know how much you can tell us of what is included in the negotiations , but does common sense not tell us that there should , at this point , be provision for operation and actions by Frontex ?
Member of the Commission . - I had the opportunity to address the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs last Monday and I repeat what I said at that time , namely , that progress is being made on the negotiations with Turkey .
Concerning Frontex and the border control of Turkey , they have reached an initial agreement on a draft working arrangement at a technical level .
Discussions are being pursued by both parties and , for the time being , Frontex is awaiting a reply from Turkey in order to continue the discussions .
Frontex is an important actor in this but , first of all , we need to get the agreement and then continue in parallel discussions with Frontex .
I agree that there is a lot of room for cooperation here .
Subject : EU counter-terrorism policies and CIA rendition
A number of recent developments have shed more light on Member State involvement in the US rendition programme .
A 2010 UN Joint Study has revealed that EU Member States colluded with and participated in activities relating to the CIA rendition programme and secret prisons .
Given these numerous abuses of power over the past eight years by Member States , and in the light of the Commission 's proposed communication on a stocktaking of counter-terrorism policies , can the Commission provide details of specific measures it plans to take to ensure that EU counter-terrorism policies prevent such abuses in the future ?
Member of the Commission . - Thank you to Sarah Ludford for this question .
As you know , I have an interest in this and we have also cooperated in the past on this .
It is needless to say that freedom and security go hand in hand , and respect for fundamental rights and the rule of law is at the heart of the European Union 's approach to countering terrorism .
Measures to fight terrorism must always be undertaken within the framework of full respect for fundamental rights , and the EU must be exemplary in this respect .
This is not only a legal requirement but also a key condition to ensuring credibility and legitimacy as well as for promoting mutual confidence between the national authorities , and confidence among the public at large .
The Commission will therefore continue to follow an approach on counter-terrorism which seeks to combine operational and legal effectiveness and feasibility with a clear commitment to the respect of fundamental rights .
Practices referred to as renditions and secret detentions are a violation of human rights .
The Commission has always stressed this , and it is up to the Member States concerned to commence or to continue in-depth , independent and impartial investigations to establish the truth .
This is a positive obligation , deriving from the European Convention of Human Rights , in order to establish responsibilities and to enable victims to obtain compensation .
We have , from the Commission side , encouraged Poland and Romania to carry out investigations into allegations of the existence of secret detention facilities , and we welcome the launch of criminal investigations in Poland in March 2008 .
The Commission has also written to the Lithuanian authorities welcoming their proactive attitude in initiating investigations .
As far as the debate on rendition flights and its implications for EU aviation policy are concerned , the Commission draws some lessons in the context of the communication of civil and business aviation from January 2008 .
Furthermore , the Single European Sky , which entered into force last January , provides additional measures for monitoring the actual movement of aircraft , and we will continue to follow this carefully - within our powers , of course .
In 2008 , the Commission provided panoramic factual information in its public staff document on terrorism and fundamental rights .
This is a synthesis of the replies from the Member States to the questionnaire on criminal law , administrative law , procedural law and fundamental rights in the fight against terrorism .
All Member States have replied to this questionnaire , and we are right now , in addition , preparing from the Commission side a stock-taking exercise of the main EU measures and policy initiatives taken in the field of counter-terrorism until the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Counter-terrorism policy conducted at national level by Member States or the participation on the CIA rendition programme will not specifically be assessed in this context , but it is very clear what the Commission thinks about this , and we will continue to follow developments in Member States , including legal challenges brought against counter-terrorism measures in national courts , and to draw lessons from sustainable policy making at EU level .
author . - Commissioner Malmström , I think never has the phrase ' poacher turned gamekeeper ' been more appropriate , and I always welcomed working with you on these issues .
I think what you said is somewhat encouraging in that it signals some strengthening in the oversight and mechanisms that the Commission will have for the future , but the fact is that there is the past .
Member States participated in illegal CIA rendition , torture and disappearance , and there was a lack of oversight and accountability .
There was a lot of rhetoric about human rights , just as there is now , but a huge gap between rhetoric and reality .
We still do not have a full calling to account .
Are there things that the Commission , as guardian of the treaties , can think of that could still be done not only to try and make sure that Member States respect their obligations in the future , but how we can still get investigations - including , I very much hope , a proper public inquiry now under the new UK Government - to make sure that we know fully what happened in the past and what went wrong ?
Member of the Commission . - I think the work done by the European Parliament on this aspect has been extremely important in shining a light on the rendition programme and showing what has been happening .
This has created momentum , but also strong public opinion to find out the truth .
As I said , the Commission has been urging and encouraging full , in-depth investigations in the countries affected and will continue to follow up and ensure these are really being carried out .
The Single European Sky proposal is there to help us to further monitor this .
We will keep an eye on this and will continue to push for clarity .
Besides that , there is not much concrete that the European Commission can do , but we are happy to work with the European Parliament in order to continue to push for clarity and to make sure that this is not something that would be part of the European policy against terrorism .
( PL ) I would like to ask you , Mrs Malmström , for information on something which is , in my opinion , an important matter .
The fight against terrorism - and , of course , we all know very well that we have to fight terrorism - also needs European states to cooperate with each other .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the following question : do you observe that there is a greater tendency on the part of Member States of the Union in terms of cooperation , and is there also a greater tendency in terms of exchanging with each other the different and very important kinds of information necessary to combat terrorism ?
Have there been any positive changes I this respect ?
Member of the Commission . - The fight against terrorism is , of course , one crucial element in the policy of the European Union .
The main actions are being taken by national services , police authorities and national politicians .
The European Union can support these initiatives , we can provide a certain legal framework , and we can make sure that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is respected .
We have some funding , we can provide support for victims and we can encourage further cooperation .
My feeling is that there is a lot of cooperation going on between the Member States on this .
Of course there is still the very sensitive issue of sharing intelligence .
This is based on trust - or lack of trust sometimes .
This has to be developed and it can only be done by harmonising and making sure that our European Union systems fully respect the rule of law and that they are trustworthy .
This is an area where the European Union can help .
In the Stockholm Programme and in the discussions leading to that , there was a clear willingness for Member States to strengthen cooperation - with each other , within the European Union , but also with third countries - in order to fight terrorism .
This , of course , always has to be done with full respect for fundamental rights , and the CIA rendition programme is not part of this .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : Entrepreneurs and SMEs
In the light of the upcoming SME week ( 25 May - 1 June 2010 ) and the European Enterprise Awards ( 31 May ) , can the Commission give an update on the implementation of the Small Business Act particularly with regard to measures on investment readiness of entrepreneurs , improving their access to finance , reducing administrative burdens and , in particular , on Member States ' initiatives and policy decisions to help SMEs tackle problems which hamper their development ?
Subject : SMEs
Does the Commission have any plans to introduce measures to help existing SMEs across the EU who are struggling , and would the Commission consider introducing a special scheme to help young entrepreneurs trying to create successful SMEs in the Union , thus reducing the EU 's reliance on FDI in order to boost industry ?
Subject : SMEs and job creation
It is widely recognised that small and medium-sized enterprises are the key to reducing unemployment in Europe , yet they face a disproportionate regulatory burden when compared to larger companies due to economies of scale .
If every SME in Europe could create one job tomorrow , this would have an enormously positive effect on employment levels .
What is the Commission doing to promote job creation through SMEs with , for example , regulatory reform and investment ?
What targets has the Commission set and how will it propose to monitor these targets ?
Subject : European SME Week
Next week is the European SME week .
Its aim is to promote entrepreneurship , innovation and competitiveness and to provide information concerning the work being done by the European Union and the authorities at all levels to support and fund micro-enterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises .
The greatest challenge being faced by small and medium-sized enterprises at the present is securing capital and funding .
There are many small enterprises , small family businesses and start-ups which were very successful but are now vulnerable because they cannot secure capital .
What can be done at European level to solve this problem ?
Subject : Measures to reduce administrative costs for SMEs
Can the Commission outline what measures it is undertaking in order to reduce unnecessary administrative costs for small to medium-sized enterprises in the European Union ?
Mr President , with your new Liberal hat on , could I ask you to clarify what questions will actually be taken ?
Will Question 33 , in Part 3 , be taken ?
We are all trying to attend several meetings .
If you could clarify exactly the ones that will not be taken , it would be helpful .
I think it extremely unlikely that we will get to Question 33 .
If you are waiting for that , I would not do so .
Mr Tajani will now give a single reply and , after that , I will give the questioners - and other colleagues - the opportunity to ask a supplementary question .
May I make the point that we are going to finish at 20.30 because the staff and the interpreters have to have something to eat before we resume at 21.00 .

Mr President , I have now been speaking in my new capacity for two years .
Small and medium-sized enterprises continue to constitute a priority for the new Commission , which is convinced of the need to do everything it can to prevent the financial crisis becoming a social crisis that would chiefly affect small and medium-sized enterprises and their employees .
Since the adoption of the Small Business Act in 2008 , substantial progress has been made .
The Commission has adopted five legislative proposals relating to the Small Business Act , two of which have already been implemented : the block exemption regulation on State aid and the directive on reduced VAT rates ; the other three , the directive on late payment , the directive on VAT invoicing and the regulation on a European private company statute , are still under discussion here in Parliament and in the Council .
The Commission has also set in motion the required non-legislative actions ; an ' SME test ' has now been introduced across the board for impact studies , to improve the quality of legislation .
To give an example : the directive on late payment , and the exemption of micro-entities from accounting burdens .
Member States have also demonstrated a strong political desire to implement the Small Business Act : for example , they have made the ' SME test ' part of national decision-making procedures , and small and medium-sized enterprises were amongst the main beneficiaries of the measures adopted by Member States in the context of the European recovery programme to deal with the crisis .
For instance , the creation and extension of loans and guarantees to small and medium-sized enterprises was among the measures adopted to improve access to finances .
However , the chosen methods and the results obtained differ between States , and we therefore need to continue working on the implementation of the Small Business Act at national level .
I therefore consider it crucial to pursue the courses of action undertaken , and ensure that the principles and recommended courses of action are implemented at both European and national levels .
The policy in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises is fully supported by the Europe 2020 strategy , is an integral part of many lighthouse initiatives envisaged and will be subject to a specific check when the strategy is implemented in Member States .
One of the 10 supplementary guidelines proposed by the Commission calls on Member States to implement a series of measures for small and medium-sized enterprises , according to the principles of the Small Business Act .
The next stage will involve ensuring that Member States incorporate these measures in their national reform programmes .
By the end of this year , we will have carried out an in-depth examination of the implementation of the Act , to measure the progress made and identify new courses of action that also take into account the Europe 2020 priorities .
The main areas of action will include improving access to credit and innovation , encouraging the spirit of enterprise and promoting the internationalisation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Small and medium-sized enterprises , especially those managed by young entrepreneurs , will be among the main beneficiaries of these new initiatives .
Mindful of the difficulties that small and medium-sized enterprises currently encounter when trying to access finances , the European Commission has closely followed developments in the sector , collaborating particularly with the European Central Bank with the aim of carrying out regular surveys of the situation .
The Commission has also drawn up a series of programmes that offer financial support to help small and medium-sized enterprises to gain access to capital that they need to develop their activities .
The Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , for example , incorporates certain financial instruments developed in conjunction with the European Investment Fund , which provide incentives for risk operations and loan guarantee operations for enterprises .
The Jeremie programme financed by the European Regional Development Fund offers a huge range of specific financial products to develop and strengthen small and medium-sized enterprises in European territory as a whole .
Finally , the new European micro-finance instrument , a joint initiative between the Commission and the European Investment Bank , is specifically directed at micro-enterprises that have difficulty obtaining ad hoc financing .
Access by small and medium-sized enterprises to credit has also improved , due to an increase in the sum of credit lines granted by the European Investment Bank to the intermediary banks that are responsible for reallocating the sums to small and medium-sized enterprises in the form of loans .
In 2009 , the European Investment Bank granted a total amount of EUR 13 billion to financial institutions ; the equivalent of a 55 % increase over the previous year .
For your information , more than 75 % of the EUR 21 billion granted in 2008-2009 reached the small and medium-sized enterprises to which they were destined , that is to say , 50 000 small and medium-sized enterprises all over the Union .
A few days ago , the Commission also organised a high level conference where banks , risk capital funds and small and medium-sized enterprises came together ; a meeting also attended by representatives from the European Parliament .
This allowed us to examine the current market situation and to explore new ideas and strategies to improve access to finances for small and medium-sized enterprises .
It was an important occasion for discussing possible courses of action to be undertaken to help enterprises in order to sustain recovery and economic growth .
One of the courses of action that was decided upon was the establishment of a permanent discussion forum with financial institutions , risk capital funds and representatives from small and medium-sized enterprises .
Quarterly meetings will be chaired by the European Commission .
The conclusions from this forum will constitute the first stage of a strategy intended to establish a plan of action to provide access to credit and capital for small and medium-sized enterprises in our Union .
Finally , I shall take advantage of this debate to inform Parliament that as part of the first European SME Week , more than 1 200 national , regional and local events will be held , concerning a wide range of issues affecting this sector .
The SME week will take place between 25 May and 1 June , at the same time as the 2010 European Enterprise Awards ceremony , planned for 31 May in Madrid .
All this is to confirm to you my personal commitment to ensure that employment in our Union can be defended by offering support to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The necessary restructuring of large-scale private industry will cause some jobs to be lost , and the only way we can bolster employment is by supporting the development of the small and medium-sized enterprises that represent the backbone of our European economy .
author . - I want to congratulate the Commissioner on progress achieved .
However , Commissioner , you talked about one of the major problems as being access to capital , and you mentioned the European Investment Bank .
It has distributed funds to Irish banks to distribute on to SMEs .
However , a considerable amount is not being distributed , mainly because of the mismatch between the needs of SMEs - refinancing of some sort - and the European Investment Bank objective , which is money for medium-term investment .
So I want to ask you if you agree that some measures need to be put in place for SMEs which will require refinancing , and what role the Commission could play .
Furthermore , would you favour some kind of enterprise guarantee scheme , similar to what is in the UK ?
Mr President , I agree completely with the Commission 's statement that SMEs are very important , not only due to the number of jobs they create but also because they are more stable than large companies that come in and have no loyalty to the region or to the country .
I completely agree with my fellow Member Marian Harkin 's statement that a lack of finance is the biggest hindrance at present , and the Commission has referred to this .
As well as that , there is too much bureaucracy or ' red tape ' in place .
author . - I want to ask the Commissioner if he will look at the non-direct financing aspects of the problems that SMEs are encountering .
For example , I do not know what it is like in your country , but in my country , there is no such thing as a bank manager any more .
We are giving money to banks , but banks do not assess people on their track record , on their character and on the knowledge of their business .
We got into the mess we are in because people were on automatic .
To some extent , they are still on automatic .
How do you win an election ?
One vote at a time .
If we can get one job in every SME in Europe , we will end the unemployment crisis .
I ask you please to consult with the European Central Bank and European Investment Bank and try to bring your influence to bear to get us back to traditional bank managers who engage with SMEs and help them to develop their businesses .
It will return a dividend .
The obvious question is , does the Commission actually believe that SME Week can deliver on its aims ?
Can I ask the Commission what action can be taken to ensure that the European Union and Member States create an environment in which entrepreneurs and family businesses can survive , develop and thrive and entrepreneurship is rewarded , not hindered , which is often the case in the present economic climate ?
Mr President , I will be brief : I agree with the observations of all the Members of Parliament who have spoken in this debate .
As regards the European Investment Bank , I took immediate action after taking up my position as Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship to meet President Maystadt and urge him to deliver the EUR 30 billion allocated to help small and medium-sized enterprises from the European Investment Bank .
This is what I promised Parliament in my hearing , before it entrusted me with the job of Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship .
To continue , the President 's response was quite positive : he told me that , after an initial freeze , some EUR 6 to 7 billion of the EUR 30 billion allocated had reached the intended destination .

I urged the President to speed up the delivery times .
There is also a problem concerning the banks in our area - a point raised by the last speaker - because the European banking system is quite diversified : not all banks are the same .
Some banks engage in financial speculation , but fortunately , we still have a banking network where the manager knows the businessman who goes to ask for credit , and so he can trust him , and also knows that the money he invests will be reinvested in the bank , and that what happened in the United States will not happen here .
The meeting that I organised a few days ago , which was attended by many of your European Parliamentary colleagues , was really aimed at this : at developing a strategy .
This is why I said that we have set up a forum that will later lead to an action plan for providing credit .
The aim is for our small and medium-sized enterprises to be competitive .
For them to be competitive , there must be innovation , but innovation is impossible if no funds are earmarked for this purpose .
Hence , my primary commitment to involving the banks - even the banks supplying credit .
Many of them have committed themselves to doing this in the future .
We are taking strong action , with stimulus from the Commission , involving banks and financial operators and also the European Investment Bank , which sent two vice-presidents to take part in the debate .
The aim of this action is to achieve at least some of these objectives , in the conviction that small and medium-sized enterprises represent the best instrument today for emerging from the crisis and - as I said at the start of my speech - for preventing the economic and financial crisis from turning into a social crisis .
You can count on my total commitment to defending , protecting and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises - and that also applies to financial aspects - in the hope that they will be able to grow , and that new businesses will spring up , because our goal is still the same as ever : with a market economy that allows small and medium-sized enterprises to become increasingly competitive , we can create a genuine social policy , in the words of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I apologise to colleagues for the rather shortened Question Time because the previous debate overran by 25 minutes .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.30 and resumed at 21.00 )

Principle of subsidiarity and universality of social public services in the EU ( debate )
The sitting is resumed .
The next item is the oral question to the Commission ( Β7-0218 / 2010 ) by Jan Olbrycht and Lambert van Nistelrooij , on behalf of the PPE Group , Heide Rühle , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Oldřich Vlasák , on behalf of the ECR Group , Peter Simon , Françoise Castex , Evelyne Gebhardt and Proinsias De Rossa , on behalf of the S & D Group , and Ramona Nicole Mănescu and Olle Schmidt , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on the principle of subsidiarity and universality of social public services in the EU .
I would like to point out that the oral question which has been asked here was brought about by a decision of the European Commission on identifying which groups can make use of social housing in the Netherlands .
That decision provoked a great deal of discussion and interest among Members of the European Parliament because it has important consequences .
It has to be realised that in different Member States of the European Union , different definitions are in use for social housing considered as a public service .
These definitions also concern the fact that we have different criteria for use of social housing , and that we have different ranges of responsibility as well .
Responsibility rests with the public authorities , but the contractors are both public and non-public .
Interest in social housing results , on the one hand , from regulations concerning public aid , but also concerns the definition which is used in the case of identifying qualified costs for structural funds .
In relation to this , as a supplement to the question , it would be interesting to know whether the Commission thinks that there should be one definition for the whole of the European Union .
Should the same principles function in relation to public aid in social housing ?
Does the Commission intend to establish in each case a permissible level of domestic income as in the case with the Netherlands ?
Is this type of action definitely in accordance with the subsidiarity principle which operates in the European Union ?
Madam President , I would like to make reference to a press release that the Commission itself issued on 19 December last year in connection with the State aid decision on the Dutch social housing system .
I will now quote from the statement . ' The Commission 's decision confirms its long-standing policy line that national authorities have a wide margin in defining the criteria and conditions for social housing and other Services of General Economic Interest ( SGEI ) . '
That is the quotation .
My question is as follows . How does this statement by the Commission fit in with the fact that , through this decision , the Commission laid down fixed income limits for social housing in the Netherlands ?
Does that actually fall within the Commission 's competence , and how does it relate to subsidiarity and proportionality ?
Furthermore , I would also like to ask the Commission how the decision to formally recognise the necessity of a social mix whilst speaking out against social segregation can be compatible with the fact that , at the same time , a fixed proportion of no more than 10 % above the EUR 30 000 threshold has been laid down whilst the Commission also states that if , at any point , more than 10 % above this EUR 30 000 social housing threshold obtain housing , this will have to be made up for in other areas in the Netherlands ?
That , it seems to me , is a very fixed and rigid arrangement when it comes to the issue of social mixing .
How does that fit in with subsidiarity and - as you yourselves stated in your press release - with the ' wide margin in defining the criteria and conditions for social housing and other Services of General Economic Interest ( SGEI ) ' ?
Madam President , I , too , would like to address the Commission on this notification of aid for social housing by the Netherlands , the European Commission 's response to which is that it must be brought into line with competition rules .
It has therefore recommended a radical reform of social housing and its missions of general interest and , in my opinion , has developed a restrictive definition of what constitutes social services of general interest .
In fact , the Commission recognises the social character of this public service , but underlines that it should be defined , and I quote , ' in direct connection with disadvantaged social groups ' and that , consequently , the supply of social housing in the Netherlands exceeds the individual needs of disadvantaged social groups .
The proposal for a reform of social housing thus presented by the Dutch Government limits to 10 % the volume of social housing that can be allocated to other social groups , but always according to social criteria or in order of priority .
This limitation amounts to undermining another public service mission that is fulfilled by the service of social housing , namely the objective of social and urban diversity , which is defined for social housing by the Dutch legislator .
Therefore , the question for me , Commissioner , Members of the Commission , is on what legal basis in the treaty can the Commission call into question the universal character of social services and force a Member State to redefine the missions that it allocates to one of these social services ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the question put forward by the honourable Members falls into three parts .
The first : whether the Commission is of the opinion that there should be one single definition of social housing in the EU .
The second : the question on the principles of subsidiarity and universality .
The third : a question of income limits for access to social housing .
Before replying to these questions , I would like to underline that the Commission attaches great importance to social housing .
Social housing is a key tool for active social and economic inclusion policies in the European Union .
In reply to questions 1 and 2 , I would like to be very clear .
The Commission imposes no single definition of social housing at EU level and fully respects the principle of subsidiarity .
The honourable Members rightly refer to the Commission 's 2005 decision on State aid for services of general economic interest .
This decision provides legal certainty in the provision of the services and reduces the administrative burden on the public authorities which finance them .
According to this decision , aid to social housing which meets the conditions set by the decision receives preferential treatment , as it is exempted from notification - irrespective of the amounts involved .
According to this decision , that exemption applies when social housing is qualified as a service of general economic interest by the Member State concerned .
It is for each Member State to define the scope of social housing in line with its traditions , culture and state intervention .
I would also like to refer to the Commission communications of 2006 and 2007 , which clearly highlighted the Member States ' responsibility and wide discretion as regards social services of general interest .
Furthermore , this point was emphasised more recently in the Protocol on Services of General Interest .
However , as the term ' social housing ' suggests , what is involved here is not housing in general , but housing provided on the basis of social criteria .
This is why the recitals in the 2005 decision refer to housing for disadvantaged citizens or socially less advantaged groups which , due to solvency constraints , are unable to obtain housing at market conditions .
The Member States must therefore define a target group for social housing to allow social housing to be allocated in a transparent way and to prevent those most in need from being excluded .
The Member States have wide scope for manoeuvre in determining the size of the target group and in applying the social housing systems .
The Commission 's role is limited to checking that there is no manifest error in the definition .
This approach was confirmed in a Commission decision adopted in December 2009 on social housing in the Netherlands .
This approach is also fully in line with Article 34 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which refers to social and housing assistance for all those who lack sufficient resources .
A clear definition of social housing also ensures that State aid cannot be channelled into financing commercial activities outside the scope of services of general economic interest .
Question 2 also refers to a universal right to housing .
However , as I have already said , housing in general is not the same as social housing .
Clear-cut , transparent eligibility and allocation criteria for social housing are in the interest of the beneficiaries and ensure the proper use of public funds .
In reply to question 3 , in which the honourable Members ask why access to social housing is limited to households with an income of less than EUR 33 000 , I would like , here again , to be very clear .
There is no income limit set at EU level for access to social housing .
This amount concerns one Member State - the Netherlands .
It was part of the changes introduced by the Dutch authorities to bring the national social housing system in line with the European State aid rules .
The Dutch authorities set such a limit to identify the target group for social housing in the Netherlands .
The Commission did not identify any errors with that definition of social housing and therefore approved the Dutch State aid scheme .
I would add that the target group defined by the Dutch authorities is very wide and covers 43 % of the Dutch population .
At a time of crisis , and of debate on how to maintain a sustainable society and our competitiveness , we are discussing an apparent detail that , as I see it , nevertheless goes to the heart of many people 's concerns .
The issue concerned is who is to be allocated housing ?
Particularly now that banks are being much more reserved than they were when the debate started - which , in the Netherlands , was in 2005 , when the situation was quite different - it is clear that some people are really getting into difficulties .
The threshold that has now been set is EUR 33 000 .
These proposals still have to be presented for approval to the members of the lower house of the Dutch Parliament , and they will tell us straight away that this threshold should , in fact , be in line with the threshold for the Netherlands ' sickness insurance fund , which is approximately EUR 40 000 .
The debate in the Netherlands is still in full swing , therefore : it is not the case that everyone is now in agreement .
I feel that insufficient room is left for flexibility , for tailor-made solutions .
Member States must be able to adapt to circumstances .
This 10 % is very small .
After I graduated , my income was also above the threshold , but I was able to keep on my rented accommodation for a quite a few years before deciding once and for all to buy and to go and live somewhere else .
We are talking about flexibility ; there is not enough elbow room .
This leads me to the conclusion that subsidiarity - countries ' ability to arrange things themselves within a much broader range - is not being sufficiently respected .
Following today 's debate , we must look at whether to come back again with a resolution .
On the whole , I think that the Commission is making a good job of this , but I think that Member States ' elbow room is excessively restricted , to the detriment of people who depend on it for their housing .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as I follow this debate , I note that there is actually a great deal of uncertainty in relation to how the law is to be applied in these areas .
Mr Andor , you just said that there is no European regulation laying down EUR 33 000 as a fixed limit .
Dutch legislators , however , have laid down this limit of their own free will , probably because they were afraid that otherwise , the Commission would , at some point , require clear criteria to be put in place .
This uncertainty leads to a great many difficulties in the Member States in relation to taking decisions themselves , specifically in terms of shaping those decisions so that they truly match up to what we need for these people and , in particular , for social housing , as these are people who do not have enough money to be able to move about freely .
It is therefore very important for us to create a legal framework and legal certainty that also properly clarifies what is possible .
Services of general economic interest , of course , really do need to be protected .
They are provided at the local level in the Member States and they are universal and we need to ensure that they really are offered to everyone .
We therefore have to consider - and I know this is being considered in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - demanding from the Commission a legal framework to protect services of general economic interest , especially in the social field , and I think that such a framework , were it to be provided , would be a good thing .
Madam President , Commissioner , we are talking here about legal basis , which is obviously very important .
However , behind this legal basis , I would like to underline the fact that housing and , in particular , social housing , is clearly not a market like any other or a commercial activity like any other .
Moreover , social housing is much more than housing reserved for people on low incomes or in need .
There are the issues of social diversity , which we have spoken about , but there is also the integration of these houses and of the people who live in them into their neighbourhood , into their town , sometimes in town centres , sometimes on the outskirts .
A great deal of work is done with the tenants , work to help them integrate and to establish solidarity , including among the different generations who live in these neighbourhoods and in this housing and , therefore , in this regard , I really think that this is a different kind of subject .
In addition , during this legislature , we are going to work on services of general interest .
It seems to me that coming here and underlining problems linked to aid or to limited access to social housing sends out the wrong signal .
As for the income limit , which was mentioned by other Members apart from me and which is set at EUR 33 000 , I think that it poses a problem because there is a whole range of very different families : single parent families , families comprising elderly people , families comprising members from past and present relationships , families that have separated .
How can we calculate their incomes ?
All of that leads me , like others , to call for more flexibility and subsidiarity if we want real social projects in these neighbourhoods .
Madam President , Commissioner , you just said that the Commission attached great importance to social housing .
Indeed , we are talking about a fundamental right that is not being applied in our Member States .
Moreover , this is another stain on our current model of European integration .
As for the rest of your answer , Commissioner , you recited the Commission 's usual prayer book , but experience shows that the Commission , your Commission , and the European Court of Justice are passing judgment on the basis of the European treaties , in accordance with a fatal principle , that of free and undistorted competition , and are therefore creating illegal access to housing construction and to housing itself .
Worse still , in 2005 , the European Commission defined social housing as housing reserved exclusively for , and I quote , ' disadvantaged citizens or socially less advantaged groups ' .
The Commission is thus encouraging the creation of ghetto cities for the poor , to the detriment of social diversity .
Like many Members , I support the idea of a new framework directive that is positive and progressive , but I fear that it is the very principle of competition enshrined in the treaties that should be changed .
On the other hand , I fear that the statements made by President Barroso and confirmed today by the Ecofin Council which , in principle , recommend controlling the budgets , will lead to a reduction in the spending allocated to low-cost housing offices and , in particular , to social housing .
I definitely believe that Europe must start from scratch .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like , in a way , to echo the opinion of Mrs Durant , who rightly affirmed that social housing is not a commercial sector or a sector subject to competition like any other .
Commissioner , I believe that we will agree on this point .
State aid is being called into question here .
I wonder why , in an area such as social housing , we would not theoretically be precisely in the area of State aid .
Indeed , we are talking about State aid for the beneficiaries of social housing , not so much for enterprises .
Ultimately , aid is allocated because it is deemed necessary ; it is not so much issues of competition that are at stake .
I note - and I can certainly only speak on the basis of my own experience nationally - that social housing is linked to such different conditions that we should really be glad that the European Commission , the European institutions , Europe and Brussels are not , as is always felt , responsible for giving us a precise definition of aid , for telling us which citizen can benefit from which aid and under which circumstances .
I would stress that what is at stake here are specific local conditions and changes in the family circumstances of each and every one of us .
How could somebody who had a family , but whose family status then changes , somebody whose income varies in the course of his life , as Mr van Nistelrooij said , one day be granted the right to social housing , according to a number of criteria , only to then see it withdrawn ?
I feel that this is unreasonable and , in these circumstances , I do not believe that the Commission should go beyond its remit again to propose to us , and ultimately impose on us , rules that would inevitably lack flexibility and probably also humanity .
Madam President , I participate in this debate as the Employment Committee rapporteur on the future of social services of general interest .
This oral question seeks to establish from the Commission what proposals it has to address a serious problem in relation to the delivery of social housing for citizens .
I regret that the Commissioner did not indicate any such proposals rather than seek to justify the existing system .
There is a persistent refusal by the Commission to come to terms with the need to create legal clarity and flexibility for Member Sates with regard not only to the delivery of existing public services - and particularly social services - but also to meeting new social needs .
We must be able not only to provide citizens with a safety net in times of need , but also to provide a robust social framework which serves all citizens .
Health , housing and education are services which should obviously be provided on a universal basis and not simply at the whim of the market .
That the market is incapable of delivering universality on the basis of equality and equal quality in these areas is self-evident .
These are all services which reach beyond the profit motive and deliver social value , which cannot be accounted for by a profit-and-loss balance sheet .
They are also , as it happens , needed to create a solid basis for a modern economy .
The present legal inadequacy with regard to what governments at both national and local level may do in the delivery of services identified as essential to the well-being of society cannot be allowed to continue much longer .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to place something on record : Community competence does not exist in the area of housing policy in general and of social housing in particular .
However , in the decision that we mention in this oral question , the Commission does give a definition of social housing .
As has been said repeatedly , Commissioner , the problem of social housing and of access to housing is a major problem today , at this time of crisis .
Let us put a little bit of humanity back into our technical , legal , and even technocratic , debates .
Over and above housing per se , social housing is the foundation of real integration , of real social inclusion for those who benefit from it .
The definition that was given in the course of the review carried out by the Commission on State aid is entirely debatable .
Commissioner , Descartes , the great French philosopher born in my region , the Loire Valley , said : ' The general interest is a circle of which the centre is known , but the circumference is unknown ' .
Therefore , I have two questions for you .
The first is simple : what is the legal status of this definition ?
Is it to be applied to all Member States ?
The second question is much more general .
In the opinion of the Commission , where does Community competence as regards the organisation of public services begin and where does it end ?
For this question is important , after all .
The universality and the accessibility of public services are at stake .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , right across Europe , our cities and communities have to struggle with problem districts .
Right across Europe , we try to solve this problem by bringing these disadvantaged areas and the people living in them up to the level of normal life in the rest of our towns and cities .
If , however , we now lay down criteria in the field of social housing , as the Commission is doing here , if we lay down criteria that explicitly - as some Members have already said - preclude a mixing of the population in these areas , that will undermine all the efforts made by the competent parties on the ground for decades .
It will also undermine ventures that the European Union has promoted with its Community initiatives Urban and Urban II .
If , here , we restrict the criteria according to which social housing can be subsidised in such a way that actually only the poorest of the poor , the most disadvantaged of the disadvantaged , receive a subsidy and can be helped within the framework of social housing , we will actually be putting up obstacles to this segment of the population mixing in disadvantaged districts , something that is , in fact , urgently needed .
This will lead to more social exclusion of precisely these population groups and will only increase these problems in our cities .
With that in mind , a broad definition and broad interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity are the order of the day , and I would be grateful to the Commission if it could briefly express a position in this regard .
( DE ) Madam President , what we have here is more of a global question , specifically that of the principle of subsidiarity and the universality of public social services in the EU as a whole .
However , social housing has been set in the spotlight of this debate on the example of the Netherlands .
This is not a one-off case - tenants ' associations and tenants ' representatives , in particular , have suspected for years that Europe 's focus on competitiveness at the very least restricts social housing in Europe , if not aims to make it completely impossible .
After the need for food and clothing , the need for housing is a basic human need , after all , and for that reason , housing is one of the social public goods , and preventing homelessness is a social challenge .
An expression of this is the fact that in States that are considerate of the welfare of their citizens , either social housing is supported or else housing is individually subsidised based on people 's income .
Of course , we now have a special case in the European Union following the accession of numerous eastern , central and south-eastern European countries .
Due to the different structuring of housing provision in the former Western and Eastern parts of Europe , there is a need , especially following the most recent enlargements of the European Union , to compare the structures of housing subsidies and housing provision in the Member States .
As a result of the method of privatisation of housing in many eastern , central and south-eastern European Member States immediately following the political changes and , in particular , as a result of the perceptible shortage of housing in those countries , the European Parliament reacted by making structural funds available for housing in these countries .
Despite that , housing policy continues to always be a reaction to the national , regional and , in particular , local circumstances in each case ; in other words , it is a classic case of a policy area where subsidiarity applies , where there is no need for supranational regulation and where no such regulation exists .
For housing as a public social good , market laws can only have a very limited application within the scope of public services .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , public services and social services are beset by enormous economic and political upheaval , the more so given national cost-saving measures .
In the European Union , we are facing growing income disparities .
Especially in times of uncertainty , the economic crisis and fears for the future , social stabilisers are more important than ever .
In my home city of Vienna , the basic idea of social housing consists of bringing about affordable housing for broad sections of the population and not restricting this - as defined by the Commission - to disadvantaged citizens or socially less advantaged groups .
The result of that is ghettoisation .
I thus have no intention of changing my opinion in this regard - it should be a principle or a right of local self-government to define social services , including social housing , at that local level and to exclude social services from the scope of competition and State aid law .
In any event , though , we need legal clarity in the European Union and a legal instrument at the EU level that covers and defines social services accordingly .
Madam President , firstly , I would like to thank the Commissioner for clarifying some of the points which were raised in the questions .
It has to be said that the provision of a house is an absolute necessity for everybody , particularly in the modern welfare state .
Having a roof over your head is absolutely vital ; it is a right and is something which everyone would agree that should be provided either through one 's own means or through government agencies , etc .
Having said that , there is a debate to be had on how much interference the government of any particular country should have in the provision of housing .
In my own country , the property bubble was created by tax incentives - which were too generous and not well thought out - for builders to build houses and providing them with the planning permission - sometimes even in flood plains , which have since been flooded - and rezoning land which should not have been rezoned .
Then , of course , the banks chipped in by giving generous loans to builders which they could not pay back and to individuals to purchase houses which they could not pay back .
We therefore have the crisis we have at the moment .
So there are a lot of questions there on how involved the state should be in the whole property development area .
However in the provision of social housing , I think firstly basing it on income is just too prescriptive and does not make any sense for the reasons given by many people .
There is definitely a role , I think , for the Commission in the broader sense , perhaps in giving guidelines on the provision of social housing , but to be too prescriptive in regard to such things as income , etc. does not make sense ; it will not work and it should not be attempted .
( RO ) Social housing does indeed come under services of general interest .
Unfortunately , the rate of youth unemployment has reached 20 % in the European Union at the moment .
According to the European Regulation , a rate of 4 % of the European Regional Development Fund allocation can be used by all Member States to fund the building of social housing and the improvement of energy efficiency in buildings .
Unfortunately , due to the economic crisis , the economic situation of European families is getting worse , and the unemployment rate , which is extremely high among young people , is a cause for concern .
This is precisely the reason why I would ask you , Commissioner , to support us in raising this rate up to 15 % during the forthcoming financial programming period for the building of social housing and energy efficiency improvements in buildings .
In the majority of Member States , health care , education , social services and the care of young people and the elderly are managed by the State .
These public services play a vital role in ensuring protection and the inclusion of all citizens in society , provided that they are accessible to all citizens .
In order to ensure that this applies throughout the whole European Union , we call on the Commission to draw up a public services framework directive which will introduce minimum requirements in this area and guarantee both equal , universal access for all European citizens and good quality and transparency with these services .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , social housing is an economic service of general interest with an important role in the market , creating positive outcomes for the benefit of the whole of society .
In accordance with Protocol 26 , Annex to the Treaty of Lisbon , it falls to national , regional and local authorities to implement and organise this type of service .
It is therefore hard to understand this restriction of the target market to families whose income is less than EUR 33 000 .
This is a measurement of poverty that is carried out in terms that are absolute and purely financial , and does not take into account the diversity of the 27 Member States ; its line of argument can be summarised as one of simple solvency .
Social housing responds to cultural and social questions ; to proximity to a place of work ; to the significant redefinition of the role of women in the market ; and to the mobility of workers in the European area .
The struggle in which the European Union is engaged to get out of the present crisis requires economic growth , which leads to immigration and ethnic , economic and cultural minorities , and the need for their integration , even with the risks of ghettoisation that are associated with it and which we must fight with fair balance .
Is the Commission not intruding in the competences of the Member States ?
Madam President , the Treaty of Lisbon recognises the importance of the availability and accessibility of social services and the roles played by local and regional authorities in providing these .
The issues of social housing are of extreme importance to people with low incomes , and it is a reality that the crisis has left a large number of people unemployed , who are in need of social housing .
Currently , Member States apply different standards when deciding their criteria for social housing .
It is understandable that the economic and social situations differ significantly in the Member States .
In order to implement the right of access to universal services , I believe it would be reasonable to define general principles and to set the recommended upper income limit at EU level .
However , we need to allow broad discretion for the Member States to make this lower , taking into account economic and social differences .
( RO ) I wish to thank the Commissioner for the clarifications he has provided on this issue .
I do not believe either that there should be a single definition of social housing .
Such a definition would be difficult to use in the situation where there are large differences in terms of standard of living .
The issue of subsidiarity is relevant in this debate .
I will digress slightly , if I may , beyond the specific scope of the question .
I believe that there should be , nevertheless , a set of clearer standards , but , in another respect , for example , in situations which involve the application of new regulations on eligibility for housing for marginalised communities .
This is a regulation which this Parliament adopted in February and which was also mentioned by Mrs Ţicău .
I , too , wish to take this opportunity to say that I would welcome an increase in the funds available , based on this regulation .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I wanted to have this debate simply because I , like others here , am concerned .
Several regions of Europe , including my own , are currently carrying out an assessment aimed at reforming their policy for allocating social housing in order to avoid the phenomena of ghettoisation and of grouping disadvantaged social groups together in the same buildings and the same neighbourhoods .
Your decision runs counter to this policy of social rebalancing and of necessary social diversity .
Commissioner , it is not right that the Commission is preventing the Member States from conducting policies of social diversity .
Certainly , access to social services of general interest relating to housing could , on the one hand , be limited to certain categories of people , but , on the other , a certain room for manoeuvre should be left so that they are accessible to people on other incomes , in order to improve social diversity in our neighbourhoods .
In any event , the balance between these two aspects should be defined by or with the Member States and the regions , and not by the Commission .
( PT ) Madam President , we all know that the right to housing is a fundamental right .
The Member States of the European Union are therefore obliged to guarantee social housing for anyone who needs it .
At a time of profound social crisis , where the number of people and families with high levels of debt , and who are finding it difficult to repay the loans with which they bought their houses , or who are enduring high rents , is rising , it is even more important to give full support to people and families who cannot afford suitable housing with adequate facilities and utilities .
It is therefore essential for the Member States to be able to use Union and national funds to build social housing and guarantee the fundamental rights to which all citizens are entitled , bringing an end to social inequalities and encouraging social inclusion .
The European Commission must take urgent action in this area , without threatening the principle of subsidiarity but supporting the universality of social public services .
( SK ) European centralisation is sometimes accompanied by fanfares , as we saw with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
At other times , however , it arrives unobtrusively .
The creation of various EU support funds , which often deform the market environment , has made it necessary to introduce mandatory notification of the provision of State aid .
The need then became apparent for exemptions from this obligation in the case of social housing .
Suddenly , we have a European definition on our hands .
If we define obligations at this level and then order those at lower levels to implement them , it is not subsidiarity .
Responsibility for social housing is fully within the competence of national , regional and local authorities .
Let us not question the ability of national societies and local communities to solve their own problems .
They are the ones who know these problems best .
They also know the options for solving them .
( PL ) It is clear that we are dealing with a problem which is different in different Member States .
In the new countries , including Poland , we have very many regions where very many people do not have a home because of very , very low incomes .
Those people are mainly taken care of by local authorities .
It rests with the local authorities and regional institutions to help such people as quickly as possible .
Without additional funding at the disposal of local authorities , and without public support , help for people who are in this most difficult situation is impossible .
At the same time , it would also be necessary to consider how , in the future , by creating a common policy and a common definition in this area , to try to obtain additional funds which could be used by regional authorities .
They would use the money and would create social housing , of which there is , truly , very , very little in many countries of Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I fully agree that we have to look at this question in a wider context , in this case , in the context of the financial and economic crisis .
In the last two years , we saw that this was a test of competition policies no matter whether it concerned the financial sector , the automotive sector or , in this case , the housing sector , and it was also a test of our social policies , whether it concerned children or the elderly or the homeless .
In this set of questions which I received , these two issues - competition and social policies - overlap .
That is why it is even more complex than it would be outside the context of the crisis .
The crisis demonstrated an enormous market failure , not only in the financial sector but also in the housing sector , and it became very clear that market forces alone cannot resolve these problems , not only for the extremely poor , but also for larger groups of society .
That is why I would be strictly against any principle that would restrict the concept of social housing to only the poorest groups in society , especially with respect to the diversity of European countries and the principle of subsidiarity .
I would certainly insist on leaving the definitions in this context to the Member States themselves as I have said already in my introductory speech .
Going back to the Dutch case , which has been the focus of the discussion , I would like to repeat that the Commission is not imposing the criteria that have been set in the Dutch context to any other country .
In full respect of subsidiarity , it is for the Member States to decide the actual conditionality of social housing .
This is confirmed by the decision concerning the Dutch State aid scheme , and I would like to recall that the limits set by the Dutch authorities - which apply only in the Netherlands - cover 43 % of the Dutch population , which is certainly well beyond the poorest groups .
The Dutch decision , moreover , has confirmed that the social mix and social cohesion are valid public policy objectives for which State aid may be justified , and not only for those living in extreme poverty or at risk of poverty .
I think the social distress in this over the last few years has destabilised society on a much wider scale , and that is why we have to be sensitive to this .
I would also need to add that the Commission only verifies aid given to housing companies .
Any subsidy given directly to citizens is not subject to State aid rules .
The discussion also touched upon a wider context , which is social services of general interest .
That is why I need to address this as well and emphasise that beyond housing , other services of general interest and , in particular , other social services play a preventive and socially cohesive role which is targeted at the whole population independently of wealth or income .
The Commission made this point clear in its 2007 communication when it highlighted the objectives and principles of organisation of social services .
The Commission is committed to promoting the quality of social services .
For instance , we support the development of a quality framework for social services of general interest within the Social Protection Committee .
A few final thoughts in closing my answer .
Since some of the questions concerned a longer timescale , spanning into the next financial perspective , I would agree that , in a variety of contexts , housing will be affected ; indeed , refurbishment in the context of energy efficiency - which , from our point of view , falls under the category of green jobs - will certainly be an area where we will have activity , without , of course , trying to have a common European housing policy .
There will also be other issues like housing for the most vulnerable groups of society such as the Roma , where there is already a beginning , and I think there will be continued support from the Structural Funds to address housing issues , in this particular case , for the extremely vulnerable marginalised groups in a variety of Member States .
This also highlights the importance of having a very diversified view because countries are different in terms of their social needs , and certain decisions and solutions that are applied in high-income countries certainly do not necessarily have to be followed - and definitely not imposed - in other Member States .
The debate is closed .
Security and prevention measures on offshore oil platforms in the EU ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on security and prevention measures on offshore oil platforms in the EU .
Madam President , 20 April was a dark day for the Gulf of Mexico , for the United States of America , nay , for the whole world .
For exactly four weeks now , the industry and the authorities have been trying everything - without conclusive success thus far - to bring a halt to the enormous oil leak and to minimise the environmental damage , in particular , on the coast .
The accident throws into sharp relief the risks associated with oil and gas supply works out at sea .
The public perception has increased , and quite rightly so , not only in the United States , but also in Europe .
Europe , together with Norway , produces more than 200 million tonnes of crude oil a year , most of it from the North Sea .
Even if the exploration for and conveying of oil and gas does not take place under comparably extreme conditions or at the same depths as in the Gulf of Mexico , we must still plan for the possibility of an accident in the EU and be ready for it .
We have the competent bodies and mechanisms in order to be able to react quickly to a potential accident .
There is the European Maritime Safety Agency , we have rescue boats , we have civil protection mechanisms , we have good coordination of assistance measures , and Commissioner Georgieva was thus able to offer European assistance for ongoing measures in the Gulf of Mexico from an early stage .
Our goal must be prevention , so as not to have to deal with the major clear-up after a disaster at all .
Together with Commissioner Potočnik , I have therefore asked our offices to review applicable EU legislation .
The European legislation represents the framework for safety and environmental protection measures , both in general and in the event of a specific accident .
Our directives ensure minimum safety standards for equipment and they contain detailed minimum standards for the health and safety of workers .
We will now review all these legal texts to see whether they provide an adequate and optimal toolset for a similar disaster or a worst case scenario .
This means close cooperation with the national regulatory authorities , as a major part of the safety provisions governing conveying oil and gas and health protection is in the hands of the Member States rather than our hands directly .
Of course , no set of regulations can offer a 100 % guarantee .
A lot depends on the approach and the behaviour of the operative field in our industry .
We therefore have every reason to get together : politics and the industry must cooperate in order to ensure that the European environment and the public are as safe as possible .
I want to put safety and sustainability in the transport of oil and gas at the heart of our stakeholder conversations .
That is why , in the last week , I hosted a gathering of high-ranking officials from the major energy firms active in European waters .
Commissioner Georgieva was also there .
In this technically-oriented meeting , we asked the industry to ensure that all possible efforts were made to prevent comparable accidents in the vicinity of European coasts .
We presented a catalogue of questions that were answered by the companies over the following days .
There were 12 questions , and they very specifically included everything that is crucial to safety on oil platforms and gas platforms and for the waters , the coasts and the Member States .
I see this meeting with the industry as the beginning of a process that will strengthen the transparency of the industry 's operations and promote compliance with the regulations and the application of best practice .
We are planning a second meeting in the upcoming months , when we have a better understanding of the causes of the accident , in order to evaluate the situation and to learn the lessons for Europe from the accident in the Gulf of Mexico .
At this point in time , when the causes and circumstances have not yet been analysed , it would be premature to draw conclusions or to call for new legislative initiatives .
If it should transpire , however , that a regulatory response is needed , I can assure you that the Commission will waste no time in submitting proposals for European legislation to you .
You see , ladies and gentlemen , there are constant efforts in Europe to prevent a similar tragedy over here .
Should a similar accident nonetheless occur , we have a number of measures and mechanisms to react effectively and without delay , and to minimise the magnitude of any such accident for citizens and the environment in Europe .
I will be more than happy to report back to you after our next meeting on what we are planning .
The explosion of the platform in the Gulf of Mexico is the greatest ecological disaster of its kind in history .
Every day , 800 000 litres of crude oil are flowing into the Gulf , which means over 22 million litres since the disaster began .
The oil slick now covers over 43 000 square kilometres , which is bigger than the Netherlands .
At the moment , it is our duty to declare solidarity with the United States and all the victims of the tragedy , and to ensure that we give as much help as possible .
In the light of this disaster , I think it essential that we immediately carry out a special assessment - a detailed and far-reaching technical inspection of drilling platforms operating in the territorial waters of the European Union .
This should be the first step at supranational level towards ensuring the safety of Europe 's seas .
In addition , I would like to draw particular attention to the fact that if a similar disaster were to happen in the Baltic Sea , which is a closed sea , it would cause permanent and irreversible devastation in the entire region and its coastal areas .
It is essential that all developments carried out in the territorial waters of the European Union should be subject to special monitoring , and that they should comply with the highest safety standards and be equipped with the most modern safety systems .
In this respect , I think it is also essential to develop a common cross-border procedure for reaction and cooperation , which would be put into action immediately if a leakage of crude oil occurred .
Observers in the United States point out that in many cases , permission to install platforms in the Gulf of Mexico has been given under pressure and in the interests of the oil industry , at the cost of the natural environment .
It is hard , here , not to mention the decision to build Nord Stream , the Northern Gas Pipeline , which was a political decision which did not take account of the dangers this investment may present to the Baltic Sea ecosystem .
Mr Oettinger , in the face of the drama in the Gulf of Mexico , drilling installations for extracting crude oil or gas should never be allowed to appear without a 100 % guarantee of safety for the seas and oceans concerned .
Decisions made under pressure from an industrial or political lobby should not be allowed .
Commissioner , often it is not enough to simply increase prevention measures .
The recent explosion in the Gulf of Mexico involved a platform which was only built in 2001 and its subsequent sinking is causing one of the biggest ecological disasters to date .
Thus far , and it is 29 days since the accident , it has not been possible to stop the leak and , as Mr Sonik said , over 5 000 tonnes of oil a day are flowing into the sea in the Gulf .
This massive pollution has happened at a time when a great many species , many of which are disappearing , are in full spawning season .
I refer to five of the seven species of sea turtle , dolphins , numerous whales and numerous important sea mammals .
Inevitably , man is also affected .
This explosion , this accident occurred just when the area was starting to recover from the devastating effects of Hurricane Katrina ; it also claimed 11 lives .
However , measures are being taken in the United States .
In 1981 , Congress voted for a moratorium banning offshore oil drilling in 85 % of the coastal waters around the United States .
The Obama government confirmed the moratorium after the accident , despite its initial statements to the contrary .
At the same time , however , oil platforms are still being commissioned , mainly in the North Sea .
There are , at present , hundreds of offshore platforms , drilling for both oil and natural gas .
The recent accident in the Gulf of Mexico really did confirm the danger of annihilation of the marine environment from offshore oil platforms .
Nonetheless , under European legislation , drilling for oil under the sea is exempted from the scope of the Seveso Directive on major accident hazards involving dangerous substances .
This recent disaster shows us that no one is in a position to guarantee that a similar disaster will not happen in the European Union and , sometimes , merely increasing prevention measures does not suffice .
The Obama government was forced to retreat by the scale of the disaster .
Perhaps the time has come , in addition to extra prevention measures , for the European Union to introduce a moratorium banning offshore drilling in EU waters with immediate effect , to match the US moratorium ?
We need to act at once , before an accident waiting to happen like that in the Gulf of Mexico comes knocking at our door .
Madam President , the collapse of the platform off the coast of Louisiana on 22 April has caused an oil slick on an incredible scale .
The latter raises three major issues .
The fact that no systems were put in place in advance to stop a leak of this nature and on this scale is hard to understand , as is the absence of sufficient controls , on the part of the public authorities , over security systems required and implemented by the platform operators to avoid the risks of pollution and , ultimately , the specific risk relating to pollution by hydrocarbons of particularly sensitive and / or particularly inhabited areas .
A moment ago , our fellow Member , Mr Sonik , reminded us of how disastrous such pollution would be in the Baltic Sea , for example .
The North Sea has already seen at least two serious accidents on offshore platforms and is one of the regions of the world with the greatest concentration of platforms .
Under these conditions , it is absolutely essential that we take stock of the situation to make sure that a similar accident is not possible off our coasts , and we are delighted , Commissioner , that an initiative of this nature has been taken .
Having said that , what measures do you intend to take in the short term to improve safety and accident prevention on offshore platforms located in our territorial waters ?
You spoke of minimum standards , Commissioner , but that is not enough .
Secondly , what control measures are in place to ensure that safety requirements are fully met ?
Having safety rules on paper is not enough ; they have to be applied and their application actually monitored .
What do you intend to do to move in this direction ?
Thirdly , in the event of an accident , what resources are in place to avoid coastal pollution ?
It is all very well having vessels and civilian forces , but what do we have at our disposal ?
Is it not time that we demanded that operators have specific technical equipment that could be pooled ?
Is it not also necessary , given the inclusion henceforth of environmental harm in EU law , to provide for an adequate system of compensation and associated financial guarantees ?
Finally , oil companies are operating at ever-increasing depths , making intervention very difficult when there is an accident and putting the marine environment at risk .
What measures are planned for offshore oil exploitation at greater depths and , in particular , in the Far North ?
Finally , I will return to the question that our fellow Member , Mr Arsenis , asked just now : is it not time that we considered an extended moratorium under the same conditions as those that the United States wants to introduce ?
We want and we need to move away from this oil-based society .
Is it not time that we did so ?
Madam President , Commissioner , I too feel that we need to stop those in industry from playing God .
Today , more than ever , the industrialised nations are thirsty for oil .
They are drilling everything they can , and at ever-increasing depths , which clearly increases the risk of accidents .
In recent times , the industries have favoured exploration and extraction , to the detriment of safety and of the environment ; every day for almost a month now , 800 000 litres of crude oil have been flowing into the Gulf of Mexico , and the environmental and economic damage will be catastrophic .
I see a huge gap between the colossal sums spent on deeper and deeper extraction and the utterly inadequate resources devoted to the upstream prevention and the anticipation of risks .
Like my fellow Members , I too demand several things .
Firstly , I think we need to conduct an audit of all the oil platforms to check their state of repair , their level of safety and their compliance with standards .
Of course , we also need to perform platform inspections , even if these inspections are the responsibility of the Member States , and we need inspections by the Commission of the inspections themselves .
Furthermore , I think we need to protect the most fragile ecosystems once and for all .
In this respect , as well as the initiative which you have taken and which I welcome , to try to ascertain how we could cope with such circumstances if a similar accident were to happen off our coasts , I do think that Europe must take initiatives to protect the most fragile ecosystems once and for all .
I am thinking about Alaska , for example .
We need an international convention on the same model as that which exists for the protection of resources in Antarctica , and Europe could spearhead this type of work and this type of convention .
Finally , if we still needed one , this is a very good reason to invest more and sooner in renewable energies .
The volcano - I will not say its name , because it is unpronounceable - was a sign for us on the issue of air transport ; in the same way , this terrible accident is another sign for us on the issue of oil extraction .
It is time for us to acknowledge that the folly of racing to extract oil anywhere and at any cost is behind us .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I welcome the statement from the Commissioner .
The world has watched in amazement , both at the immense flow of gas and oil from the ruptured pipe following the explosion and disaster in the Gulf of Mexico and at the seeming inability of both the industry and the US authorities to stem the flow ; we must hope that recent developments will prove successful .
We have had , as colleagues have mentioned , our own experience of platform disasters in the North Sea .
I think of Piper Alpha as one example , and I believe that lessons have been learned from that .
But let us remember that there is a significant difference between the depth of sea in which they are operating in the Gulf of Mexico and the depth of the North Sea .
Let me urge that we are cautious and do not rush into new legislation .
Let us be certain as to what happened .
Let us be certain whether our existing rules would have prevented it happening here , and let us be certain that any new rules would prevent it happening .
Accidents and acts of God do happen , and we cannot guarantee to prevent them .
There has to be a limit to what we can do in order to prevent them .
I would like to give you a final thought , when we are considering relative risk : that accidents like this put the relative safety of nuclear energy into a different perspective .
Madam President , the oil rig leak in the Bay of Mexico is a real disaster , both environmentally and economically .
Apparently , there were some irregularities in the granting of drilling permits by the United States Interior Secretary .
This would constitute unforgivable irresponsibility , the consequences of which are incalculable and do not only affect the United States .
We know that hundreds of offshore drilling authorisations are granted by countries throughout the world , and if these authorisations were granted just as irresponsibly , it would pose serious problems to the entire world .
As MEP for a European outermost region and for the overseas countries and territories ( PTOM ) , made up almost entirely of islands , nearly 130 in total , scattered over three continents , I must express my great concern for our islands in the face of offshore oil exploitation projects .
That is why it is essential for the European Union , which must set an example , to review with the utmost rigour the security and prevention measures on its own offshore oil platforms .
Furthermore , accidental or operational oil spillages into the sea , not necessarily caused by Europe , are estimated at several tens of thousands of tonnes each year .
Is it not time the European Union took initiatives so that , henceforth , offshore platforms fall under an undisputed scientific authority , which should be established in the form of an international authority ?
After Copenhagen and in preparation for Cancún , the European Union should pride itself on promoting real global governance where the search for , protection and exploitation of deep-sea resources are concerned .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , as a neighbour of the ' Swabian Sea ' , I would like to call on you to take the accident , the disaster , in the Gulf of Mexico as seriously as if it had happened in our own Lake Constance .
You would then no longer have any drinking water and in my home town , there would be no more festival , with all the dramatic consequences that would involve , and much else besides .
What does that mean ?
Are you sure that the oil rigs far away from us - in other words , in the North Sea and the Baltic - will really stand up to the different storm conditions that we will have to face as a result of climate change ?
Are you sure that your European Maritime Safety Agency really is equipped to deal with something like this ?
You spoke about good coordination .
We have already often experienced failures in radio contact between the different countries .
Has that been checked , before an emergency incident occurs ?
When something actually does happen , what is the legal situation in relation to lawsuits against the oil companies ?
Would a risk fund perhaps be useful in this connection ?
Finally , is it clear to you that the monitoring authorities in the US were much too closely interdependent with the oil industry ?
Can you rule out us having the same problems at European level ?
The stipulation should not be ' You can do everything , except ... ' .
( RO ) I , too , welcome the Commission 's initiative .
I think that it is important for us to discuss this topic , even though the accident did not occur in an area under the jurisdiction of a European Union Member State .
There are currently a huge number of platforms in Member States ' territorial waters extracting oil .
This activity is expected to increase at a time when the International Energy Agency estimates that only 5 % of sea oil reserves are currently known .
It is important for us to see what lessons we need to learn from the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico and what the current situation is in waters where similar production activities are being carried out in EU Member States .
If necessary , we must also take additional measures to improve the safety of workers on these platforms , as well as further measures to prevent accidents with disastrous consequences for Europe 's vulnerable regions .
Another lesson which we must learn from the Deepwater Horizon disaster , and from the past as well , is that we need to look very closely at how operating licences are granted and what current contracting practices are followed .
We must ensure that companies cannot shirk from assuming responsibility .
A company entering into a deal with a certain degree of risk which must be tackled with specific safety measures and can generate huge revenue must also be prepared to suffer the consequences if an accident occurs .
If you have followed the course of the inquiry into this disaster in the United States , the chain of contractual relations established between several firms allows companies to pass the buck to each other , while oil continues to pour into the sea .
We cannot put up with a similar situation here .
This is why we must look at the legislation in this area and make any improvements to the legislative framework so that we can ensure we reduce the risks of such an incident occurring .
Past experience shows that huge human and environmental losses remain in the wake of accidents , with the procedures for establishing liability capable of lasting for years on end .
The Commission must ensure that the legislation for exploiting oil resources in safe conditions does not contain provisions which are too lax and assess to what extent this legislation needs to be amended in order to reduce the use of means of shirking responsibility .
( PL ) The example provided by the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico forces us to think carefully about investment projects under way in the European Union .
I am talking about the Northern Gas Pipeline , which is being built in defiance of recommendations made by the European Parliament .
The source of the gas will be the Russian Stockman field in the Barents Sea .
The project plans the extraction of 24 billion m3 of gas annually in the first phase , but this will then rise to 68 billion .
To obtain this amount of gas , many boreholes have to be made in a very short space of time .
It will not be possible to stop the stream of 148 000 tonnes of methane , because there are no valves or transit stations .
Damage to the pipeline will by no means mean its closure .
Gas will continue to flow out until the fault has been repaired , because if water got inside , it would cripple the pipeline completely .
Therefore , I call upon the Commission to carry out a thorough analysis of the dangers presented by development projects of this kind .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is a timely one .
We have not yet solved the problems in the Gulf of Mexico , nor do we know where the next problems will occur .
That is the reason for my first question , Commissioner , which is as follows : where , at this present time , can Europe help with specialist expertise , the Joint Research Centre or with the various other bodies that we have so that we can attempt , together , to obtain a solution for the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico as quickly and as effectively as possible ?
In reducing CO2 emissions by 20 % and making up the difference through renewable energy sources , the European Union has chosen the right route , and we can achieve a very great deal through greater efficiency .
Do you believe that we could , for example , launch new initiatives together with Norway within the European Economic Area ?
( NL ) Like other speakers , I am terribly shocked that it has been possible for hundreds of thousands of litres of crude oil to gush into the sea for weeks on end without us managing to stop it .
I am also terribly shocked by the enormous damage this is causing and by the fact that the company in question , BP , is constantly playing this down .
We are being forced to face the facts , and we have not even been able to assess all the longer-term consequences .
It is essential , therefore , that we take the measures at European rather than national level that are needed to render such occurrences impossible in future .
In so doing , we must concentrate on the procedural and also the technical aspects , by imposing the necessary safety systems .
This has a cost , of course , but the cost of doing nothing would obviously be much higher .
In the past , we took the global lead by imposing double hulls for oil tankers .
I think that here , too , we should take the lead and set a good example .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Oettinger , as a Member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and as shadow rapporteur for biodiversity , this disaster obviously has a personal impact for me .
There is a lot of destruction of life that should be conserved .
Someone has said it already today , but the truth is that , despite every precaution , accidents do happen , as there are limits to prevention .
However , accidents are not confined to oil platforms - nuclear power stations , too , are not immune to incidents and accidents .
In Austria , we have a saying , and it goes as follows : ' Does something always have to happen before something happens ? '
In other words , does there always have to be an accident before we learn anything ?
This oil disaster should make us all consider whether leaving behind nuclear power would not be a way forward for Europe .
We should also concentrate all our mental energies and our financial resources on investing in renewable energy .
( GA ) Madam President , it is good that we are discussing this important issue but , at the end of the day , I do not know what will come of our talks or what effect we will have on large companies - the oil companies who own the oil wells which caused this damage and this disaster .
At the same time , the Commission is to be applauded for their recommendations that measures be implemented here to ensure that the same will not happen in our own area .
However , if there is one lesson to be learned from this disaster , it is that we desperately need to make other sources available to provide energy in our own area , particularly natural energy such as wind and solar power .
The sooner we do this , the better it will be for everyone .
If we do not succeed in doing this , the oil companies will be going further out in the ocean searching for oil and damage and disasters like this will happen not just once , but over and over again .
We should not allow this to happen .
( RO ) We support the investments made in Europe 's energy infrastructure , but only when they guarantee total safety for construction and production activities .
I also take this opportunity to call for any project involving the underwater extraction or transport of hydrocarbons to be implemented only after a proper assessment of the environmental impact has been carried out .
I have called on more than one occasion for European maritime accident intervention centres to be set up in every Member State with access to the sea .
This type of accident also comes under this category .
Last but not least , all companies involved in the underwater extraction and transport of hydrocarbons should offer guarantees and have insurance policies for paying out damages in the event of accidents .
( LT ) I believe that the whole world is watching with concern the events that continue to unfold today on the coast of the Bay of Mexico .
Nobody could have envisaged and forecast that such a huge country , the world 's leading nation , the United States would be unable to deal with what at first glance seems manageable .
I think that we , Europe too , are contributing considerable funds and human resources towards solving the problems of climate change .
However , nature has its own demands .
I feel it is very good that we will have opportunities to learn from others ' mistakes , but again , I would also like to remind you of the problem with the Northern gas pipeline and I believe that we , Europe , will be politically responsible for the exploitation of this gas pipeline and therefore , I would also urge the Commissioner to ensure that we once again review the conditions of the exploitation of this gas project , and I also welcome the opportunity and will to strengthen Europe 's own rescue capacities .
Madam President , honourable Members , like you , I am shocked , not only in my role as a Commissioner , but also as a citizen , when I see how nature is disrupted and destroyed in such cases for many years .
Although we are shocked , we must still remain calm and level-headed , as frenetic activity and hysteria would be out of place here .
The exact cause of the accident in the Gulf of Mexico is still unknown .
Was it the technology that failed ?
Was it human error ?
I have confidence in the US Government and public to seek an explanation with the same thoroughness as exists in our interest in explaining the causes here in Europe .
I also believe that the population of the United States of America expects , with the same shock and thoroughness , that lessons will be learned .
In that regard , I have confidence in the United States as an industrialised nation , in its technical skills and in its democracy .
As a second point , we must move away from oil .
It is clear , however , that we have been going down the oil route for generations and this applies to the industrialised nations of Europe in particular .
Our citizens have far in excess of 200 million cars - and you and I all drive them .
I drive a lot , and I also fly a lot for business purposes .
At the weekend , hundreds of thousands of people will be flying south once again , and spending their Whit break in Mallorca .
When it comes to Greece and Spain , people say that only tourism can solve the economic crisis , and that means more flights to Athens , to Palma , to Marbella and to other destinations .
We consume oil - all of us , you and I. It seems to me that even this august Chamber , this honourable House , is not exactly constructed in an energy friendly way .
There are more neon lamps than MEPs here tonight .
It is because of all that that I believe that we simply have to be aware that we still need many years of major oil consumption but that we must nevertheless be fully ambitious as we walk the path away from oil : 20 % renewable energy sources in 10 years ' time .
We are a preparing a ' Roadmap 2050 ' and we will present the various alternatives to you in the course of the year .
Expert opinions say that , in four decades , we can obtain 80 % of our energy needs from sources other than fossil fuels and thus other than oil .
Electromobility represents an option here , but the majority of vehicles will still not be electrically powered for many years and will instead be powered by oil in the form of diesel and petrol .
It is clear that drilling for oil in the North Sea or the Gulf of Mexico represents an attempt to reduce dependence on a number of countries .
Without this , without our own deposits , our dependence on the OPEC States and on countries that are not always characterised by democracy would be even greater than it is .
There is one crucial difference though : in the North Sea , drilling takes place to around 150 to 200 metres , whereas in the Gulf of Mexico , the depth is 3 000 to as far as 4 000 metres , with far inferior opportunities to guarantee safety .
Depths of 150 and 200 metres can be reached with manned submarines .
In the Gulf of Mexico , human beings are , in principle , far away from the source of danger , far away from the technical safety provided .
I also have confidence in our Member States .
We have every reason to have confidence in our national authorities and our technical teams in the United Kingdom , Germany , Norway and Denmark .
Also , in the partnership which currently exists between the European Union and our authority ( the European Maritime Safety Agency - EMSA ) and the national safety teams , we have an excellent , high level of cooperative safety between the European Union and those of our Member States that are bordering countries .
In the case of Nord Stream , too , we naturally had to examine the issue of safety .
This involved complicated safety and approval processes that were all carried out , and I want to make clear that Nord Stream will probably be the most modern and the safest gas pipeline in the world .
Here , too , there is one crucial difference : if there were ever a problem in the gas pipeline , the gas could be stopped at the source or at the coast .
Nord Stream is not comparable with what is happening in the Gulf of Mexico .
Ultimately , we will have to take the path that leads away from oil , but we will need decades to go down that path .
All of us in politics and in society must take that path .
On the way there , and in the meantime , we must check whether our safety standards and laws and guidelines and safety teams represent the highest level .
We have put the relevant questions .
In the autumn , when we know the causes , when we have the answers , when we have grilled our energy companies , we will be happy to give you more information .
I believe that the energy companies are well aware of the seriousness of the situation .
I have one final point to make .
There are already bases for liability for punitive damages .
Incidentally , none of the parties involved in the United States disputes that .
When it is clear who bears the guilt , the party in question will be liable and we can already see that this will amount to billions .
In European environmental law , as well as in our national environmental regulations , the question of liability , of causing damage and of punitive damages is clear .
This , too , will reinforce a precautionary approach when it comes to safety .
I assume that , in a few weeks , we will know whether we in Europe have any legal or technical need to act , and we will then be happy to report back to Parliament again .
Your words also show how important it is to you , across all the parties , to act in a foresighted and precautionary way on this subject rather than to react afterwards once a disaster has already occurred .
That is how we work in the Commission .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
After the disaster involving the deep-sea oil rig on US shores , it is advisable for us , too , to draw a few lessons .
First and foremost , we must assert that although deep-sea drilling showcases state-of-the-art industrial technologies , it is still not without risk .
We must also state unambiguously that the increase in private investment in the oil sector must not mean that political decision makers surrender the right to strict environmental regulation .
The oil disaster in the United States is a good opportunity for the EU to review its own safety regulations .
These are still too general in nature .
We only need to think about the directive on environmental impact assessments or the framework for occupational safety .
The review is further justified because the rules that are somewhat more specific focus more on the steps to take after a disaster has occurred .
Considerations to do with prevention therefore take a back seat .
Learning from the US example , we need to delineate clearly the areas of responsibility for the oil well owners and operators and those of the supervisory authorities .
Industrial regulations and voluntary undertakings by companies do not offer a reassuring solution .
It is absolutely clear that legally defined safety guarantees are needed .
Volcanic ash crisis ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the volcanic ash crisis ( B7-0217 / 10 ) .
author . - Madam President , Mr Simpson apologises for not being present during the discussion on the ash cloud crisis .
Ironically , in view of this evening 's discussion , he has been caught up in the flight restrictions related to the ash cloud restrictions in the UK and therefore has been unable to travel to Strasbourg for the discussion .
I will therefore be speaking on his behalf this evening .
The oral question on the volcanic ash crisis is just as relevant today , in the context of the ongoing disruption to airspace , as it was at the time of the initial eruption of the Icelandic volcano last month , when we saw much of EU airspace closed for six days .
We are now dealing not only with the aftermath of that disruption and its financial impact but also with the present ongoing uncertainty of continued and prolonged disruption to European airspace .
While I believe that some important lessons have been learned and acted on following the unprecedented scale , duration and cause of the initial airspace shutdown , it is clear that the response at European level needs to be stepped up a gear in the face of ongoing disruptions .
Faced with the challenges that the unprecedented nature and unspecified duration and the disruption is causing to air travel , I am concerned today to get assurances that the mechanisms we have in place for coping with the disruption are working effectively and that , where gaps have been identified over the last few weeks , these are being adequately addressed .
I am pleased to say that the Air Passengers ' Rights Regulation has proved vitally important in providing a safety net to ensure that it is not the passengers who bear the brunt of the financial consequences of the disruption and who are not left stranded by the chaos .
The airspace closure has , however , raised important questions about airlines fulfilling their obligations when it comes to air passengers ' rights , especially in the light of any compensation afforded to the aviation industry .
What feedback is the Commission getting on the treatment of passengers , and what assurances can it give that airlines are fulfilling their obligations in line with the legislation ?
Furthermore , the current situation has exposed the vulnerability of those passengers booked on third-country airlines for whom the air passengers ' rights legislation does not apply .
How does the Commission propose to address this gap in the legislation ?
We also - very early on in this crisis - recognised the heavy financial losses suffered by the aviation industry during the airspace shutdown .
My concern with any compensation package made available to the aviation industry is to ensure that compensation is directed at the different sectors of the aviation industry - not just the airlines - and that the compensation measures are of an EU-wide nature .
I know that some Member States will be more sympathetic than others when it comes to giving financial aid to their airlines .
What assurances is the Commission able to give that some conditions will be levelled to avoid any distortions in the compensation handed out at Member State level and to ensure a level playing field ?
I now turn to the most pressing concern today , which is over the procedures in place for defining no-flight zones in the EU .
The continued disruption to European airspace has once again put the procedures applied for defining no-flight zones under the spotlight .
There are concerns that Member States are being over cautious in their implementation of no-flight zones and that aeroplanes are safe to fly amid higher densities of ash than are currently allowed by EU rules .
The ongoing closure and opening of airspace by Member States over the last few weeks has very much highlighted the need for a more joined-up approach at EU level , rather than the differentiated approach we are currently seeing .
I am also aware that the Commission has put renewed emphasis on improving data collection and modelling methodologies to give a more detailed picture of the risks involved for aeroplanes flying through an ash cloud .
How does the new information we have impact on the restrictions currently in place and the definition of the no-flight zones ?
Finally , we have seen the value of increased European coordination when it comes to responding to the ash cloud crisis .
Further areas where we have recognised the importance of greater cooperation include the acceleration of the Single European Sky initiative and the creation of a mobility action plan to help the EU cope better during such crises .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to provide an update on the evolution of the Icelandic volcano crisis which , of course , is linked to aviation .
The European Union has been heavily affected by the consequences of the Eyjafjallajökull volcano eruption in Iceland .
The volcano eruption laid a cloud of volcanic ash over most of Europe .
Volcanic ash contains many problematic substances that are harmful to aircraft and , in particular , their engines .
The presence of this safety threat in the sky forced national authorities to take decisions , in accordance with the relevant procedures developed at international level , to close off all affected airspace .
The European Union immediately mobilised resources to tackle the most pressing problems .
Taking into account evolutions in the situation and the need for a more differentiated approach to the model and risk management procedures , the Commission took the initiative , over the weekend of 17 and 18 April , with the Spanish Presidency and Eurocontrol , to propose a coordinated European approach .
As a result of this work , in full cooperation with Member States and the industry , new procedures were defined .
At the extraordinary meeting of EU Transport Ministers that took place on 19 April 2010 , this new procedure was endorsed , thereby allowing for a gradual reopening of airspace in a coordinated manner as of 08.00 on 20 April 2010 .
As a follow-up to this immediate action , the Commission produced a report addressing the impact of the volcanic ash cloud crisis on the air transport industry .
It received broad support from the Council of Transport Ministers at its extraordinary meeting of 4 May 2010 .
Whereas the focus of the report was to address the current volcano crisis , it has nevertheless sought equally to address the European Union 's need to be able to deal effectively with similar crisis situations in the future , should they arise .
The events of the past 10 days have shown that the situation is far from being resolved at this stage .
The volcano continues to be active , and recurrent closures of airspace continue to take place , depending on the weather conditions affecting the dispersion of the ash cloud .
The Commission is therefore committed to ensuring a prompt follow-up to the Transport Council conclusions as adopted on 4 May 2010 .
I am happy to report the first steps taken as a consequence .
The European Crisis Coordination Cell has been agreed with effect from 11 May 2010 .
The final arrangements for setting it up are being made this week .
The nomination of a functional airspace blocks coordinator was endorsed by the Single Sky Committee on 7 May 2010 .
The designation of Eurocontrol 's performance review committee as an SES performance review body was also carried out by the Single Sky Committee on 7 May 2010 .
The European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) has been given the task of defining binding standards for engine ash tolerance levels .
The Commission will shortly be calling for the creation of a task force to explore how the current European forecasting and dispersion models can be improved so as to enhance associated risk assessment and risk management in such crisis situations .
There is more to come as the Commission works towards meeting the Council of Transport Ministers ' expectations , as expressed in their conclusions of 4 May 2010 .
The volcanic eruption in April highlighted to us that traffic in European airspace is not prepared with an appropriate response in the event of unexpected disruption .
There has been no coordination , flexibility or effort to make the maximum possible use of flight conditions .
The SES II package was adopted in November 2009 in record time , as is also mentioned in the Commission 's briefing note .
The package was adopted in spite of Member States ' resistance .
In fact , the translation and publication took longer than the actual negotiations .
The crisis has come and we have seen the benefit of implementing the SES II package .
In my view , if Member States dropped their current reservations , we could have a Single European Sky in next to no time .
To do this , we require a network of direct routes and an efficient traffic control system which disregards national borders from now on .
Unfortunately , there is no intention of this happening .
The only solution therefore is for us to implement the SES II package extremely quickly .
The Commission has tabled urgent measures which have actually already been requested in the approved regulations .
They are excellent measures .
However , the main action required is to create functional airspace blocks by no later than the specified deadline or by the end of 2012 .
This also requires the regulatory guide , which , unfortunately , is not mentioned in the Council 's conclusions of 4 May .
The guide 's absence can be used by Member States as a pretext for delay .
In addition , the guide must be the instrument used to ensure that , by the requested deadline , we not only have coordinated traffic zones , but a proper Single European Sky too .
The guide must provide for traffic control within the blocks , coordinated with adjacent blocks so that there are no overlapping areas .
Otherwise , we will replace the current national boundaries with the blocks ' boundaries , thereby extending without any justification the deadline for implementing the Single European Sky .
I do not believe that we need to consider in future that an SES III regulation will be required to combine the blocks .
This approach also allows the SESAR system to be implemented in ideal conditions at minimal cost .
In 2011. the last Member States will join the Schengen area .
I believe that it is unacceptable for us to maintain borders in the sky when we do not have them on the ground .
I want to start by thanking you for your answer .
In my opinion , a number of questions have not yet been answered fully , and so I should like rather more explanation of several points .
Mr Simpson 's absence demonstrates that the issue is indeed still current , and that the consequences of such eruptions are unpredictable and can be far-reaching in terms of our citizens ' mobility , and also in economic terms if the situation is protracted .
As I see it , it also demonstrates that we cannot , in fact , rule out the possibility of something similar occurring in a few weeks ' time , for example - in the middle of the peak summer season - and the airspace having to be closed .
Consequently , we must continue to work not only on structural measures to improve the efficiency of our aviation and of our transport system in general - I shall return to this shortly - but also on better crisis management .
A minute ago , you also talked about setting up a kind of coordination cell .
More clarity will be provided on that subject this week .
Nevertheless , could you perhaps already tell us a little more about the kind of task you envisage for this coordination cell ?
What exactly should its initial tasks be ?
The occurrences in April have made it abundantly clear that coordination between the parties concerned - such as airports , airlines and travel agencies - falls short , and that there is no mechanism for informing the parties concerned of what they have to do in such cases .
Also , stranded travellers , for example , do not really know what their rights are .
Thus , as I see it , we need a European preparedness plan to enable the right decisions to be taken rapidly and the right contacts to be developed .
In fact , the same goes for the repatriation of travellers ; after all , where tens of thousands of people are concerned , a system must be set up somewhere to facilitate this .
Passengers ' rights are a very important element .
Europe has done a very great deal of work in this field , which is to be welcomed .
As you know , though , there are gaps in the legislation .
We are talking about third-country airlines , which do not actually fall under our legislation , and so I would advocate integrating these kinds of rights into our aviation agreements with third countries .
I also think that we need to monitor the application of this kind of legislation by the Member States .
We heard just this week that the Italian authorities have fined the airline Ryanair .
That is good news , but what is happening in the other Member States ?
Can we obtain an assessment of this ?
Of course , there are also the numerous structural measures , but I do not wish to dwell too much on those : the Single European Sky that is under construction , and also the railways , for example .
The railways proved not to be a viable alternative .
There are many reasons for this : it has to do with different systems and also with circumstances such as our lack of so much as an integrated ticketing system .
In my opinion , that is also very important , Commissioner .
Therefore , a very great deal remains to be done , but you have our support in this .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have already held a debate about the ash cloud and the associated problems for aviation in the immediate aftermath of the volcanic eruption .
We observed various things in this crisis .
We observed , for one thing , that aviation really is essential for the transport sector , as it is not only passengers that get stranded , but goods , too , can be left untransported .
In Germany , for example , BMW had some production bottlenecks due to not receiving deliveries .
We observed that we need every mode of transport , including aviation .
For another thing , we observed that it is a significant crisis for the airlines if it is not possible to fly for several days .
A five-day break , the airlines said , could be coped with .
A 20-day break , however , could perhaps have caused a collapse of the entire industry lasting quite some time .
We need not talk about compensation just yet , the airlines themselves said , but if it had lasted longer , that would have been necessary .
Passenger rights have been subject to varying comments from different speakers .
They have now put to the test the rule that , in such extraordinary cases , too , everything can be done for passengers in relation to information , compensation and recompense to the extent that they need it and in the way we originally laid it down here .
There are still two subjects in particular that I would like to go into .
The first is the Single European Sky .
We do not have a single European airspace , and that is something that was painfully absent this time , too .
A single European airspace clearly would not have prevented the volcanic eruption , we all know that , but we would certainly have been better able to bring about the smooth evacuation of passengers .
We have appointed a Functional Airspace Blocks ( FAB ) coordinator , of course .
He is now starting work , and we all very much hope that his work will relatively soon be able to lead to a single European airspace .
The question is also how long will it take until we actually achieve this ?
Perhaps you are not in a position to answer that precisely .
We have also discussed before whether better European coordination of the railway sector - something that we have long been wanting and , on paper , have long had - could have helped passengers to get home more quickly .
In this regard , too , we observed quite clearly where our difficulties lie .
I will now move on to my final question .
Do we have good crisis management arrangements for cases like this ?
We have the institute in London , which is actually there to provide information when there are earthquakes .
It also deals with volcanic eruptions as a secondary responsibility .
Now it has been producing computer projections based on second-hand data , and it has been criticised for that .
What can we learn from other parts of the world where volcano eruptions are more common , such as the United States , Indonesia and others ?
What other measurements do they take ?
According to my information , they are better prepared for such situations .
Perhaps we had not planned for this in Europe , but we do then have to learn the resultant lessons .
We are a hi-tech location , we have a lot of opportunities , and researchers in Germany , for example , have called for a specialised monitoring network for those aerosols , those minuscule items , that volcanic ash contains .
What else do you think that we can do ?
How can we improve our technologies in the interests of aviation , the people and goods ?
Madam President , the closing of European airspace was doubtless a necessary preventive measure in the interests of safety .
Subsequently , and before the airspace had to be closed again , a more suitable technique to handle the problem should have been found .
Unfortunately , I have to say that this clearly did not succeed at all , either in coordinating the measurements , in the analyses or in respect of passengers .
The second time , too , the treatment of passengers who were held up due to flights that were downgraded was extremely inadequate , and it must be a priority to improve this .
I find myself wondering when there really will be plans in place .
Commissioner , you have , furthermore , not provided a very detailed answer to the question relating to funding and potential compensation for the airlines .
That is a key issue , as this subject continues to be constantly under discussion .
Quite how , then , is this to be solved ?
Who , exactly , is to be compensated ?
The airlines ?
Do they then pass the money on to the passengers ?
For example , will business people who missed important appointments receive compensation ?
Will a dealer , a company , that had to wait for replacement parts receive compensation ?
Why should it only be the airlines that receive compensation ?
I do not regard that as justified if you compare it with the economic consequences of this crisis .
Moreover , we really need to take account of the fact that , ultimately , the airlines have been receiving a long-term subsidy from European citizens through the abolition of the kerosene tax , meaning , of course , a priori that they already have a subsidy .
Commissioner , this question is pending and I await an answer from you .
Thank you , Madam President .
I should perhaps like to start by thanking Commissioner Kallas for his endurance during those five days .
We might perhaps consider that the first two or three days could have seen a little more action , but on the whole , I believe that the Commissioners carried out their work extremely properly , and that the decisions of the Council were such as to give great encouragement within the context of the Single European Sky to the measures taken on the adoption of functional airspace bloc coordinators and the implementation of the measures by the European Aviation Safety Agency , and many others of these measures were taken quickly .
At the same time , I think it very important that by understanding this pressure between business interests and the political interest , and by standing up for passengers ' rights , the rule under current legislation that decisions about the opening or closing of particular airspace are taken by Member States was preserved .
Since , if we were to imagine that , God forbid , an accident were to happen , then the Commission or the relevant European institutions might perhaps have exceeded their powers , and there would then arise a very big question , not about how large the losses to business were , but about who was responsible for the wrongly taken decision that helped bring about the accident in one particular airspace within the EU Member States , then the situation would be very different .
As a consequence , I believe we should draw some conclusions from this relatively critical situation .
In the short term , several measures have been taken , as I said , but , of course , as far as passengers ' rights are concerned , as Mr El Khadraoui has already mentioned , several low-cost airlines in fact ignored passengers ' rights ( and these are not third-country airlines , these are airlines from EU Member States ) and , in principle , abandoned their passengers for five days and nights ; in reality , they will be the winners - they will save money - and this remains an unresolved issue directly in the sphere of implementation in relation to passengers ' rights as they currently stand in the European Union .
Another challenge in the long term is the lack of connection in several European states via other means of transport with the central part of Europe . Thank you .
Madam President , first of all , I feel it is essential to point out that in this case , as in others , the precautionary principle must prevail , because human lives are at stake .
However , if it is to prevail , its application must not result in extreme decisions that would lead citizens to view precaution as ineptitude .
Therefore , in this case , why did we only take into account the use of an old virtual mathematical and meteorological model and ignore the pilot unions , which recommended test flights and the use of weather balloons ?
Perhaps we might then have avoided total paralysis of the airports and the shambles that followed .
While the VIPs have always been treated well , a large number of European citizens were abandoned by the whole world , including by their own governments .
Finally , I repeat my request for a parliamentary committee of inquiry to bring to light the fraud that some people have been engaged in during this crisis .
I will not repeat the thoughts already expressed by many speakers on the consequences of the Icelandic volcano , the closure of air space and the losses incurred by airlines and consumers , i.e. passengers , who were imprisoned in the airports .
I am pleased to hear today that there will soon be decisions on the creation of the Single European Sky and that , according to the Commissioner , an airspace coordinator already began work in May .
Today , however , as we are not sure whether we will be able to coordinate such unstable situations or even slightly similar situations in the future , I feel that we should think about how to develop and devote greater attention to other , alternative means of transport and ways of carrying passengers , as the German MEP mentioned , railways , for example .
In our region , the Baltic Sea region , represented by Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia ( which are on the edge of North-Eastern Europe ) , this situation with the eruption of the volcano has especially highlighted our need for good rail services and here I have in mind the Rail Baltica project .
I understand that other European regions possibly have the same problem as well and the situation is not any better ( is it ? ) , but today I am talking about my region and therefore in this case , we would like to have the opportunity to reach Western and Central Europe through Poland , once Poland has joined our rail track .
Otherwise , we will be isolated from the EU 's transport system .
Other countries have railways and possibly motorail trains , but our three Baltic States do not have this yet .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether , in the immediate future , sufficient attention will be devoted or is being devoted to the suitable implementation of alternative transport projects ?
With the help of the European Union , will we manage to gather the required political will and ensure alternative means of transporting passengers so that we can avoid such consequences in similar crisis situations .

( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Kallas for being here and for the work that he has done during this difficult time .
This is a debate that had to take place , ladies and gentlemen , and unfortunately , I think it will not be the last of its kind .
I will spare you any repeats of the statistics of this serious event and the negative impact that it has had on the economy .
I simply wish to remember those who were affected .
Firstly , there were the passengers .
Ten million people were left without flights and with no guidance as to what to do .
The impact on passengers was so great that the provisions of directives and regulations could not protect them .
The exclusion of liability in contracts due to catastrophe or force majeure brings to mind the need for a joint fund to tackle the consequences of a global disaster such as that caused by the volcano .
I now come to the airlines .
The International Air Transport Association ( IATA ) estimates that they lost EUR 1 700 million worldwide .
The Association of European Airlines ( AEA ) assesses the loss at EUR 850 million at European level .
This blow was all that they needed to accentuate a spiralling crisis that is threatening many airlines with closure .
The other victim has been tourism .
The consequences for tourism have been devastating .
Firstly , due to the cancellation of contracts that had been made in advance , as is usual in this sector , and secondly , due to insecurity , which has caused a change in normal booking trends .
This is my diagnosis , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
There can only be one conclusion : the European institutions do not have the tools to effectively tackle a crisis of this magnitude .
Now I come to the criticism , because criticism is necessary and inevitable ; self-criticism , if necessary .
No one can be exonerated , because everyone involved acted badly , late and inefficiently , sometimes through no fault of their own .
The Member States cannot be exonerated because , although the decisions were within their competence , they were still unable to act .
The European institutions cannot be exonerated because they took four long days to react , and because their reaction , which invoked safety as their priority , did not unfortunately produce calm , but paralysis .
I will now discuss the Commission 's response .
Today , the Commission is reiterating the measures that it had announced to us .
In my view , they are reasonable measures , but there is a lack of clarity about the timescale for implementing them .
We are not talking about something in the past .
Even today , there is a latent threat of flights being grounded , and it is concerning that we are dependent on air currents .
I know that we cannot fight the elements .
This was said by a famous Spanish sailor regarding a big naval battle that we lost .
The crisis will not help us to take measures .
The Member States will be reluctant to provide resources .
If we are mean , however , this volcano could do more damage to the European economy than is being forecast .
I ask the Commission to be determined , and I ask the Council to urgently tackle the need to take decisions .
I ask everyone to be generous in implementing alternatives to make up for the incapacities of the institutions .
I do not hold the Commission or the Council responsible , but we need to acknowledge the diagnosis that the institutions have not been capable , as they currently stand , of solving a crisis of this magnitude and proportions .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Kallas for his work over the last few days and say that the crisis involving ash from the Icelandic volcano causing European mobility to be blocked , which even yesterday caused further closures of European airspace in Ireland and the United Kingdom , along with the two extraordinary Council meetings called by the Spanish Presidency at the Commission 's suggestion , have taught us several things .
Firstly , they have taught us that this crisis has affected the whole sector , not only airlines but also airports , and we congratulate the Commission on its comprehensive vision when considering the consequences and assistance .

This has been done by Mr Kallas , Mr Almunia and even Mr Tajani , who has considered the impact on tourism and on the agencies .
We therefore welcome this approach by the Commission .
Secondly , while we already knew that the Single European Sky was necessary , we now know that it is urgent .
This is why we need to definitively appoint the coordinator - a former colleague of ours who is highly qualified - and , of course , remove the obstacles that still remain in the Council .
We also urgently need to launch the Single European Sky ATM Research system , which underlies the Single European Sky , along with guaranteed funding .
Could the Commission tell us what reluctance or reservations it observed in the Council meeting on 4 May ?
We need to know .
We even also have the impression that there are Member States that are opening up airspace more than others , and that is not good in a very competitive sector such as air transport .
In addition , although Parliament has been prioritising passengers ' rights , and that has been reiterated , with strong reticence on the part of the Council , now the need has clearly been seen to review the application of these laws .
We need the Commission to be implacable with the low-cost airlines that have spread confusion by lying to passengers and to the public .
The necessary penalty proceedings must naturally follow .
I also invite you , Commissioner , to launch a pilot project that my group proposed for the 2010 budget of having consumer offices in the airports to facilitate the necessary measures for passengers and consumers in the midst of the general confusion .
While some of us were already fighting for rail networks , trans-European networks , as an alternative to modes of transport with a greater impact - and this has been demonstrated in Spain by the AVE high-speed train , for example , between Barcelona and Madrid - now we know that we urgently need to build an alternative secondary mobility system , as is prudently done with electrical and telecommunications networks .
This is why the review of the trans-European networks with a view to the financial perspectives must be more ambitious .
Madam President , my particular perspective in this debate is on the impact on the more peripheral airports and on airlines which are already in economic difficulties .
I live on an island which is behind an island which is off the coast of Europe .
As such , our peripheral airports and our airlines are particularly important for connectivity and mobility .
There are a number of regional airports on the west coast of Ireland .
We have Donegal , Sligo , Ireland West Airport Knock , Shannon and Kerry .
Given our proximity to Iceland and our island status , we have particularly severe problems to deal with because of the ash .
With reference to peripheral airports , I believe the Commission should fully promote international PSO routes in terms of connectivity of peripheral airports to hubs and that Member States should be given real flexibility when it comes to State aid to peripheral airports .
Furthermore , there are many airlines already in financial trouble and they may go out of business because of this crisis .
Let us not fool ourselves .
It is not going to go away any time soon .
This will lead to job losses in the airline sector and consequently , less competition in the market .
We have to look very seriously at how the EU can play a constructive role , both from the perspective of an equitable distribution of financial assistance and the crisis management tools that are at our disposal .
Finally , it is important to realise that current legislation was put in place to stop airlines cancelling flights because it suited them , but we are now in a position where airspace is closed and airlines cannot fly .
The financial burdens are very significant on all actors - passengers , airlines and airports .
The question is , who is responsible , and who bears the financial burdens ?
( FR ) Madam President , since this new volcanic eruption is confronting us with the same problems that we have already experienced , I would like to go beyond the crisis management and coordination system , in which progress has been made , and emphasise , as others have done , interoperability and the rail reservation system .
Land transport and , in particular , the railways , must be able to take the place of air transport more easily when it is put out of service .
It is not just volcanoes that put it out of service ; it may actually be grounded on other occasions too .
However , beyond this aspect , and more structurally still , I would like to ask you about risk cover by the sector itself in this type of crisis - and I stress by the sector itself .
In fact , I think that State aid , every time that it is granted ( or every time there is a problem ) , will very quickly prove to be untenable at budgetary level and will lead to quite unacceptable discrimination between airlines , between operators in the aviation sector , who would introduce identical demands and , finally , between the ultimate beneficiaries of this potential aid and those who would be excluded from it .
Given the size of the airlines , I think we must do as we did in the banking sector and move towards prudential rules in their case , rules that would oblige them to provide themselves with a form of compulsory insurance .
This insurance would enable them to cover this type of risk by pooling the cost of the cover , without always asking the Member States to insure them free of charge , particularly as airlines already benefit today from the historic tax exemption on kerosene and airline tickets .
Finally , we must also ensure that these airlines duly compensate their passengers , but without passing the bill on to taxpayers .
Madam President , we are all aware of the horrendous disruption caused , and continuing to be caused , by the volcanic ash cloud .
More than 100 000 flights have been cancelled and around 12 million passengers have not been able to travel as planned .
Goods and cargo have been delayed or not transported at all and businesses , both large and small , have been affected .
Our European airlines and airports have suffered catastrophic financial losses .
I believe that European airlines alone have lost more than EUR 2 billion .
In all this chaos , one thing is clear : air transport is enormously important for the European economy , and as individuals , we depend on a thriving and efficient air transport industry where safety for crew and passengers is the first prerogative .
As such , I applaud the decision of the Commission to respond decisively following the compulsory grounding of the European air transport sector .
The Commission has recognised the need not only to consider financial compensation , but also the necessity to speed up the implementation of SESAR measures .
As a general rule I believe that the state should not artificially support business .
Risk , as we all know and accept , is part of running a business .
However , these are exceptional circumstances .
We have not seen such sustained disruption to the industry with such enormous financial losses since 9 / 11 and , notwithstanding the financial difficulties currently facing all Member States , I would urge them to back plans to support an industry which simply cannot sustain further losses .
The question now is , what can and should be done in future to deal with such crises ?
Firstly , airlines must be involved in discussions about possible airspace closures from the outset .
Secondly , the SESAR package must be brought forward in a sensible fashion .
I still have some reservations about the creation of a network manager .
I am not fundamentally opposed to the idea , but I strongly believe some questions remain to be answered .
For example , what would be the exact role ?
To whom would this person be accountable ?
How would this improve the current situation ?
I look forward to serious debate on the issue , Commissioner , before any legislation is implemented , as a knee-jerk response could prove more damaging than intended .
I also think it would be wise to look at North America and elsewhere to see how they deal with the issue of volcanic ash .
In the UK , we apply the same terms of reference as the ICAO , but the Americans use a different method to calculate the ash drift .
They seem to apply a more measured approach and I believe that we could perhaps learn something there .
In addition , we must remember that when decisions are made in the EU regarding closing EU airspace , the impact of such decisions does not stop at our borders , and discussions with the remainder of the ICAP countries must take place .
Finally , as European policy makers , we have a responsibility to develop a viable long-term strategic vision for aviation in the EU , taking into account the international dimension .
I believe we should support the establishment of measures to improve risk management , settling justified compensation claims without distortion of competition , as well as promoting well balanced , cost effective structural reforms .
( SK ) The closure of air space after the April eruption of the Icelandic volcano confirmed that air transport is highly sensitive to various restrictions on flying conditions .
Not only clouds of volcanic ash , but also heavy snow , whirlwinds , thick fog and other weather phenomena cause airline companies huge complications in the provision of regular flights .
Responsible airline companies therefore conclude various policies with insurance companies , which are supposed to cover their financial losses resulting from unforeseen emergencies .
The costs of this airline company insurance are , of course , included in the price of air tickets , and passengers also pay as part of the price of the air ticket for the airline company to provide them with the necessary services and alternative transport arrangements in the event of an emergency .
I would like to emphasise and repeat once more , Commissioner , that passengers make a payment as part of the price of an air ticket so that airline companies will be able , in the event of an emergency , to deal with the resulting problems operationally , and to request appropriate compensation from the insurance company for the resulting damage later .
An ordinary EU citizen who does not directly use aviation services has nothing to do with this business .
It is therefore totally inappropriate to transfer such aviation losses to EU Member States .
It is therefore quite right that governments who run their affairs wisely do not want to comply with these absurd demands .
If anyone is to compensate airline companies for the restrictions arising from the exceptional weather conditions , it should be their insurers , who must fulfil contractual obligations within the scope agreed in their insurance policies .
After all , that is how it works for every one of our citizens in the EU : if their house burns down , for example , or ice crushes the roof , they receive compensation only from their insurance companies , if they are insured at all .
They will not get a new house or better accommodation from any airline companies or EU governments .
Why should they , therefore , contribute towards making up for the lost profits of airline companies ?
That would surely be absurd .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that in a healthy entrepreneurial environment , no support - and I mean no support at all - of this kind can be justified for airline companies from the governments , and therefore from the citizens , of the EU .
( PL ) In April , a volcanic eruption caused the complete paralysis of air traffic in European air space .
This event , which was not , of course , caused by anyone , resulted in adverse effects both for passengers and for all European airlines .
At dozens of airports , passengers were left to their own devices and did not have access to information about the resumption of flights .
The only fairly specific information came from statements about the closure of more areas of air space .
Although we cannot blame anyone for the forces of nature and their effect on our daily lives , we should ask very directly about this situation and sum up the actions of the European Union institutions which are responsible for matters such as ensuring the safety of air passengers .
Unfortunately , I think their action was definitely insufficient and very delayed in relation to the event which had taken place .
For after all , the total chaos in air traffic experienced by passengers , and their complete lack of knowledge about when flights would be resumed , show the EU institutions , including principally the European Commission , in an extremely bad light .
Therefore , I would like to find out what the Commission intends to do in the future in the case of other volcanic eruptions .
What steps will the Commission take to prevent a repeat , in a similar situation , of the paralysis of almost the whole of Europe and , most of all , to improve the flow of information directed to passengers which , hitherto , has been decidedly lacking ?
I think that the measures currently proposed by the Commission are , unfortunately , not sufficient .
( EL ) Commissioner , the closure of two major airports yesterday , in London and Amsterdam , due to a new volcanic ash cloud , demonstrated that the grounding of flights in April was not the result of an improbable event with no long-term repercussions or risk of repetition .
Moreover , Mr Simpson 's absence from this evening 's debate says far more than his presence .
We are going through a difficult economic period , which is bringing with it successive mergers in the aviation sector and which is governed by uncertainties for the airlines and their employees .
For three consecutive days in April , the international industry lost USD 400 million a day , threatening to blow efforts to restructure the financially weaker airlines in Europe sky high .
What is certain is that suitable institutional instruments to conduct a risk analysis at European level and to use a specific method to process all the data at the disposal of the Member States and the European authorities were , and still are , lacking .
The risk of a repetition of the highly damaging confusion which we experienced beneath the ash cloud is real and the measures taken must institutionally safeguard the Union 's ability to intervene in a coordinated and premeditated manner in this type of crisis , thereby limiting the incredible inconvenience to millions of passengers and the financial losses to carriers and tourist companies .
Madam President , as Ireland does not have a land connection to mainland Europe , Irish air passengers have faced extreme difficulties ; I would venture to say , more than any other Member State .
For example , I myself travelled to Strasbourg this week overland , and had to take a ferry to Wales , a car to Folkestone and a train to Strasbourg .
I raise this because it is typical of the many journeys undertaken by Irish people in recent weeks .
The EU Transport Ministers have established three separate flying zones based on the safety risk to aircraft .
I have to say that , since the introduction of the third zone , over 300 000 hours of airline operations have taken place .
This is a welcome development and , of course , further measures are still needed .
I strongly support the efforts to fast-track the introduction of the Single European Sky concept .
The Declaration of Madrid , adopted in February by the Spanish Presidency , established a roadmap for putting this policy in place .
I have no doubt that the Commissioner , who is with us this evening , will spearhead this .
The role of Eurocontrol must also be closely examined .
It must be given statutory powers as opposed to the coordinating role which it currently holds .
As early as yesterday , a joint agreement was reached between Ireland and the UK so as to curtail the disruption of air travel : a welcome development .
( GA ) Volcanic ash does not recognise any political or physical borders and this incident reminded us once more of the immense power of nature .
It is now clear that there is a real need for a common air transport policy in European Union airspace .
The role of the European Union must be strengthened in the aftermath of this crisis .
( LT ) The consequences of the volcanic ash crisis had a negative impact on the transport system of all of Europe when ash from the erupting volcano forced the cancellation of more than 100 000 flights and disrupted the journeys of 10 million passengers .
This crisis affected the European Union 's Eastern Member States particularly badly , as they remained completely isolated from Western Europe and , unlike other EU Member States , did not have the opportunity to choose alternative modes of transport .
Yet again , this proves the importance of the development of transport infrastructure , the development of Trans-European Transport Networks and the creation of a system of alternative means of transport , both for transporting goods and passengers .
Therefore , we must establish a passenger transport system that operates effectively , which is not so dependent on air transport , but is dominated by other alternative types of transport , especially for transport in Central Europe .
We really must create a transport system that would not only ensure the effective transportation of passengers , but the smooth functioning of the economy .
I agree with the ideas mentioned on the realisation of additional links and I therefore urge you to support the European rail corridor project for the competitive transportation of freight , which would allow the Baltic States mentioned to be linked to other Western European countries and would allow the creation of added value for the entire Community .
In addition , following the implementation of this project , the region 's residents would have an alternative to air transport .
( ES ) Madam President , I am going to talk about tourism , a fundamental sector for the Canary Islands , which receive around 12 million tourists per year .
If there is one thing that tourism needs , it is certainty .
Situations like the one that we have experienced - and which may be repeated - have dramatic consequences for this strategic sector for the Canary Islands .
The losses have not only been suffered by the airlines , the airports and the tour operators : hotels , car hire companies , restaurants and services in general have suffered huge damage .
Between 15 and 23 April alone , 313 818 aeroplane seats were cancelled in the Canary Islands , with losses of around EUR 57.3 million as a result of the tourists not coming .
This is , of course , a significant loss .
We need immediate measures when the event occurs , such as opening airports at night without additional costs and looking after the public , the passengers , properly ; but we also need compensation .
I am not going to criticise what was done or what was not done or say whether the crisis was managed well or not .
It is only worth being aware that it could happen again and that we need to be prepared for it .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your steadfastness when it comes to passenger safety issues .
In recent days , we have seen that it is clearly not only in the financial sector that major speculation takes place but that a few of the airlines , too , are prepared to gamble with the safety of passengers , at least in words - though luckily not yet in actions .
After all , we are not merely talking about the passengers in the air , but also the people on the ground .
I must ask you to continue working to this end .
I must also ask you to continue working for passenger information and passenger rights .
Over recent days , we have seen that not everyone and not every age group has unrestricted access to the Internet .
Telephone lines were broken , the Internet was not available , and people who are not routine business class fliers like we here in the plenary are , tourists and older age groups , had hardly any information .
I must ask you to continue working to this end .
( PT ) Madam President , the situation created by the eruption of the volcano in Iceland has demonstrated the significant impact that a certain type of natural phenomena - that are fortunately rare , but demonstrably occur periodically - can have on the economy and society .
By doing so , it underlined once again the importance of a preventative approach to these phenomena .
In this case , that means seeking to adopt any measures that reduce the aforementioned impact , not preventing it from happening , as that is clearly impossible .
However , it is not legitimate to use a pretence at better crisis coordination in response to these phenomena as a pretext for seeking to breathe new life into a broad range of initiatives .
I am talking about the Single European Sky initiative and the goal of opening European air traffic control up to liberalisation and then privatisation .
In this regard , if there is one thing that the current volcanic ash crisis has confirmed , it is the importance of keeping air traffic control in the public domain : it is done in the public interest and is , first and foremost , a basic guarantee of public safety .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about disturbances in air traffic and also its economic impact on aviation .
I would like to stress , once again , that the safety of Europe 's citizens is the most important thing .
Commissioner , many steps have been taken and it is now time to contemplate specific alternatives and to implement them , for example , the expansion of the trans-European high-speed network , which can also help reduce CO2 emissions .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are 2 000 volcanoes around the world , 50 of which are active .
Thus , it is not just a European problem , but a problem for international aviation .
We need to clarify in the research where exactly there are risks and where there is also a certain scope of responsibility .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner , together with Eurocontrol , to perhaps entrust the European Research Council with the task of carrying out research in order to properly judge this risk .
Ultimately , the final responsibility always lies with the aircraft captain and consumers are also called on to consider whether or not this poses a risk for each of them .
Everyone can remove the risk by simply not flying .
An objectification of the entire issue must be at the heart of things , however .
Madam President , the Joxer character created by the great Irish playwright , Sean O 'Casey , observed the whole world as ' in a state of chassis ' .
And certainly the evidence is there for all to see .
If we look downwards , we see oil gushing from an oil well , decimating the environment ; if we look upwards , we will see volcanic ash gushing from a volcano decimating the airlines , and if we look outwards , we see recession gushing from the banks decimating the economy .
Certainly I have suffered , like many more , from the volcanic ash , the first time going home : it took me two days ; I had to hitchhike part of the way .

The second time I could not get out to the last plenary ; it took me one and a half days to go to Brussels and one and a half days to come here , but the one thing I have learned is that it is impossible to book a ticket on the Eurostar when you are travelling .
You need your credit card to book it and you need it to get the ticket , which is impossible when you are in transit .
I would ask the Commission to use their influence to try and get them to have the same system as that which applies to ferries and airlines .
( ES ) I am not the only one , Madam President , but thank you .
I just wanted to add that we need to be able to extensively use all the available technology in order to measure the ash .
In fact , a few days after the closures , in a visit to Astrium in Toulouse , we were told about an extremely detailed information system on the composition of the atmosphere via a satellite network , and we are not clear as to whether this existing systematic information was used , which , moreover , comes from a European enterprise , namely the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company .
Could the Commissioner tell us whether it was used or whether this is being considered ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , thank you very much for the many interesting and detailed comments on this ash problem .
I only had three minutes at the beginning .
Now I can elaborate at least 10 times more on all these issues , but I will be brief - do not worry - or at least not too long .
I can only say that it has really been a very exciting and extraordinary period , and it is back again .
It is clear that volcanoes continue to erupt as this Icelandic volcano is doing .
This is all part of life for the aviation industry , but it is not only volcanoes but also thunderstorms , snow and such occurrences which all disrupt aviation .
This is a part of this business , we must be very clear about that .
Nobody alone can be responsible for this risk - no airlines , no governments , no European Union .
I must also say that so far , the European Union has no jurisdiction at all in regulating air traffic .
It has been intergovernmental bodies that have been dealing with this so far , as well as national authorities .
To exclude , prevent or foresee everything which can happen in aviation is impossible .
The risks must be shared and clients who decide to use aviation services must be prepared - as we must all be - for some delay if , for example , the runway at Brussels airport is not cleared of snow or some other thing .

Regarding the criticism that we acted late and regarding who in fact acted : I was there in Eurocontrol ; the risk from ash is a real risk , and we cannot hold out for the possibility that we will finally find scientific solutions concerning what size of particle would be considered dangerous for engines , because nobody wants to give this assessment .
We can determine particle size and we can assess the cloud , but nobody wants to give an assessment and to say that this ash is no longer dangerous for the engines .
This will be a very complicated thing .
The decision to close airspace was taken strictly in accordance with the existing rules and with all relevant institutions who were responsible for this .
To those who ask who is now responsible for the closure of airspace , I would ask them who would be responsible if the airspace had not been closed and something had happened .
When Eurocontrol sought to find some different approaches to the ash cloud , it was not an easy decision or easy discussion because it was a matter of deciding to take enormous responsibility for the safety of aviation .
The safety of planes and lives must come first .
I think it was done reasonably fast under these circumstances because the volcano was , and continues to be , very exceptional and extraordinary .
Regarding the future , the key issue mentioned by somebody is what about Indonesia , what about the United States ?
There is a responsibility , which mainly rests with the pilots .
In Europe today , pilots tend to reject this kind of new responsibility .
European air traffic is very busy and there must be some kind of combination between greater flexibility and clear data about the possible threats and possible risks .
I do not know about Indonesia , but in the United States , the system is very simple : it is the pilot who decides how to circumvent the ash and I must say that this works very well .
But in Europe , we must obviously first create some common approach to the methodology of possible assessment of risk .
Regarding passengers , I must say that we have always consistently and forcefully stated from the Commission side that passenger rights legislation must be complied with .
This is a very clear message .
Again , the enforcement of this legislation is in the hands of Member States but I understand that most airlines and most Member States also have taken this very seriously .
There are different examples and , of course , in the aftermath , there will be exposure to negative examples as well , but mostly they have been taken seriously , and we are planning a revision of passenger rights .
We will definitely then assess what to do with the attempts to abuse passenger rights and excessive interpretations of passenger rights .
In general , the passenger rights legislation has worked very well and the logic must be there .
Passenger rights stipulate that passengers must be provided with information , with care and with rerouting or reimbursement under these extraordinary circumstances , not compensation .
This is a different word .
There is a huge programme under way with the Single Sky initiative in order to streamline air traffic management , and I cannot complain about the cooperation between Member States during this particular period .
The Transport Council was very cooperative and made many decisions which probably , under other circumstances , would have taken much longer .
I really cannot say that we had bad cooperation with Member States in preparing and handling this extraordinary Transport Council .
Regarding finance and financial consequences , its rules are very simple and they are very clearly described in our paper prepared by three Commissioners - Rehn , Almunia and myself .
This is State aid , and State aid can be given if Member States consider that there are enough reasons to give State aid to an airline which is in trouble , because passenger rights and all these costs must be borne by the airline .
If the airline is in trouble and if a Member State considers that this is really a very bad situation , then State aid can be given , but , before State aid is given , a very careful assessment must be made not to create distortions and unfair advantages in the market .
This was the main concern of airlines as well , and a fair approach to everybody is also the Commission 's concern ; our competition department will definitely look very carefully at all possible State aid cases .
So far , I do not know if anybody has applied for State aid in this particular area because , as I said at the beginning , airlines have contingency plans .
Somebody mentioned that they should have insurance .
I asked them as well about the insurance .
Insurance is more or less impossible because you cannot describe the product , or you can describe the product but it will be so expensive that it is not affordable .
They have contingency plans on how to deal with extraordinary circumstances which disrupt the schedules .
Of course , as an economist , I can see that there is a lot of room for different fantasies , what to calculate under the losses and what is a real number .
It is a huge work to define the exact consequences of this volcanic ash which can be presented as a claim .
Regarding alternative transport , we will , of course , push ahead .
We will have a TEN-T meeting soon where the Commission will push ahead for the development of a network of other modes of transport .
I asked railways what is possible and what they actually did during this crisis , and they sent a lot of interesting information .
There were additional trains , but the information about availability , timetables and other things remain , so far , very poor .
One of our biggest priorities for the near future will be to have better information about all these possibilities .
Again , if there is a crisis in aviation , then bringing passengers home or taking them to destinations will still mainly be in the hands of airlines .
It is at the planning stages that it is very important to also consider other modes and indeed other engines .
This is another interesting story .
There are lessons to be learned , and we are learning these lessons , and we will push forward with many plans and measures to create more streamlined air traffic management in Europe .
I must stress that volcanoes do not obey any rules , and we cannot exclude possible extraordinary events .
There will always be some risk which must be taken into account , and such a risk must be part of planning our activities .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when a volcano erupted in Iceland in the 18th century , the country was veiled in a cloud of ash , and in Europe crops failed for the next three years .
We do not have reports on the damage to air transport .
This year 's far smaller eruption of Eyjafjallajökull has literally wrought havoc with air transport in the European Union .
The damage to airline companies and airports - in other words , the direct damage - has had a counterpart in the chaotic care given to travellers stranded in various corners of the world .
The rights of passengers are certainly an interesting topic for academic debate , but in this case , they were the lowest priority for the staff concerned .
We have no reports of other forms of transport being used to bring people home .
The chaotic responses show a lack of coordination , and also hesitation , at a time when quick decisions should be made on re-opening air space .
Commissioner , will the Commission speed up its work on applying the partial results of the SESAR programme to the practice of managing aviation operations ?
My other questions would merely repeat the questions of Brian Simpson .
There are 56 000 citizens of the European Union who are ill and waiting for a transplant , and this includes 2 000 in Poland .
Every day , 12 people die because of the shortage of organs available for transplantation .
Organ donation rates range from less than one donor per million individuals in Bulgaria to 34-35 donors per million individuals in Spain .
In Poland , the figure is 11 .
Most organs are taken from deceased donors on the grounds of prior consent ( the opt-in approach ) or presumed consent ( the opt-out approach ) .
In Poland , cells , tissues and organs can be taken from deceased donors if the person who has died had not registered with the Central Register of Objections .
The development of transplantation requires an atmosphere of social approval for filling in the declarations of will which make it possible to take organs after the person has died , as well as condemnation of opposition to donation .
I , personally , am actively involved in work to promote transplantation , and I encourage all fellow Members to do the same .
In Poland , I have distributed badges and bracelets which encourage support of transplantation medicine .
With fellow Members from other political groups , I have started the ' Chain of Relatives ' , a national social campaign to propagate transplantation and voluntary blood donation .
Promoting the idea of transplantation and coordinating the exchange of experience between Member States can save thousands of lives .
It is essential to create a common EU database of organs available for donation and transplantation , and a database of all living and deceased donors .
This would also be a significant tool in the fight against organ trafficking and human trafficking .
The affair of the Icelandic volcano and its current consequences lead us to reflect that the European Union must not be unprepared for an emergency or unexpected occurrences , but must protect passengers above all else using existing or new management instruments or measures .
As an example of such measures , could airline companies not have offered to buy train tickets to avoid long queues at train ticket offices , especially for passengers with reduced mobility ?
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.05 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Outcome of the summit of 7 May 2010 and the ECOFIN meeting - What is the political relevance of the EU 2020 strategy in the context of the current financial and economic crisis ? - Consequences of the financial and economic crisis on the EU 2020 strategy and its governance - What is the relevance of the EU 2020 strategy in the framework of the current financial and economic crisis ? ( debate )
The next item is :
the joint debate on mechanisms for strengthening economic order ,
the Council and Commission statements : Outcome of the summit of 7 May 2010 and the ECOFIN meeting [ 2010 / 269 ( RSP ) ] ,
the oral question to the Council and the Commission : What is the political relevance of the EU 2020 strategy in the context of the current financial and economic crisis ? - B7-0213 / 2010 ) , - B7-0214 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Council : Consequences of the financial and economic crisis for the EU 2020 strategy and its governance - B7-0301 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Council and the Commission : Political relevance of the EU 2020 strategy in the context of the current financial and economic crisis - B7-0219 / 2010 ) , - B7-0220 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , everyone is aware that we are living in a period of exceptional financial turbulence .
This has been the case for a few months , and the origin does not go back a few months , but a few years , when the subprime crisis occurred in the United States .
The origin was , therefore , a financial crisis in the private sector of the financial system , which rapidly became something that was affecting the real economy in the form of a deep depression , which , technically speaking , was a deep recession .
This involved a decline in production and a significant increase in unemployment , which was particularly serious in those countries in which the property or residential construction sectors had a significant influence .
There was an immediate reaction from the Member States and the central banks in order to prevent the financial system from collapsing , and there was also a reaction in relation to the real economy .
This reaction , of course , had consequences for public economies and public finances .
We are now no longer talking about private finances , but about public finances .
Firstly , there was a crisis of financial stability in public accounts as a result of very marked deficits .
There was also a crisis in sovereign bonds .
This is what has been coming to the surface in recent months , encouraged by the actions of very volatile markets which , at times , have even been clearly speculative .
These actions have also caused a significant rise in the interest that the markets require from the Member States when they are going to issue bonds .
Moreover , this clearly affected the whole of the euro area , and therefore became a problem affecting not one , two or three countries , but the stability of the whole of the euro area .
That is the situation .
Those are all the events , or the diagnosis of the facts that the European Union has taken into account in order to react and act in response to this , and I feel that the EU has acted correctly throughout this period .
It may have appeared slow to take decisions .
It may , at times , have seemed to be exasperatingly slow to take some decisions , but it has achieved the right results , the results of prudent action by the EU and , more importantly , coordinated action by the EU .
Although it might appear that various measures prevent us from seeing the whole , I believe that the EU has established an appropriate strategy for the circumstances , which has to include some short-term measures and look more towards the medium and long term , as it is about preventing such a crisis from occurring again .

As we have already said , the short-term measures involve an injection of public money and coordination by the European Union : what is known as the European Economic Recovery Plan , backed by the Commission ; a plan that coordinates this immediate action , this shock treatment that the Member States are adopting in order to limit the damage done by this huge crisis , but not make it disappear .
One manifestation of this short-term action is undoubtedly the aid to Greece , which had already been warned by the Commission months before about a difficult situation in its public accounts .
The Council is making a series of recommendations to Greece in relation to Article 126 ( 9 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and the Council and the Commission are monitoring developments there .
Not only are recommendations being given in relation to the liquidity of its public accounts , but also regarding structural reforms in the pensions system and the need to undertake reforms in the health system .
Then came 23 April , when an action mechanism was adopted regarding Greece .
Yesterday , this mechanism was manifested for the first time in funds being sent to Greece by EU countries through the system of this agreed mechanism .
This is therefore the first expression of this short-term action , which is essential when a Member State is in serious difficulties , as is the case with Greece .
Naturally , also in the short term - and this was expressed very clearly in the oral question put by Mr Daul , Mr Verhofstadt , Mr Schulz and others - we need to have a strategy to get us out of the crisis .

It needs to be a measured , controlled strategy and , of course , it needs to be aimed at avoiding the very serious difficulties in public accounts , but it also needs to maintain the objective of growth .
However , obviously a short-term strategy is not enough .
We need to take medium and long-term measures . There are structural problems in the European economy ; structural problems that were ultimately responsible for weakening Europe in the face of a highly volatile situation of extreme financial turbulence .
The European Union is taking and suggesting measures in the medium and long term that it is important to point out .
This is firstly the case because they are going to respond to the type of crisis that occurred as a result of this serious economic situation affecting the whole of the EU and , in particular , the euro area system .
In order to be able to respond to the crisis in the financial sector , the European Union has planned a series of measures that are being debated in the next few days in Parliament : a supervision package , which I hope will be adopted as soon as possible .
I also hope that the Council and Parliament will reach an agreement in this respect .
As part of this package , or in relation to it , the Economic and Financial Affairs ( Ecofin ) Council adopted a measure yesterday : the regulation of hedge funds , alternative funds or high-risk funds .
I refer here to the question by Mrs Harms and Mr Cohn-Bendit , who place a great deal of emphasis on this aspect .
The perspective of action in the G20 also needs to be taken into account , also implementing what has been agreed in the G20 .
Likewise , we have said that the European Union has structural weaknesses and that structural reforms are needed .
The Europe 2020 strategy aims to do this , and it is based on the commitment of the Member States to tackle certain objectives through a series of integrated guidelines .
These guidelines are also going to be accompanied by national plans , which will be designed in what are known as the reform plans .
It should also be said that , along with the Europe 2020 strategy , the action that the Commission is adopting in relation to the whole of the production system is also important .
In its communication on 12 May , it proposed the coordination of economic policies .
The Europe 2020 strategy is therefore a way of responding to the underlying problem in the productive economic system , preventing these fundamental weaknesses in the system in the future and making the Union 's economic system competitive and productive .
It is also a way of aiming towards the objectives of technological added value , taking into account the social impact and therefore the need for specialisation in the labour market , employability and also combating climate change .
There is not , however , only a problem with the private financial system , with the productive structure , and essentially with the private sector : there is a problem with public accounts , which is also the focus of another aspect of the EU 's medium and long-term measures .
These are the measures in the Commission 's proposal of 12 May , which the Ecofin Council began to debate yesterday and will continue to debate .
These measures are aimed at maintaining budgetary discipline , guaranteeing compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact and establishing measures to resolve and prevent crises .
With this in mind , a task force has been created , which is going to meet for the first time this Friday , 21 May , chaired by President Van Rompuy .
Its objective is budgetary discipline and it will be using the Commission document on coordinating economic and budgetary policies presented by Commissioner Rehn .
This relates to all the more long-term measures , in which we also need to include the debate that is beginning in the EU about tax on benefits in the financial sector and a tax that even the G20 is beginning to talk about , which is a tax on financial transactions , which is , in turn , being debated in the EU .
This is something that Mrs Harms and Mr Cohn-Bendit emphasise in their question .
On this subject , it should be said that all the European Union institutions are working towards this .
It was discussed at the European Council in December of last year .
The International Monetary Fund was given the task of conducting a study on a tax on international financial transactions .
It was discussed in the European Council in March , the Commission proposed it on 1 April , and it was also discussed in the Ecofin Council .
This is , therefore , another measure that will undoubtedly be discussed at the G20 , and which is of the utmost importance ; these are what I have called the medium- and long-term measures proposed by the EU .
Yesterday , for example , at the EU-Latin America Summit in Madrid , a reform of the financial system was also proposed .
In other words , the European Union is raising these issues in all the forums that it attends .
In short , Mr President , the steps are being taken and the conditions are in place to move towards what has been described as economic governance of the Union .
The European Council is playing an active role in this , along with the Commission and Parliament as the legislative and controlling body .
So I think we can say - to conclude , Mr President - that it is true that the crisis has clearly demonstrated the shortcomings of the European monetary union in the absence of economic union , something that is provided for in the treaties but does not exist in reality .
We have remained in monetary union , but we are not moving on to economic union .
These measures adopted in the short , medium and long term by the EU are clearly taking the Union along a path towards economic union .
This crisis has weakened our economies and put the Union to the test , but it has not destroyed it , it has not fragmented it .
The European Union has responded and , at times , we have felt that it has done so slowly , but it has acted surely .
At times , it seems that it has been hesitant , but it has been united , and its response has been correct and appropriate to the challenges that we face at the moment .
I hope that the European Council in June will consolidate this move towards European economic governance , towards a united reaction to this crisis from the EU .
I therefore also hope that it will adequately prepare the EU 's common position for the extremely important G20 meeting in Toronto on the regulation of the financial system and for the important debate on taxing international financial transactions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome this debate on the crisis response of the European Union and on the immediate and longer-term challenges of economic governance we are facing .
I shall start with the immediate challenges and the crisis response .
Ten days ago , the European Union took bold and necessary decisions to safeguard financial stability in Europe .
It was a dual response to the aggravated crisis , which had turned into a systemic challenge to the euro .
It was a response that I would call a consolidation pact .
First , we agreed on a European financial stability mechanism that provides a financial backstop for up to EUR 500 billion , which will be supplemented by IMF funding at a ratio of 2 : 1 .
Secondly , we agreed to accelerate fiscal consolidation in those Member States where it is most urgently needed .
With these decisions , Europe came up with a credible package that shows our citizens , the markets and the wider world that we will defend the euro - our common currency - whatever it takes .
We are not doing it for the sake of the mystical market forces but for the sake of sustainable growth and job creation in Europe , by ensuring that the threats to financial stability will not kill the economic recovery that is now in progress - though this is still rather modest and fragile .
This is our responsibility in relation to our citizens , and we are delivering in very concrete terms .
Yesterday , coordinating and managing on behalf of the euro area Member States , the Commission delivered EUR 14.5 billion for Greece , which the IMF has complemented with EUR 5.5 billion .
We said we would be ready to meet the immediate needs of refinancing , and we delivered on time .
Of course , this is all conditional on a full and complete implementation of the programme designed , together with the Greek Government , by the Commission , in liaison with the ECB and the IMF .
The European Central Bank has also taken extraordinary measures to tackle the attacks we have recently seen on the euro .
Beyond that , our Member States have understood the paramount importance of fiscal consolidation to ensure the sustainability of public finances and thus , preconditions for sustainable economic growth .
Last week , Spain and Portugal presented significant new fiscal consolidation measures which are important and difficult but , at the same time , are necessary steps in order to reduce the ballooning public deficits in 2010 and 2011 .
The Commission will present a comprehensive assessment of the adequacy of the new targets and measures in the course of the next two weeks .
Let me underline that a faster reduction of the public deficit is indeed an essential component of the financial stability package that was agreed on 10 May by Ecofin .
It is equally important that both countries adopt structural reforms that will contribute to increased potential growth , especially reforms of the labour markets and pension systems .
While accelerated fiscal consolidation is an immediate priority throughout Europe , at the same time , we need to coordinate our economic and fiscal policies by applying differentiation among the Member States .
In other words , the efforts of fiscal consideration need to be differentiated according to fiscal space and economic vulnerability .
Countries with little or no fiscal space will need to front-load and accelerate measures , while others with better fiscal space should maintain their less restrictive fiscal policy stances for the sake of growth and jobs in Europe .
Of course , it would be a mistake to stop our efforts here .
Let us recall that the first 10 years of the euro have been a success story : that is the starting point .
But the crisis has shown that we need to acknowledge its systemic shortcomings .
Peer pressure has lacked teeth , good times were not used to reduce public debt , and macro-economic imbalances were ignored .
This is precisely the reason why last week , on 12 May , the Commission presented an ambitious set of proposals to reinforce economic governance in Europe .
We want to strengthen preventive budgetary surveillance , address macro-economic imbalances and set up a permanent and robust framework for crisis management .
I count on Parliament 's support for these important proposals .
They are at the heart of making Europe 2020 a success in the coming years .
Our proposals are based on two principles .
First , prevention is always better than correction - not to mention letting a situation escalate into a crisis , as we have seen .
Second , stronger fiscal surveillance should be accompanied by broader macro-economic surveillance , to go to the roots and origins of sustainable economic development .
Our proposals are made of three building blocks .
First , we must reinforce both the preventive and corrective arms of the Stability and Growth Pact .
The essential cornerstone of reinforcing economic governance is to coordinate fiscal policy in advance , in order to ensure that national budgets are consistent with the jointly-agreed European policies and obligations , so that they will not put at risk the stability of the euro area as a whole and that of the other Member States .
Let me be very clear about this : this will not mean scrutinising national budgets , budget line by budget line .
We have neither the intention nor the resources for that .
Instead , it will mean analysing and peer-reviewing the broad budgetary guidelines and fiscal balance before the submission of the draft national budgets by governments to Parliament with the legal right , based on the treaty and pact , for the EU to make recommendations and ask for corrective action from the Member States concerned .
Some have criticised this , saying that this is a breach of parliamentary sovereignty .
I myself am a former member of a national and the European Parliament , and I am fully aware of the sensitivities of parliamentary fiscal powers .
However , everyone can see that this is not about breaching democracy or parliamentary sovereignty but ensuring that our Member States respect those very same rules which they have themselves decided on previously : in other words , to practice what you preach .
We need to introduce a truly European dimension to economic policy making in Europe : it is not enough to look only afterwards at international decisions .
In the EU , in particular in the euro area , we know only too well that national decisions have an impact beyond national borders , and therefore there will have to be coordination at European level before those national decisions .
The second building block is to go beyond budgetary surveillance to broaden and deepen surveillance , to address macro-economic imbalances .
Why is this important ?
The divergences in competitiveness and the gap between the surplus and deficit countries of the euro area has widened in the past 10 years .
This has been at the root and origin of why the financial crisis hit the EU so hard , especially some of our Member States .
We should prevent and tackle emerging problems before they escalate into a crisis .
Therefore , we propose to define indicators and a scoreboard , agree alert thresholds and give recommendations and early warnings if necessary .
These indicators could include , for instance , productivity trends , unit labour costs and current account developments .
It is self-evident that this does not mean that we would want to weaken the export performance of any country ; of course not .
Instead , it aims at rebalancing economic growth in Europe as a whole .
We need to reinforce export competitiveness where needed and domestic demand where needed and possible .
That is the way to play as a European team for the benefit of the whole of Europe .
Thirdly , we need to be very clear to whoever is watching the euro area that we will never be defeated .
To discourage anyone from even trying our vigour , we need a permanent and robust framework for crisis management for the euro area Member States .
The temporary mechanism established on 10 May is a bold first step in that direction , but for the medium to long term , the Commission will propose a more permanent mechanism , subject to strict policy conditionality and , of course , drawing on the lessons of recent experience .
Yes , we need to avoid moral hazards .
That is why we must make the mechanism so unattractive that no leader or country is voluntarily tempted to resort to it .
But recent experience has shown that it is better to have a fire brigade ready for a possible bush fire than only start building the fire brigade up when the fire has already turned into a broader forest fire .
It is better to be safe than sorry .
To conclude , these Commission proposals pave the way for a quantum leap in economic governance in Europe , but I also want to draw your attention to another immensely important decision - on the same day we proposed these measures - namely , the proposal for Estonia to become a member of the euro area on its own merits .
Just to give you one figure : while the average debt in Europe is , at the moment , around 75 % , in Estonia it is around 7.5 % - not 75 % but 7.5 % - on a sustainable basis .
This proposal sends an important signal to all that the euro area will withstand pressure with self-confidence , and sustainable economic and fiscal policies will bring fruit for Member States .
All in all , the Commission 's initiatives , once adopted , will lead to a substantial deepening of economic governance in Europe and to a prudent widening of the euro area .
Indeed , in the EMU , it is high time to fill the ' E ' with life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has finally reacted .
The Heads of State or Government have finally begun to deal with the problems by deciding , 10 days ago , on a support plan for our currency , the euro .
This is a plan which accurately reflects the scale of European solidarity , thus contradicting all those who doubted it , but which is still inadequate and must be accompanied by measures to reduce our national budget deficits and measures for obtaining agreement among the 27 on the social and fiscal budgets .
I think everybody is saying this this morning , and we have all been saying the same thing for the past fortnight .
Well let us do it now !
This plan was completed last Wednesday with the Commission 's decision , which I welcome , to radically enhance supervision and the implementation of a stability pact .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will not extricate ourselves unless all these measures are implemented .
We will not extricate ourselves unless we have political courage , because the measures that we should have already taken collectively at EU level and individually at national level will have to be taken now .
This applies to both right-wing and left-wing governments .
I am very sorry that the German socialists were lacking this courage when they voted in the Bundestag on the European aid plan .
We must learn lessons from all this .
The first lesson : we must know the true state of national public accounts , just as we know the true state of EU public accounts .
I am asking the Commission to strive to ensure this and to punish , and not just timidly criticise , any State which fails to meet this obligation .
As you well know , everybody is afraid of the speed trap , everybody is afraid of the penalties , of the number of points on their licences when they are on the road .
This is how we are made , so there have to be penalties .
This is the alpha and the omega of any serious policy in this area .
Second lesson : the 27 must concentrate on their budgetary policies very early on in proceedings .
The Commission asked for this last week .
I myself asked for it in this Chamber a few weeks ago .
I know that it irritates Member States when we ask them to concentrate , but they must get used to being irritated from now on if they continue to treat their public finances as if they were living on a desert island , as if they were not connected to one another by a currency and , hence , by a necessary common discipline .
Moreover , what is true of national budgets is also true of social and fiscal policy .
Once again , I understand the anger of some of our compatriots when they are asked to make sacrifices for others who work less and retire earlier .
This cannot continue either .
That is the third lesson which I have learnt from this crisis .
The euro will only be viable if we collectively give ourselves the resources to make it so .
I would not contradict President Obama 's financial adviser , Mr Volcker , who said that the euro is liable to collapse if we do not change our culture and behaviour .
We must look beyond national considerations and towards European considerations .
We must move on from short-term policies , designed to prevent our national governments from falling a few points in opinion polls , to medium- and long-term plans , which are also being demanded by our entrepreneurs so that they can invest and recruit .
My group is asking Europe to wake up .
It is asking for the Commission to do its job , which is to apply the carrot and the stick technique with Member States .
Financially reward the ones that clean up their public finances and punish the ones that refuse to do so !
The Commission , Mr Rehn , must not be afraid of doing this .
It would be to the benefit of Europeans and of Member States .
The main problem amongst our fellow citizens , which is raised at all our meetings at the moment , is whether their savings are still safe .
I understand these citizens , who have worked all their lives to have a few savings .
So that is the first assurance we should give them : that their savings are protected .
That is quite simply what the Commission must do ; it was created for that purpose .
It is only in this context , ladies and gentlemen , that the 2020 strategy will have any meaning .
It is only if we are once again serious of purpose , if we act collectively with regard to public accounts , that we will be able to win the battle of unemployment , education , training , research and innovation .
I said this yesterday , and I say it every day : if savings have to be made in all our Member States , then we too , as Members of Parliament and European civil servants , will have to lead by example , or else we will lack credibility .
That is all that I have to say , and I am still hoping - I have experienced a few very serious and very deep crises - that this crisis can at least serve as a new starting point for Europe and its citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is taking place against the backdrop of a very serious situation which represents a threat to the European Union .
We have decades of laissez-faire ideology behind us and these have been decades during which anyone who questioned the alleged superiority of the capitalist economic system was ridiculed .
This economic system has taken us into the deepest financial , economic and employment crisis and the deepest crisis in the morality and legitimacy of the institutions since the end of the Second World War .
The system is wrong .
It is , to a certain extent , immoral , and it is also warped .
I would like to give you an example , because many of our citizens do not understand the jargon that is used .
What is the trade in credit default swaps and credit default insurance all about ?
It means that you can take out an insurance policy which can then be bought and sold like a commodity .
Let me put this in practical terms .
I am sure that the lovely farm owned by Mr Daul is covered by a fire insurance policy .
If I , Martin Schulz , can buy Mr Daul 's fire insurance policy and if I receive the insurance payment instead of him when his house burns down , then I simply need someone , for example Mr Cohn-Bendit , who is prepared to set light to the house and I am a made man .
This is a warped system .
It should be abolished and these practices should be banned .
These are exactly the mechanisms that we are discussing and the real-life examples are not funny .
One concerns the pension fund of the Californian teachers ' union which wanted to buy a German airline via a hedge fund .
The pension fund did not succeed , but it bought something else instead .
However , the pension fund then went bankrupt .
This has brought ruin to a whole generation of teachers , who have been paying into the fund for 40 years .
That is the reality of this economic system , which has now reached its limits and which must be put on a tight leash .
Now it is the governments ' turn .
This is what you have said , Mr López Garrido and Mr Rehn .
That is all well and good , but we are the ones who are reacting , we are the ones who have been driven to action and , in my opinion , we are reacting far too late .
Regulations should have been introduced in many areas at a much earlier stage and we have often called for this to happen in this House .
Now we are bringing in regulations for hedge funds , but when will the European Rating Agency be established ?
Is it really normal for an American rating agency , at exactly the point at which the speculation against Greece reached its climax , to set its sights on the next target and lower Portugal 's rating ?
What type of institutions are these which can decide on the fate of entire nations ?
They must be controlled and regulated .
However , this should not be happening now .
It should have taken place years ago and we called for it years ago , but our calls were rejected .
They were rejected by the same governments which today claim to be managing this crisis .
( Protests )
Mr Langen , I know that you are tabling an amendment this afternoon to ensure that Parliament is not in session during carnival time in Germany .
That is a good thing .
It is just that when you are here , it is carnival every day that Parliament is in session .
I am really sorry .
We have structural deficits in the EU , which the institutions are responsible for resolving .
We have allegedly created an economic and monetary union .
However , the reality is that we have a monetary union , but not an economic union .
In Europe , we have a patchwork quilt of economic policies .
A total of 16 sovereign states are failing to coordinate their economic policies , some of which are inconsistent with one another , within a single currency area .
This represents a huge risk .
Arnold Schwarzenegger and his beautiful state of California are completely bankrupt , but that does not affect the dollar at all , because the economic policy of California forms part of the single currency area of the United States .
If 2.8 % of the gross domestic product of the euro area is put at risk , as in the case of Greece , a serious crisis will be caused here .
We must get rid of this deficit , which is why we need economic governance .
Anyone who is still opposed to this has not heard the warning shots .
We are in the middle of an extremely serious crisis of legitimacy .
People are realising that this economic system has failed and they no longer have any confidence in it .
They have seen that the national and international institutions are being driven by this system and therefore they no longer trust the institutions either .
During this phase , many people are returning to the refuge of national rhetoric in the face of this globalised , Europeanised challenge .
This three-way contradiction between the crisis of confidence in our economic system and in our state institutions and the retreat of many state institutions into taking a national approach , rather than looking for solutions in the international structures , is a mixture which puts the EU as a whole at risk .
Therefore , we need economic governance and we also ultimately need the strength to implement our own regulations .
Finally , Mr Daul , who is the chair of the group which includes the representatives of Nea Dimokratia , should be a little more restrained in his criticism of other parties .
Mr President , I do not think that either nationalist or Marxist rhetoric is going to provide us with the solutions we need for this crisis we are going through .
( Applause )
What we are currently experiencing , Mr President , is not , in my opinion , a monetary crisis in the Union , it is not even a crisis of our single currency ; rather , it is a crisis of EU governance .
This is the situation we are in at the moment .
I would even go as far as to say that it is a crisis borne of the Member States ' obsessive belief that they can solve Europe 's problems with their intergovernmental approach , when a monetary area , Mr President , must be governed by a single method , by the Community method , on the basis of the European interest , and not by a syndicate of national interests , which is what the European Council and the Council of the European Union , by their very nature , represent .
For my part , I therefore have three messages to send out this morning in this debate .
The first message , Mr López Garrido , is addressed to the Council .
We could perhaps ask the Spanish Presidency to invite the Members of the Council to show a little discretion in relation to the euro crisis , because each time a solution is found to help the euro , one or other Head of State or Government is compelled to come forward to say his piece , and to sabotage , in fact , the solution that has been found .
I therefore think that the first thing that the Council must be asked to do is to be a little bit more discreet and to let the Commission and the European Central Bank come up with solutions .
My second message is for the Commission .
I believe , Mr Rehn , that you took some brave decisions last Wednesday which are a step in the right direction , but that the Commission must go further .
For the time being , then , we have a working group .
This Council working group will meet to put forward solutions around October time or towards the end of the year .
In my opinion , this is much too late .
It is up to the Commission , which has the right of initiative , to put together an ambitious overall package over the coming weeks and months .
That is what must be done .
We must not wait for a working group of the Council to tell us what must be done ; it is up to the Commission to take this initiative .
It is up to the Commission to draw up a comprehensive package , which it will present to the Council and Parliament , and which will comprise , in my view , four elements .
Firstly , strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact .
This means , in fact , penalties ; I personally am in favour of Mr Rehn 's idea , and I hope that everyone else is as well .
He says that , as part of this package , the Commission should be tasked with screening budgets before they are approved by national parliaments .
This is not a matter of subsidiarity or of a lack of subsidiarity ; it is a matter of loyalty towards the Stability and Growth Pact and the euro .
We cannot say , on the one hand , that we are members of this Stability and Growth Pact and of the euro area , and , on the other , that our budget has nothing to do with the euro , or that this is a strictly national competence .
Secondly , I believe that this package must also integrate a convincing 2020 strategy .
That which is on the Council 's table at the moment , Mr López Garrido , is not at all convincing .
Are you going to reach a conclusion in June ?
What , though , are you going to conclude in June with regard to the 2020 strategy ?
Will it be the same thing that you concluded with regard to the Lisbon Strategy , which failed ?
Will it be the open method of coordination once again ?
Well , if you are serious , you must now provide the Commission with all the instruments it needs to actually manage this 2020 strategy , this economic strategy which has to extricate us from the crisis .
The third thing which definitely must be done is to create a European monetary fund to replace the stability mechanism which was created , because that mechanism , as you say yourself , Mr Rehn , is not going to be up to the job .
Once again , it is an intergovernmental mechanism which was concocted within Ecofin and which requires unanimity .
Every single loan which is granted has to be approved by all the Member States .
This is a system which cannot function in the long term , and a European monetary fund , managed by the Commission and , if necessary , by the ECB , is therefore required .
However , it must not be left to take those decisions which are the responsibility of all Member States in the euro area .
Finally , we must have a European bond market .
This is what we are expecting from the Commission , Mr Rehn .
We want you to be ambitious and courageous enough to put an ambitious package comprising these four points on the negotiating table within both the Council and Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my Group has once again decided to take a positive approach to the financial stabilisation mechanism which was agreed at the weekend of crisis talks in Brussels almost two weeks ago .
We are combining our support with a clear commitment to a more united economic and financial policy .
This is nothing new for my group .
It has been a tradition for us for many years .
However , along with this commitment , Mr Rehn and Mr López Garrido , we want to see a serious decision being made not to continue simply combating the symptoms of the crisis , but instead to tackle the overall challenge that it represents .
As we see it , we have been trying to cure the symptoms since 2008 .
We have been attempting to save the banks since 2008 , when Lehman Brothers went bankrupt .
I would like to say once again that we must be honest with the citizens of Europe .
The euro was not stabilised during the weekend before last .
Instead , once again , a large number of German and French banks were rescued .
The share prices demonstrated very clearly what had happened .
However , we must get out of this cycle of rescuing the banks , which has cost us billions upon billions .
We no longer know where the money is coming from and we are only daring to take tiny steps towards state regulation of the financial markets , going by the agreement in the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) .
The central aspect of what we are calling for today is that the state must return to the financial markets and take a very determined approach .
It must no longer be kept in check by the banks and speculators which everyone is complaining about .
It is true that the banks are a vital part of the system , but there must be something very rotten in this system if our states can repeatedly be brought to the brink of disaster and the political system allows this to happen .
I would like to summarise the situation very briefly .
We must now make clear decisions on certain issues .
There are indications that some of the EU Member States are moving in the right direction , but we believe that there should be a ban on toxic assets and short selling throughout the EU , that hedge funds should be kept under very tight control , and that we must stop talking about introducing a tax on financial transactions and actually do something about it .
We need this tax , among other things , in order to refinance what we are doing with public money .
The participation of banks and speculators must no longer be merely a matter for soapbox speeches .
We can genuinely guarantee their involvement by introducing the tax .
A second issue which is of great concern to me is the future of a coordinated budget policy in the European Union , in other words , budgetary discipline .
I am very familiar with this term in a German context .
However , I propose that , against the background of crisis management and the vote on the Europe 2020 strategy , we should once again come to an agreement on what we actually want , on how the Member States and how Europe should be presenting themselves to our citizens in five or ten years with regard to the responsibility of the state .
Should the European strategy be used as a battering ram against the social responsibility of the state ?
I would very much like to know how you see all of this : nurseries , schools , universities , libraries , care for the elderly , hospitals , museums and theatres .
A week ago , my colleague , Mr Cohn-Bendit , said that Greece needed more time to put a reconstruction plan in place .
I am familiar with the disastrous financial situation of many Member States and I believe that some of them need time to decide what should be done .
As I have said , using a battering ram against the social security system would definitely be the worst thing that the European Union could do at this point .
However , that does not prevent us from looking carefully at our budget policy in order to ensure that the different generations receive equal treatment .
As Greens , we have supported budgets of this kind in Germany time and time again .
I would like to make one final point .
If we were to give up on our climate policy and sustainable development now , as some people have indicated , we would really be implementing the devil 's plan .
We must not neglect innovation in industry and business , a climate friendly approach to production and the organisation of public transport .
We must safeguard jobs by means of innovation , future viability and sustainability , but this does cost money .
The introduction of new taxes is a taboo subject .
However , I am convinced that we will only emerge from this crisis if we can break down the taboo of state intervention , the role of the state and the need for intelligent taxes .
( Applause )

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , it has sadly become a characteristic of some of those who speak in support of the European Union to believe that the solution to every problem is more integration .
This approach misses the point .
What Europe too often lacks is not extra mechanisms to implement agreed policies , but rather the political will to fulfil commitments which have already been made but not executed .
I therefore earnestly hope that the Europe 2020 initiative , which is certainly necessary to deal with the underlying economic crisis faced by Europe , does not fail on the same basis .
Concerning the eurozone crisis , however , we are told that , to avoid similar crises in the future , the Union needs powers to call for the prior presentation of draft budgets by sovereign governments and to impose tougher sanctions on Member States - but budget information was already supposed to be available ; it was just inaccurate and poorly scrutinised .
Would the quality of information and the competence of those analysing the data improve just because a more demanding procedure was introduced ?
Sanctions were previously available ; they simply lacked credibility .
Increasing their scope does not make them any more likely to be imposed .
Would the new measures be taken any more seriously ?
Furthermore , issuing debt , which risks increasing the EU budget and directly guaranteeing EU lending , is a major departure that undermines the principles of sound public finance which we are supposed here to be reinforcing .
In the ECR , we want the euro to be a success for the sake both of those who choose to join and of those in the wider European economy , but this requires Member States to take their responsibilities seriously , to be honest with each other , and to fulfil their agreed commitments .
By its own admission , the Commission believes its proposals will lead to a substantial deepening of economic and monetary union .
It is little wonder that , whereas the English version of the text of the March summit referred to ' governance ' , which is what the Commission has also referred to , the French version referred to ' government ' .
It seems that , for some , a centralised European economic ' government ' is indeed the ambition , but this would not address the problems we face : it would be bad for our citizens , for our Member States and , I say , for the European Union itself .
Mr President , the most recent Council meetings indicate that far-reaching changes are under way .
We are currently experiencing a process of governmentalisation of European policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon praised the role of Parliament and the strengthening of that role .
We have also spoken out in praise of this .
Fundamental agreements are now being reached between the governments and inconceivably large amounts of money are being spent .
Until now , the parliaments have had little say in the matter and we must put a stop to this .
The method used by those in government has resulted in huge sums being spent to rescue banks which are themselves responsible for getting heavily into debt .
These governments have saved casino capitalism using taxpayers ' money .
However , they have taken a very hesitant approach to rescuing the states that are in debt .
Somewhere , they managed to find EUR 750 billion .
The question is whether the money printing press will save economic development .
I believe that it is more likely to save the banks ' capital .
However , the European Union must be more than just a free internal market with a single currency .
Mr Barroso is right when he says that without an economic union , we can forget the monetary union .
However , I cannot yet see any clear outlines .
Persisting with the failed Stability and Growth Pact has relatively little to do with the sensible coordination of economic policy .
What we are lacking is a social union .
We are lacking the lasting and effective re-regulation of the financial sector .
We are lacking a coordinated tax policy and wage policy and a tax on financial transactions .
Although we have been talking about this tax for a long time , it remains just talk .
It is time to safeguard the social state by means of the EU institutions , not to dismantle it .
The Greeks and other nations are afraid because they can see the measures that are being taken on the social side .
It is time to fight for the harmonisation of social standards at a high level .
Hedge funds must be banned and tax havens abolished .
We are making very slow progress in combating the crisis in the financial markets .
In the light of the speed with which the speculators are acting , we are doing far too little .
During emergencies like those that we are repeatedly being faced with , it is totally wrong to nationalise the billions which are being spent as losses and privatise the profits .
The banks must not be allowed direct access to taxpayers ' money with the support of the state .
Incidentally , one thing is clear to me , and that is that in the current conditions , we will have to redefine the term ' bank robber ' .
Commissioner , I should like to take this opportunity to thank you personally for your hard and effective work in connection with the economic crisis in Greece .
I should also like to thank all the parties in Parliament for the support and solidarity they have shown Greece .
I have three proposals and I should like , most emphatically , to ask for their support .
As far as the adoption of a permanent instrument for economic governance is concerned , the Bruegel Institute , which is a think tank in the field of economics , proposes the following : the European Central Bank should guarantee European bonds up to 60 % of the GDP of each country ; these are so-called ' blue bonds ' .
Where bonds exceed the 60 % limit , the surplus should be borrowed on market terms ; these are so-called ' red bonds ' .
This is a proposal for a permanent instrument for economic governance ; we do not need to set up new mechanisms and so forth and it can be adopted very quickly .
I have two ad hoc proposals for Greece : the International Monetary Fund could extend the repayment period for the loan to Greece from three to five years .
If the same extension were adopted by our European lenders , it would be much easier and more realistic for Greece to repay its debt and this would be a good message for the markets .
The second proposal is this : the amount in aid to Greece could be used to repay our bonds .
It would be rational management of the issue if Europe were to release resources now , to be given to Greece in the future and used by it to develop the Greek economy .
At the moment , the Greek Government is on the defensive ; it is trying to scrape money together so that it can reduce its debt .
However , we cannot try and stimulate growth at the same time .
That is why , Commissioner , I think it would be a good idea if a parallel effort to stimulate growth were supported .
To close , I should like to say that we hope that the Greek crisis will be the only price the European Union has to pay for the hasty establishment of the economic governance which we should have established ten years ago .
Let us hope that the Greek crisis is the only price we have to pay .
Mrs Tzavela , I did not interrupt you because you are from Greece , and this issue is very important , but because you spoke for more than one minute .
Please keep to your time next time .
Mr President , when you became President of this House last year , you said that you would treat all groups equally .
I have noticed in this interesting debate that Mr Schulz ran two minutes over - all the groups ran over - but you picked on one group .
Could you explain why this is ?
I would like to say , Mrs Sinclaire , that I am watching the time .
Those speeches did , indeed , run over by some seconds .
The Member who was speaking a moment ago ran over by the longest , but I allowed this because she represents Greece , and it was also the opinion of someone who lives in Greece , and this matter seemed to me to be important .
As a rule , I do not allow speakers to exceed the allotted time , but I think we are all agreed that Mrs Tzavela 's statement was particularly important for us .
( ES ) Mr President , we had to be on the brink of the economic abyss in order for the Heads of State or Government to understand that the way forward is not more nationalism but more Europe .
Some measures that have been adopted are aimed in this direction , such as the reduction in vetoing rights in the European Council or the seeds of a European public treasury .
Finally , albeit late in the day , we have realised that we are all in the same boat and there is no point dealing with individual situations , especially in an improvised way .
I wonder , however , whether this attitude is a digression , or conversely whether it is the start of real European economic governance , because what we do not need , ladies and gentlemen , is governance .
What we need is authentic government , if we want to be true to the will of the founding fathers .
Parliament must therefore promote all the reforms aimed at strengthening Europe and make budgetary and fiscal discipline a reality , while forgetting about nostalgic sovereignty .
Ladies and gentlemen , strengthening the European Commission and strengthening Parliament is the only right recipe for building Europe , as otherwise , it would disappear like a thief in the night .
( NL ) Mr President , what I have learned is that , if Mr Daul 's farmhouse is on fire , you first have to put the fire out .
Therefore , our group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , fully supports the rescue package on which the Council and the Commission have decided .
That a decision on a package to the tune of hundreds of billions of euro was unavoidable in a single weekend is a wake-up call to the fact that stricter and more consistent budgetary rules are crucial and must be strengthened .
Mr President , the Council was unanimous ; let us also show that kind of unanimity .
Unfortunately , however , listening to Mr Schulz , Chair of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I note that such unanimity is not to be found in this House .
All of us in Parliament want a Europe with sustainable economic growth , sufficient jobs for our citizens and healthy businesses .
We can achieve this only if we have a stable currency and a stable economy .
A Stability and Growth Pact that is enforced is crucial for an ambitious EU 2020 strategy .
For both of the above , success is dependent on sound European governance .
This is at the heart of the resolution we discussed with the groups in this House last week .
Commissioner Rehn deserves our support , and I think it irresponsible that our fellow Members from the S & D Group are refusing that support .
Although irresponsible behaviour by speculators is not the cause , it has fanned the flames of the euro crisis .
As far as our group is concerned , Commissioner Barnier must work energetically on proposals to curtail irresponsible behaviour on the financial markets .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Wortmann-Kool is wrong in two respects .
Firstly , we definitely do not want Mr Daul 's farm to burn down .
We do not want any farm to burn down .
We want to take precautions , that is our objective .
Secondly , we very much support the measures that Mr Rehn has proposed .
It is simply that in some cases , they do not go far enough , because the majority of the measures have only been suggested when Mr Daul 's farm is already on fire .
You rightly say that we must prevent the farm from catching fire in the first place and that is the decisive point which I would like to discuss .
Mr López Garrido said today that it had taken an infuriatingly long time for the decisions to be reached .
It is also the case that we have spent an infuriatingly long time taking note of the changes that have happened in the European Union over the last ten years .
Mr Rehn has correctly pointed out that differences between the individual euro countries with regard to competitiveness have increased and not decreased .
What you do not mention , Mr Rehn , is something that is very important to us , namely , the fact that the gap between the rich and the poor in Europe is widening .
If that sounds like Marxism to Mr Verhofstadt , to us it is a question of social security and social policy .
However , that is simply not of interest to some people .
The question is how you intend to get people to accept the economic measures and the strict budgetary requirements which you rightly propose when people begin to realise that Europe and the euro area are characterised by a growing gap between rich and poor .
This is unacceptable and this is why there are more protests against the necessary measures than would normally be the case .
Therefore , we are calling on the Commission and the Council to act .
We must reduce the differences in competitiveness .
I believe you are absolutely right when you say that we must succeed in increasing the competitiveness of countries such as Greece and Spain .
This is not about making the competition conditions worse in Germany , Holland , Austria or other countries , but about improving the competition conditions in the economically weaker countries .
That is absolutely the right strategy , but your proposal , Mr Rehn , does not include any specific measures for bringing this about .
You spoke today about the reform of the labour market and the pension system .
This is the right approach , but it is not enough just to reform the labour market and pensions .
We must also look at the budget .
If we do not develop our infrastructure and if we do not use all the means at our disposal in the Europe 2020 strategy , including green technologies and so on , we will not succeed in achieving this objective .
Therefore , I am asking you to take note of the fact that competitiveness and social security in Europe must be strengthened .
Mr President , I would like to make a point on the situation in those Member States that are not members of the eurozone but which still share the same preoccupation .
Political leaders in our countries have been selling the idea that EU membership should be seen as a guarantee against hard economic times , but reality has now proven differently .
The euro is constantly attacked from all sides despite all the efforts made , and we all know that fresh money is only a quick fix for a much deeper problem .
This is an exceptionally serious situation and we need exceptional answers .
Let us face it ; there is no escape from deeper economic integration and this therefore implies closer political union .
Because this imbalance leads to daunting divergences between Member States , and to ensure financial discipline at European level , we need good governance , sanctions and compliance mechanisms .
We need to find ways to encourage investment , attract capital and boldly cut bureaucratic expenses .
We need to see intelligent measures taken by governments .
In Romania , for example , the government is cutting pensions and salaries instead of reducing bureaucratic expenses or money for political clients .
We have in Romania more employees of secret services than the FBI has but , instead of cutting here , we are cutting doctors and teachers .
I strongly encourage the Commission to stand by the proposed measures and not to give up under Member States ' pressure , because only a few can be seen as examples these days .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yes , we need responsible public spending .
Yes , we need to balance our budgets .
This requires responsible management of expenditure , and enough has been said about that for the moment .
Yes , of course , this requires increased mutual supervision between equals .
But , no , Members of the Council - and this is , I might add , addressed above all to the gentlemen Members , and not so much to the female Members - it is a sham to let people believe that we are going to meet the current challenges solely by reducing expenditure , as that will most certainly plunge Europe into recession , that will most certainly destroy the social fabric , this social cohesion that is part of the EU 's identity .
Therefore , if we wish to bring public finances back into balance , which is the only option , and also be able to invest - because this is not simply a matter of reducing deficits , but of investing in our future - we will have to find new income streams .
This means making the financial sector contribute , it means imposing a tax on financial transactions , but also on the banks , and it is not a matter of choosing one or the other .
It means making those who have profited the most from the situation contribute - I am talking here about the energy sector ; it means stopping the handing out of gifts , such as all the tax reforms that have been implemented , to society 's richest individuals or to companies that take advantage of tax havens , and really trying to stamp out tax fraud .
This therefore means breaking another taboo , ladies and gentlemen : not the tax taboo but the taboo of sovereignty , which you , Members of the Council - and , unfortunately , with the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - will defend to the death .
Better to have tax sovereignty and failure than to really tackle the roots of the problem .
Finally , with regard to financial supervision , I should like to encourage ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the President-in-Office just asked whether there was an exit strategy from this crisis , and I would say yes , there is : it is called fiscal conservatism .
The structural problem of ours has been that public overspending went on for too long .
The public sector was out of control for many years .
Even in good times , the German Government of Mr Schröder went through the 3 % ceiling , and Greece , of course , broke all the records , because the Greek political class is utterly unable to manage money .
We had the Stability Pact .
What did Mr Prodi say about the Stability Pact in 2002 ?
You know : you were the head of Mr Liikanen 's cabinet .
He said the Stability Pact was stupid .
So we had to change it .
This was the guardian of the treaties .
We did change it , and we put it on the slippery slope - and we see the results today .
The EU will be faced with a track of fiscal conservatism for many years to come , and that is going to be very important .
What we need is innovation , more free markets and more entrepreneurial skills , Mr Schulz .
Mr President-in-Office ( from Spain ) : do we need taxation ?
No , it makes things even worse .
It pushes the EU into stagnation , and you will be Robin Hood in reverse .
I understand the anger of the people - the people with pensions , the people with savings .
I understand the German taxpayers .
They know that they will have to pay , but German taxpayers cannot always pay .
I find it a bit pretentious of Mr Verhofstadt ( if he is still there ) to tell Mrs Merkel to shut up talking about the euro .
This was said by a former government leader who messed up his own country .
So what is he trying to prove ?
( FR ) Mr President , you will not be able to calm the financial markets without giving up a sacrosanct principle that you defend , which is the completely free movement of capital and so-called free competition , which really means unfair competition .
Today , a great deal of money is being put on the table , but this is actually designed to reassure the financial markets , whereas to the people you promise only pain .
You have brought the IMF back into the European fold .
Why were we not consulted about this decision ?
Now , in a show of strength , you wish to actually usurp power by seeking to have the national budgets overseen by the Commission itself .
You talk unceasingly of deficits and debts .
Why , though , do we never talk about existing revenue options ?
We have a deficit at the moment because we have consistently lowered taxes on capital and created the conditions for an increasingly unequal distribution of wealth .
Therefore , the measures to be taken should include amending the statutes and the role of the European Central Bank .
We need true solidarity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how long will the euro last in its current form ?
Are we perhaps headed towards its destructuring within a year or two ?
I do not agree with creating a new supplementary deficit of EUR 750 billion to cover an earlier one or that these measures are sufficient for building the socio-economic future of 500 million Europeans , nor do I agree with the dogma of saving the euro as it is , because it should be done by keeping the euro as low as possible and reducing the interest rate to inject capital into productive investments for our industries , which are gasping for air , rather than into public financing .
I do not agree with the European Commission expecting to review and audit the accounting of Member States ' budgets before the national parliaments : farewell to sovereignty .
I disagree with an economic and financial strategy that fails to contemplate specific needs .
( DE ) Mr President , I am opposed to the Council 's unacceptable anti-European approach .
You are complaining about the crisis and you are now introducing an economic protectorate , while you bear the central responsibility for many of the causes of the crisis .
You have not allowed regulations to be imposed when they were needed .
Just one example of this is Eurostat .
The officials , who have been the subject of so much condemnation and whom I have repeatedly criticised in other areas , highlighted the problems in Greece and also in Spain and Portugal at an early stage .
The Commission called for Eurostat to be given appropriate powers to conduct investigations .
Who blocked this move ?
The Spanish , the British - Mr Martin is not here - the Germans , Mr Daul and his people from France and the Austrians , because you did not want your books to be looked at , because you knew how much they concealed .
This applies also to Mr Grasser , the former finance minister , who is now appearing all over the place on German television , instead of facing criminal charges in Austria .
What we really need is , of course , not an emergency government .
You will not do what the Americans sensibly did in a similar crisis , which is to pass a Glass-Steagall Act , to increase the banks ' capital , put a check on the conduit banks and reduce the systemic risks .
What we need instead is democratic legitimacy , a two-chamber system which will finally put an end to the nonsense of the Council , which is outwardly so pro-European , but internally makes decisions without democratic legitimacy , so that we can bring about true democracy in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , the crisis highlights very clearly the limitations of the treaties , our own weaknesses , the double standards in dealings with the European Union , the deficits , the errors and the lack of seriousness .
Secondly , it also indicates that anyone who does not do their homework is harming themselves and putting the EU at risk .
This applies to the Member States , but also to the Commission and to us .
Thirdly , when the European Union establishes objectives and rules for itself and agrees on procedures and sanctions , the Commission must not be dependent on the agreement of the Member States in order to be able to meet its obligations .
The deficit and sanction procedure needs to be automated .
Fourthly , I would like to call on the Council to end the Eurostat blockade .
It must be possible for Eurostat to carry out investigations in the Member States when it wants to and its employees must be able to speak to the necessary people while being aware that this is the right thing to do .
We need information , but without advance authorisation .
Fifthly , you have mentioned hedge funds and we have not yet come to a decision on this subject .
I am calling on the Council to enter into negotiations with Parliament very quickly so that we can hold the first reading of the hedge fund regulation before the summer .
Sixthly , on the subject of the transaction tax , we must not just keep calling for it ; we must put it into practice .
The Commission should quickly submit a proposal for the European transaction tax .
My eighth point is directed at the Council .
We are committing ourselves to holding an impact assessment of all national legislation which is relevant to the EU .
My ninth point is that we need to study the effects of all the measures on the real economy and we need more Europe and less intergovernmentalism .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , I have a very specific question which will allow us to emerge from the position of powerlessness and confusion that the crisis has left us in , with no one knowing how the crisis arose and how we can find our way out of it .
Mr Schulz has referred to the highly critical speculative products and credit default insurance and to the damaging practice of short selling , which brought Greece to the brink of disaster and could represent a major problem for Portugal and many other countries .
Mr López Garrido , you have frequently attended the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) in recent months , why was it not possible for the Member States to take concerted action to ban these products ?
I have been asking this question in the capital of my own country over recent weeks and months and it has taken you months , in fact until yesterday evening , to introduce a ban on the damaging practice of short selling .
I ask myself why we have to wait until things have gone wrong before making use of the appropriate legislative measures , which are already in place , to protect the people and the economies of Europe .
I believe it has something to do with the Council 's dreadful , discouraging slowness to act , which you have referred to .
I will make a deal with you .
We in the European Parliament are presenting concrete proposals .
In the context of regulating the supervisory bodies and the discussion about hedge funds , we have proposed that we should take appropriate measures on a European level and we will make the same resolution on derivatives , if you , Mr Langen , do what you are always saying .
We are calling on you urgently to ensure that the Council finally begins to work with us to put in place legislation so that we in Europe are able to act and no longer have to wait for ever for the Council to make a move .
We need to have the tools at our disposal in Europe to enable us to make progress .
Please help to make sure that this happens in the Council .
However , the decisive point is that the Council must take action on the legislation .

( FR ) Mr President , this is probably the most serious crisis that has ever confronted Europe , which is why urgent action is needed ; we have to take decisions , and good decisions at that , and we cannot wait until October .
The rescue plan was the first decision taken and it was probably taken too late , but better late than never .
Now , we must urgently follow it up with the establishment , in the long term , of a real European monetary fund , a European bond market and a European rating agency , because as we all know , the single currency will not be able to operate without budgetary , tax , economic and political convergence .
Moreover , until Europe indicates that it wishes to be governed , the markets and speculators can quite simply take the reins .
There is a lot of talk about economic governance , but perhaps we should concentrate on the issue of the actual governance of the European Union , which has been lacking recently .
In my opinion , we should set two targets .
Yes , of course the debt has to be reduced , but we must reduce it in a realistic and credible way and , at the same time , we must obtain those margins for manoeuvre and implement the reforms needed to prepare for the future .
We must do both things at the same time .
That is why it is vital to create synergies between the national budgets of Member States - I would have preferred the Commission to have expressed it in these terms - which is why it is probably vital to reform our tax system and to direct it more towards development and growth and to harmonise it .
There will no monetary union unless there is budgetary , economic and political convergence .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Rehn , as you know , there are two ways to reduce deficits .
Expenditure can be cut or taxes can be increased .
All States can cut expenditure at the same time , although separately , without needing any European coordination .
However , to increase taxes and , more specifically , taxes on capital , companies , profits and banks , they do need European coordination .
Your communication last week contained absolutely no mention at all of this issue .
My question , which is a fairly common one among Members from all groups , is as follows : over the course of the next few weeks , are you going to propose a tax coordination plan to provide Member States with the means of recovering margins for manoeuvre so that they can increase certain taxes , which is something they are unable to do separately ?
This is the added value which the European Commission can provide at the present time .
Unfortunately , you do not have any plans in this area .
Mr Verhofstadt was saying that you had a right to take the initiative .
In the current situation , you have a duty to take the initiative in this area .
( NL ) Mr President , it is to be feared that the support package for Greece will not work .
After all , no country in the world has ever managed to reduce a 14 % budget deficit to 3 % in three years .
Greece will be no different .
There is a great deal of opposition in Greece to the austerity measures , and so it is highly likely that the country will be sucked into a negative growth spiral , with sharply declining consumer spending even though an increase in that spending is actually needed to pay off the loans plus interest .
Therefore , Athens will sound the alarm again at some point , saying , ' we are not managing to pay it off ' .
There is a good chance that Europe will then write off the loans , with the familiar words , ' we have no choice ; we need to prevent worse happening ' .
Mr President , the lesson to be learned from this crisis is : be honest and keep your word .
The countries of the euro area must put their budgets in order , publish honest figures , comply with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact and purge their debts .
Countries failing to do those things must leave the euro area .
( EL ) Mr President , the biggest unemployment march in the last ten years is due to take place in Greece tomorrow .
Greek workers are demonstrating against the measures taken by the government , workers who neither work less nor are paid more than their counterparts ; you can see the data for yourselves .
Mr Rehn , it is major hypocrisy to call this tripartite financing mechanism a ' rescue and solidarity ' mechanism .
It is a European punishment mechanism , with the International Monetary Fund playing bad cop .
For six months , we have been suggesting that you make use of Article 122 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
For six months , we have been calling on the European Central Bank to change its policy .
For six months , we have been calling on you to investigate the unacceptable American credit rating agencies .
You did not do so .
You let the speculators run riot , you brought the International Monetary Fund into the euro area and now you are asking for harsh austerity programmes .
This mechanism must be debated by the European Parliament , in accordance with Article 218 of the Treaty of Lisbon ; we need a real debate on solidarity policy .
Mr President , we can all recall the pompous presentation made by the Spanish Prime Minister earlier this year .
However , Spain is now following Greece with a deficit of 11 % in GDP .
The EU bureaucracy immediately looks around to find someone to blame , but the fact is that it is this bureaucracy that is responsible for the crisis because it brought countries into the eurozone in the knowledge that their economies were not up to speed - or do we employ 1 000 people in Eurostat just to be a data collector ?
The hedge funds may be taking advantage of the situation , but they did not cause the crisis .
The EU now demands cost reductions , but is it realistic to expect the cost of the public sector in Greece to be reduced if 20 % of the working population is employed by the state and 50 % of SMEs have the state as its only client ?
Now , a rescue package has been put forward but the reality is that most of the countries supposed to contribute to it do not have money to do so , such as is the case of the UK .
In any case , the EU always takes the opportunity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , too rapid centralisation and Europeanisation , possibly also in relation to the introduction of a European currency , are part of the cause of the current problems .
The fact is that the European currency simply cannot be a hard currency in the long term , because it has brought together very different national economies , some of which are in a weak position , under the same umbrella of monetary policy .
Now the call is for a common , centrally managed economic policy to accompany the single currency , which amounts almost to European economic governance .
It is undoubtedly true that weak national economies must be subjected to strict controls on their budgets and their debt management strategy if they want to remain in the euro area .
However , the sort of centralisation which takes the form of Brussels exerting budgetary authority over all the Member States would , in my opinion , be a massive and improper intervention in the sovereignty of the Member States .
This would really just mean going from bad to worse .
The crisis must not be used as an excuse to introduce more EU centralisation , which is something that many people have wanted since before the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
If we really want to learn lessons from the current crisis , we may have to find a quite different structure for European monetary policy .
This may be something like a European hard currency union in a core Europe , in which the national economies that do not meet the convergence criteria would exclude themselves from the euro area .
We know that austerity programmes will soon be the order of the day throughout Europe .
One thing is clear : if the Member States and the citizens of Europe have to introduce savings , then the European Union must do the same , perhaps by investigating the overlapping areas of authority and duplication of effort among its forest of agencies and sorting out its budgetary controls .
We in Parliament will also have to consider whether , by increasing our staffing budget and raising the secretarial allowance , we are sending out the right signal at a time when savings are being introduced across the board .
( DE ) Mr President , on the day that we celebrated the 60th anniversary of the Schuman plan , on 9 May 2010 , the Council formally laid the Monnet method to rest , with the help of the Commission .
For example , a legal basis for the financial aid has been chosen which prevents Parliament from becoming involved , namely Article 122 ( 2 ) .
The Commission has tolerated all of this .
I would like to join in Mr Verhofstadt 's criticism .
It is not a crisis in the system or in the euro , but a crisis in government .
When I see the Spanish President-in-Office of the Council here , I have to ask myself what the Spanish Presidency has actually achieved .
It has not come up with any ideas or any incentives .
While we are discussing the most difficult problem faced by Europe , you are organising splendid summits in Madrid - we will not begrudge you that - but it does require us to be here .
The Commission has accepted everything that has been thrown at it .
It has allowed itself to be given the run around by the Council and following severe labour pains , it has given birth to a communication which does not contain a single concrete proposal .
I can only agree with Mr Bullmann in this respect .
Where are the concrete proposals ?
Will we once again be given a basis for discussion for the next two or three years ?
That is simply not enough .
We want the Commission to have the courage to take the initiative on the Monnet method , on the Community method and on common institutions and proposals .
Everyone here knows that the cooperation of the Member States on economic and financial issues is long overdue .
That is the cause of this crisis .
It is caused by the level of debt in the Member States and the fact that they have lost control of it .
The diversionary tactics aimed at areas of the financial market represent the wrong approach .
Mr Schulz has not spoken as if he were suited to more than simply being the leader of his party , but he is right on one point and I would like to tell him so .
We also regretted the fact that our Greek colleagues in this group did not support this package in the Greek Parliament .
I think this is irresponsible .
However , we should also point out that all the states in crisis in Europe , all of those which blocked the new moves , including Great Britain , Hungary , Portugal and Spain , have socialist governments .
( ES ) Mr President , the current session of the European Parliament began a year ago , and there has not been a single plenary sitting in which we have not discussed the crisis .
It is true that there is nothing more important for us to talk about than a crisis that has destroyed 20 million jobs in Europe .
It is very important , however , that we define our object correctly , because an equation that is poorly expressed is impossible to solve .
The crisis is not the ' euro crisis in Greece ' .
It is a crisis that has demonstrated three intolerable asymmetries that must be overcome .
The first is the asymmetry between the real economy and the financial economy .
The second is the asymmetry between the monetary union and the lack of a fiscal , budgetary and economic-policy union that is in step with the monetary union .
The third is the virulence of the crisis and its challenges and , despite this , the exasperating slowness of the response and decision-making mechanisms that are typical of the European Union .
We are therefore behind in responding to all those millions of unemployed people who are looking to us , and we are raising difficulties that are not arising in other countries that are tackling the crisis with greater decision-making capacity .
We have seen extraordinary decisions at the same time : the communication from the Commission , the extraordinary decisions of the Council of Ministers last week and , of course , the 2020 strategy .
However , these extraordinary measures do not come free of charge : they are accompanied by major requirements , restrictions and threats of penalties for countries that are not capable of restricting spending , and which could therefore also compromise growth .
Yesterday , we were talking here in Parliament about the European Convention on Human Rights and the Action Plan for the Stockholm Programme .
We had the opportunity to recall that Europe cannot be built solely with an internal market and monetary union .
Europe is not principally built on those things , but on citizenship .
It is therefore the time to recall once again that those millions of Europeans are expressing their discontent with the Europe that we are offering them , with the Europe that is expressing more threats and penalties for countries that do not comply than incentives for a model of growth that is capable of restoring employment and social cohesion and assisting in the fight against poverty .
Without that citizens ' Europe , this crisis will be impossible to resolve .
( FR ) Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the Commissioner and the Spanish Presidency for everything that has been achieved recently , albeit late .
Sailing a ship through a storm is not easy .
You have broken down more barriers in a fortnight than in all the previous years put together , and I want to encourage you to continue along the same lines .
I have a message for each of you .
I should firstly like to say to the Spanish Presidency that in June , you are going to be responsible for the adoption of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Do not put your name to this mockery .
The Lisbon Strategy has not worked ; some of the problems faced by southern Europe are due to a lack of competitiveness .
As Mr Verhofstadt said , we need another way .
We also need financial supervision .
It has just been explained to us that Parliament is going too far .
I am rapporteur for the European Systemic Risk Board .
I note that during the course of the most turbulent weekend of the last few weeks , the word ' systemic ' was uttered several times .
Your presidency is responsible for this package .
Be ambitious !
You have our support .
Do not listen to those in the Council who capitalise on the lack of regulation .

My second message is addressed to Mr Rehn , whose courage I salute ; I fully support the Commission 's proposal for national parliaments to work far more upstream with the EU .
However , this must be approached very carefully or it will provide all the populists and all Europe 's critics with a golden opportunity .
You have our support , but let us try to have a more inclusive approach with the national parliaments , rather than giving the impression that ' Brussels ' is dictating everything .
I note that it is those same national parliaments that claim to be the protectors of democracy that have put Europe in its current situation by voting , year in year out , for deficit budgets .

Mr President , we are in a situation of our own governments ' making ; it is not as though rules were not there to prevent these crises happening in the first place .
If rules such as the Stability and Growth Pact and the Maastricht criteria had been adhered to , we would not have the level of debt crisis that we currently have in many Member States .
I find myself in the very strange situation of drawing parallels between the behaviour and financial skills of our Member States ' governments and those of our investment banks .
We sit on the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs every week discussing the inappropriate behaviour of our banks , saying they have not obeyed the rules or they have applied them flexibly with financially engineered accounting measures .
This is exactly what our governments have also been doing .
We demand responsible corporate governance and yet the level of off-balance-sheet finance vehicles , special-purpose vehicles and undeclared contingent liabilities that our governments are engaged in does not show how to conduct responsible governance .
In the UK , we have been shocked at the difference between the declared deficit of the outgoing government and what we have actually found once the books have been opened up .
New leadership in the UK gives us a clear mandate to reassess the true state of finances .
I really do hope that the rest of Europe can also do the same ; restate their finances and find a way forwards .
( NL ) Mr President , we need a coordinated European policy to address the consequences of the crisis ; but Europe will have to stop being led by large companies , not forgetting the large financial institutions .
Governments have twice had to bail out our financial institutions , without these institutions footing even part of the bill themselves .
In the past two years , the aid to these institutions from the Netherlands alone has led to a EUR 2.5 billion increase in interest expenditure .
In the same period , the largest Dutch pension fund , ABP , spent EUR 1 billion on Greek government bonds in order to achieve a somewhat higher rate of interest .
In other words , speculation is continuing as before , and soon we may have to rescue the pension funds too .
EU 2020 should lay the bill at the right door .
Rather than by making extreme cutbacks to essential public services , the cost should be covered by the top earners and speculators , by means of partial debt relief for countries such as Greece and of a tax on banks , for example .
This way , we preserve the European social model .

( EL ) Mr President , I should like to say that , in theory , I absolutely support the proposals made by Mr Olli Rehn , whom I am bold enough to consider the political head of Europe and the person who deserves our special respect .
However , what I want to say and point out is that a raging fever is as dangerous as hypothermia , both in the human body and in the economy .
We must not jump from the slow adaptation of Maastricht , through which the entire economy of Europe passed for many years , to forced and sudden adaptation which will prolong the recession .
The rich will get richer and the poor will get poorer .
That is why I should like to point out that the continuing global economic disorder is due mainly to the creation of large unwanted reserves at global level and should be combated by efforts to stimulate growth at European level , so that we can address this crisis rationally .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Verhofstadt complained that nationalist and Marxist rhetoric are not enough to lead us out of the crisis .
I will make an attempt with Europeanist rhetoric .
Just a few weeks ago here in this House , many of us pledged our solidarity with Greece .
Indeed , of what use is Europe if not to support Member States in need ?
However , of what use are the euro and the Eurogroup if they do not promote a culture of responsibility and stability ?
What will happen if solidarity becomes synonymous with a European Union that , in violation of the treaties , is reduced to footing the bill for those countries which sacrifice their responsibility for their citizens ' future for the fleeting consensus of a season ?
Commissioner , is it Europeanist rhetoric if we ask the European Commission to be independent and authoritative and not to have regard for governments that cook the books ?
Is it Europeanist rhetoric if we request new regulations for the financial markets ?
Is it Europeanist rhetoric if we complain of errors in the construction of the euro , for which there are still no common fiscal and pension policies ?
We are in the middle of a crisis , it is true , but this crisis was not produced by surplus or too much Europe , but by a shortage or not enough of it .
Europe must strongly reprimand the States to be responsible , stable and serve the future generations .
All this is not rhetoric if the initiatives we are talking about are simply created and implemented , and form part of a political strategy that is a step ahead of events so that we are not forced to run behind them .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a Europe of the people and not a Europe of the States .
The crisis we are experiencing is the crisis of European policy 's inability to govern the market .
In order to save the euro , political institutions need to be strengthened and intergovernmental logic needs to be left behind to allow for European governance .
This is not rhetoric because a few minutes ago in Berlin , German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , sounded the alarm stating that the euro is in danger .
Voicing alarm without indicating strong and convincing measures risks further weakening the single currency for investors and the market and making all of Europe weaker .
Imagine the response of the markets in the coming hours , considering that just minutes ago , the euro collapsed again .
When we exit the House , Mr President , we may find ourselves poorer and more insecure .
New European governance alone will allow us to defend the single currency , promote growth , employment and social inclusion .
We must discard the old approach of coordinating national policies and equip ourselves with strong decision-making instruments .
New European governance must assure three levels of intervention : a policy for growth , suitable financial instruments and emergency management .
The EUR 750 billion rescue package was important but we have realised that it is not enough .
Today , we need a strong political initiative that can guide the market to allow for greater mobility of the resources .
The monetary and budget policies have proven inadequate in assuring productivity and competitiveness .
We must not be afraid to invest , above all , in Community interest projects such as infrastructure , energy , the environment , knowledge and human capital .
Mr President , Parliament has a great responsibility : to reinforce the capacity of Member States to leave intergovernmental policy behind and launch European spirit anew through its own independence .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European governments are being driven by the markets .
At last they are reacting , but they are reacting after the event and not in advance .
It is scandalous that the governments and the Commission only react when the real weaknesses appear in the markets .
They should have identified these weaknesses themselves at an early stage .
When the euro was introduced , we knew that we would not have a single monetary and fiscal policy , as is normally the case in individual states .
For this reason , we have taken measures to find a substitute for this , but we have not adhered closely to these measures .
The rules were broken very quickly and right at the start , even by the larger Member States .
We need another effective set of rules with sanction mechanisms , including a name and shame policy , the loss of voting rights and suspension of payments from the European funds until the fines have been paid .
Secondly , it has become clear that there are internal tensions within the euro area which are on the verge of putting its strength to the test and which take the form of differences in competitiveness .
The Commission must take action in this area .
It must investigate the budgets of the individual Member States to determine whether they represent a risk for the euro area .
Of course , we know that the right to draw up a budget is a central right of the national parliaments .
However , that is no reason for failing to develop a common European approach .
This is urgently needed .
We need more Europe and not less Europe .
This may well be our last chance .
If the Commission and the Council do not negotiate with Parliament , I am afraid that the result will be a major disaster at some point in the future .

( PL ) I agree with Mr Mauro that in the fight against the crises , there has not been enough action from the European Union .
In recent years , we have concentrated on political integration - we have been taken up with the Treaty of Lisbon and strengthening the competences of political institutions - but we have neglected cooperation on combating the crises .
I am thinking of a variety of crises which require cooperation and solidarity .
I am not thinking just of financial crises here .
As we hold this debate , several countries of the European Union , including my own country of Poland , have been hit by a huge flood .
People have been killed , and there have been heavy material losses .
People expect that in such situations , the European Union will come and help them , but there has not been much of this help .
The European Union is weak because its budget is too small , and it does not have enough money for specific measures .
Political strengthening is not being followed by the appropriate financial strengthening .
I hope that as a result of this crisis , the tendency to reduce the budget will not increase still further , because then we will be even weaker and more helpless .
( FR ) Mr President , the moment has now arrived in this crisis , which is not only European but also global , when we must have truth and clear-headedness and when responsibility must be taken .
Global governance is being established .
What influence will Europeans have ?
How are we going to influence this global governance if we are incapable of establishing our own European governance ?
Nobody could have failed to see that , after 50 years of integration , increasing national selfishness was putting us at risk of 50 years of disintegration .
Nobody could have failed to see that we were trying to create citizenship without the citizens , to conduct politics without the voters , to establish faith in the ideal of a rule of law without complying with it .
After the fall of the Berlin Wall , we reunified our continent with a belief in our strength but we were too proud to see our weaknesses .
And what is happening now ?
The crisis is hitting us full in the face at a time when our European integration is fragile and comprises poorly governed and , in some cases , corrupt States .
The chain of solidarity in the Union is currently being tested , and we all know that the strength of a chain is that of its weakest link .
We are right to save the weakest , because the time has come , and it will be our strength that saves them .
It is not EU regulations that are inadequate but their implementation by Member States and the European Commission , which has not adequately monitored the States , which has been defective .
It is not less Europe that we need , it is more Europe , but a Europe of truth , clear-headedness and responsibility .
Of course , we have to respect the Stability and Growth Pact , which must be reformed .
Yet the task facing us now is to regain the trust of our citizens , which means ensuring growth and jobs .
Growth means investment .
If the public sector does not invest , we cannot expect the private sector to do so .
In addition to a crucially important industrial policy , I propose , for the 10 years of the EU 2020 strategy , a major EUR 1 000 billion European investment plan aimed at making the EU territory the most competitive in the world in terms of trans-European networks , infrastructure , interconnections , high-speed trains , broadband services , motorways , water , space , research , health , energy , and education , and achieved through a reform of our budgetary support measures , in cooperation with all the public stakeholders and , in particular , the EIB .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , when the economic and monetary union turned 10 years old , the Commission thought that the euro was the Union 's greatest success .
It would now be difficult for us to make that statement without qualifying it , because the crisis has shown that the economic and monetary union is an unfinished project .
The minimum measures needed to save it were taken in a climate of emergency , but let us not delude ourselves : the pressurised conditions , the direct interests of the main Member States , and the painful and slow nature of the decisions have led to the precarious image that the public and the world have of the euro and the European Union .
We must face the facts .
The European Union and the euro are a process of integration , not just inter-country cooperation : they are an unfinished process that must either be reinforced now or run a serious risk of disappearing .
There are three issues that must be tackled .
First , it is important to consolidate the instruments that have been created in this climate of emergency : a European monetary fund must be created ; progress must be made with Eurobonds ; progress must be made with the European supervisory and regulatory architecture , and progress must be made with a European dimension for managing the banking crises .
Second , it is important to understand that there is no strong currency if the economy is weak : the forecast of 1 % growth for the European Union is unsustainable both in terms of its demographic makeup and in terms of fighting unemployment ; and the 2020 strategy is nothing more than a collection of good ideas if there are no means for realising it .
Third , Mr Rehn , fiscal consolidation is important , but it cannot coexist with growing divergence between the Member States that make up the Union : convergence policy must be urgently reviewed .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe that the worst crisis that we could suffer is not only the one that we are currently suffering , but the one that we will suffer if we are not capable of learning the right political lessons regarding what is happening .
We have been living beyond our means , especially in some countries .
We have moved away from the real economy and embraced the fictional economy , in our public accounts and , at the same time , in our family and private lives .
We have not been capable of understanding that , as is the case for any living organism , growing is not the same thing as getting fat .
Growth requires effort and proportion , while the process of getting fat involves a lack of proportion and balance in comparison with the work that we do and the welfare that we enjoy .
This crisis does not remain static .
The picture of the crisis a few months ago was a different one , a completely different one , to the picture that we have today .
The picture of the crisis in a few months is going to be a different one to the picture that we have today .
This crisis was economic and financial , and will have a growing social dimension involving social conflict .
This means that while we are in this phase , before the conflict becomes a social one , those of us involved in politics need to be aware that our main crisis is a crisis of confidence .
It is not only a crisis of the euro .
Let us analyse all the political and electoral processes in recent months .
There is a crisis of confidence , and that means that what we need to ask ourselves is how we need to change , how our attitude needs to change : our political , institutional and personal attitude .
In this respect , instead of thinking about other institutions , the question that Parliament needs to ask itself is what contribution it can make to a change of institutional and political attitude in this House .
I dare say that today , having heard many reasons for the crisis - bureaucracy , agencies , governments - there are two issues on which we need to change .
Firstly , Europe requires a minimum level of cohesion from Parliament : it cannot bleed itself dry in such a profound debate on two concepts of European society .
Secondly , we need to dare to tell the truth about what is happening to us .
( EL ) First of all , I should like to take ten seconds out of the proceedings to restore the truth .
Mr Langen , who is not in the House , said that it was unacceptable that Greek members had voted against the three-year stabilisation programme in the Greek Parliament .
I should like to point out that it would be a good idea for Mr Langen to repeat his recommendations at the next meeting of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , because those members , who happened to be responsible for governing the country until a few months ago , belong to the PPE .
To return to the more general issue , it is a fact that the current crisis has highlighted chronic sicknesses and weaknesses in terms of the economic coordination of the euro area and in terms of the global system of economic governance and , as a result , huge , uncontrolled power has been amassed in the globalised financial system .
So , today , we have , first and foremost , a question of democracy to address and Europe , if it wants to respect its values and history , needs to take a leading role here .
The decision to establish a euro area stability support mechanism is an important step , there can be no doubt about that .
However , a crisis management mechanism is not enough ; we need to tackle the causes at the root , not only at national , but also at European level .
We are making a mistake and undermining our common future and the future of subsequent generations by putting the sole emphasis on immediate financial recovery and underestimating the impact of growth , employment and the basic structures of the welfare state which have been several decades in the making .
Commissioner , the proposals to strengthen economic cooperation which you presented on 12 May may help to construct a more cohesive Europe , with fewer macro-economic imbalances , subject to two preconditions : firstly , that they will not be limited to the inflexible application of the Stability and Growth Pact and , secondly , that they will fully incorporate specialised targets for viable growth and employment within the framework of the 2020 strategy .
( PT ) Mr President , several colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have already drawn a very complete picture of the situation .
I think that what is needed now is mention of the role of the Member States .
The fact is that the national government of each Member State also has a role here as regards imposing the requirements and conditions for strengthening the single currency , and moving this project of monetary and economic integration forward .
I would like to say here that our party - the party linked to the PPE Group , which is the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ( PSD ) - is supporting the government 's austerity measures , because we believe that the mistakes that have been made during 15 years of socialist government in Portugal , which are now unfortunately visible for all to see , must be remedied ; the PSD will support measures to remedy them .
Nevertheless , while we are supporting the austerity measures , we would also criticise the Portuguese Government - and this is a good example to others in similar situations - because it is not cutting spending .
To reduce the deficit , it is essential not just to increase taxes , but also to cut spending and the government must have the courage to take measures to reduce spending , reduce the deficit and pay off some public debt .
This is true for Portugal and it is also true for other Member States that are in difficult situations .
We , as MEPs , are also responsible for defending in our countries the measures that are necessary in order for the euro to come out stronger , and for this integrated area and this dream - the dream of the PPE Group and the dream we all share - to become a reality .
That is why we are critical of governments that do not have the courage to take the necessary measures in their countries .
( SV ) Mr President , in some key points , this more communal economic policy also has an impact on the EU budget .
We are talking about the funding of the strategic flagship project Europe 2020 .
We are talking about some costs , guarantees and so on for the loan mechanism and control of the financial markets .
We are talking , not least , about a series of new duties that result from the Treaty of Lisbon .
In the European Parliament , we are highly conscious of the fact that many Member States currently find themselves in an extremely tricky economic situation , often with difficult national budget problems .
On the other hand , it is clear that , in this situation , the EU can help by taking measures that are important for the economic recovery of the Member States and that will give a new boost to growth and job creation .
The EU budget should therefore focus on areas where the EU can provide added value - European added value - and where the budgets of Member States and of the EU can complement and support one another .
That also means , however , that the Member States cannot give the EU significant additional responsibilities without providing the necessary resources .
I am thinking of research policy , flagship projects and education and infrastructure investments that are required if we are to have a better economic future .
I therefore think it is incredibly important that the spirit of this increasingly communal economic policy should also be reflected in a constructive attitude in the negotiations on the EU budget for 2011 , in the mid-term review of the long-term budget and in the debate on the new financial framework after 2013 .
Otherwise , we will not be able to move forwards and put in place common measures to promote growth and jobs .
( EL ) Mr President , as a Greek member of the European Parliament , I should like to repeat in the House something which I have said in public in Greece from the outset and to express my gratitude for the help which my country has received from the European support mechanism which , in conjunction with harsh but mostly unavoidable measures , has prevented the Greek economy from immediate collapse .
It would be useful if the mechanism for Greece had been adopted with the speed at which the support mechanism proceeded for other economies , when Europe finally realised the risk which we were all running .
Today is the first time that I have seen real determination , both in Parliament and in the other European institutions , to look directly and realistically at the real economic impasses in Europe .
Why are we in this situation ?
The main reason is that we have spent beyond our means and run up credit .
We spent when there was no crisis , we spent during the crisis , we are spending now on our way out of the crisis .
Anyone who wants to learn what happens when you consistently spend more than you have just needs to come to Greece .
The European Monetary Fund and the other institutions proposed in the resolution under negotiation are moving in the right direction .
However , if it is to provide real incentives , the Fund needs to take account not only of the absolute size of the debt and deficit , but also of the speed of reduction of the debt and the deficit .
Our real problem , and I say this to the left wing , is that 4 billion people in the developing world living on EUR 200 a month have discovered capitalism and are claiming global resources and markets from us , the rich , who live on EUR 2 000 a month .
We in the West do not have a monopoly on the capitalism on which the old European model was built .
If we do not change , if we do not hurry up with structural changes , competitiveness and innovation , we shall simply live more poorly .
Mr President , there is little doubt about the seriousness of the current crisis and the ' cost of use ' of unprecedented policy methods is very high .
The task of regulators and policy makers is to undertake actions that make it possible both to restore the equilibrium shattered by market failure and to correct failed government policies .
This is being done , but it has still to be seen how fast , and through what policy measures , European Union Member States will return to their path of growth .
More regulation is not a guarantee against the risks of the current crisis .
As we have chosen the path of more regulation , it should go hand in hand with increased simplicity and reduce the complexity of financial markets .
What is also clear is that fiscal and monetary policies are not substitutes for structural reforms .
Structural reforms have to address the underlying weaknesses of the European Union economy : sharply growing debts and deficits , ageing , the highly probable new surge of inflation , risks generated by climate-change policies , low productivity and lack of competitiveness .
With less public money , more will have to be done ; hence , public money , both European and national , will have to be used more efficiently .
A business friendly regulatory environment , efficient government , non-distortionary taxes , high labour participation rates , especially among women , a good education system , research and innovation - all that constitutes a minimum core package of measures to bring growth , jobs and competitiveness .
Without doubt , the European winning strategy has to be based on fiscal tightening , but its focus should be on innovation , the only way to boost productivity and growth in a sustainable way .
The European Commission and the European Parliament should regain their strategic role and go for brave European solutions .
Both citizens and markets need more Europe .
Mr President , I take it as a given that sovereign states must be held to account for commitments made and be required to meet agreed objectives , so I start from there .
But it is also time to look around and see what other actions are contributing to the recent turmoil .
In the 1930s , the gold standard and protectionism contributed to a deepening of the recession .
By contrast , within the European Union , we have had solidarity and the institutional capacity , via the European Central Bank and the Commission , to learn from past mistakes .
The work of the institutions has been impressive , given that there are 27 EU Member States , including 16 euro members .
Furthermore , our institutions have cooperated with the US Federal Reserve , the Bank of England , the Japanese Central Bank and others .
Despite this , the markets - the so-called markets - have , in effect , moved to take a negative view of almost every step taken .
Now I am all for free markets ; protectionism does not work .
But are our markets free ?
The markets were well-massaged and influenced towards getting us into the crisis in the first place .
Is there not by now a reasonable suspicion that powerful interests have a capacity to take on sovereign states and win , and that some - for whatever objectives - are using this power to advance their own agenda , using the markets for their own ends ?
A political agenda could include concerns that the euro could , in future , replace the dollar as the pricing currency for oil , for example ; a business and economic interest agenda could include simply amassing greater power and wealth by destroying sovereign rights , including shared sovereign rights , within the European Union .
It is time for political leaders to reflect on just what is happening .
I repeat : Member States must be disciplined , including the Member State I come from .
Of course that must happen .
But we are putting all the emphasis on Member States and very little on what is behind some market activity .
I would like to hear from the Presidency of the Council and from the Commissioner .
What is being done to police this ?
When we did not police these people in the past , look where they led us .
So do not have just one prong on your fork : it is time to have two prongs .
( HU ) The Europe 2020 strategy is a very important strategy , especially now , at a time of growing financial and economic crisis .
This crisis has spotlighted such fundamental questions and negative processes that if we do not integrate these into our strategy , this may jeopardise the success of our economic policy .
We must not allow the prestige of the euro to be damaged , but must do all we can for the sustainability of monetary union .
I represent the last country to join the euro area .
Slovakia 's citizens consider the introduction of the euro a success story and therefore it is contributing as well to the protection of the euro with every means available .
We must raise awareness that the monetary crisis may have serious political consequences .
These may include increased euroscepticism and uncertainty among those countries that are preparing to enter the euro area .
We need to help and encourage those countries that have not yet introduced the single currency .
In devising the EU 2020 strategy , policies that guarantee sustainable development must be given a major role .
Although work on energy diversification solutions in Central Europe is in progress , there must also be increased use of alternative energy sources in order to reduce climate change .
We must also make people aware that the capacity of current alternative energy sources is finite .
From the perspective of our long-term energy security , nuclear energy is the solution that can guarantee a sufficient amount of energy with the lowest levels of carbon dioxide emissions and , therefore , we must place great emphasis on the related question of the safe storage and production of fuel .
Providing impetus for further research into modern energy technologies , such as the innovation involving fusion-based reactors , is also indispensable .
Many important questions arise that we wish to incorporate into our strategy , and we are faced with the major task of improving the coordination and integration of various areas .
It is only by doing this that we can ensure that , in addition to a monetary union , the all important economic union will also be achieved .
( RO ) I very warmly welcome the measures put forward by the Commission and Council .
If these measures had been adopted some time ago , we could have avoided a large number of the effects of the crisis we are going through .
A lack of economic governance led to decisions being taken under pressure and without any consultation with the European Parliament .
In addition , there are no mechanisms in place for monitoring the measures adopted .
Last year , large sums of money were injected into banks .
This was a necessary measure , but saving the banks has not helped mitigate the crisis later on .
The crisis has continued .
The Growth and Stability Pact has not been adhered to .
Unacceptable deficits have been run up .
States have taken different measures in similar situations .
Some have decided to tell their citizens the truth and adopt austerity measures .
The lack of common rules is having different effects on Europe 's citizens , even though all Member States have helped trigger the crisis .
We cannot consume more than we produce , nor can we spend more than we can collect .
We need financial stability .
This is why the proposals for creating a new financial stability mechanism or European monetary fund are an absolute necessity .
However , these measures need to be backed up by a coherent economic recovery strategy and by control and sanction mechanisms .
This will allow us to say that we are going to establish real , effective economic governance for the benefit of all Member States .
Mr President , I will abide by your rule .
I welcome the Spanish Presidency 's comments about productive systems and a focus on competitiveness .
I think we need a little bit more of that conversation in this Parliament , in Council and in the Commission .
In relation to your comments about the slow response , we need to look at that because there is the problem of a lethargy in the European system in terms of response .
Member States could have reacted more swiftly when the banking crisis hit .
We are capable of doing it but we seem not to have done it in this particular instance .
Finally , the Commission is looking for four pillars of a new strategy .
I think the Commission needs to examine its own role in this crisis .
I believe that the monitoring of the rules of the Growth and Stability Pact were on the basis of a ' soft ' power approach which did not work .
Had we all , as others have said , abided by the rules , we would not have this problem .
Giving you more power will only work if you actually use the power you already have .
( RO ) During the current economic crisis , the Europe 2020 strategy seems to be posing a real challenge .
On the other hand , it provides an opportunity as well .
It can give an important fillip in terms of supporting the economic and social reforms required long term .
Solidarity and adaptability must be the principles on which it is founded .
I believe that the allocations for the Cohesion Funds must be kept as they play a fundamental role in reducing the disparities in economic development between the EU 's regions .
On the other hand , it goes without saying that the objectives adopted at European Union level cannot automatically become national objectives .
They must be adapted according to the possibilities of each country .
The Romanian Government has set up a high-level working group which will set national objectives .
At the same time , it will help coordinate the drafting of the National Reform Plan .
( EL ) The behaviour of the markets and of the banks is like a pack of wolves , as the Swedish Finance Minister called them , a pack of wolves ready to tear the economically weak countries apart .
The first victim was Greece , followed by Spain and Portugal .
In the case of Greece , we saw speculators hit it mercilessly , on the one hand , and Community solidarity which was very late coming and which came on very harsh terms , forcing the Greek people to make very unpleasant sacrifices and embark on justified strikes , on the other .
It would appear that the protagonists of the international economic crisis are now the states , not the banks .
We need to learn from this adversity .
The European Union needs more Community solidarity , better supervision of the financial system , stronger national compliance with the Stability Pact , more coordinated financial policy and measures to prevent competitive imbalances .
The people of Europe want a more humane Europe , with fewer inequalities between the Member States .
The time has come for a more realistic and people friendly programme for the European Union of 2020 which listens to the challenges of the times .
( SV ) Mr President , Europe needs more cooperation and more solidarity - not protectionism and nationalism .
We know that - history has taught us .
I find it hard to understand the fear that the finance ministers evidently feel when faced with this proposal for prior examination of the Member States ' budgets .
In recent months , even hardened finance ministers were , and should have been , afraid .
A vein of national self-assertion can certainly be detected here .
By all means scrutinise other countries , but not mine .
Scrutinise Greece , Spain and Portugal , but not my country .
Noli me tangere - touch me not !
Our mutual dependence requires openness and trust .
The Swedish and Finnish governments both have experience from the 1990s of serious crises , and they should both whole-heartedly support Commissioner Rehn 's proposals .
( SK ) A responsible budget policy in all countries of the European Union is only the first step towards solving the current situation .
The next step , which is surely more difficult to implement , should be to strive for a measured change to our workforce structure .
A large proportion of EU citizens , that is to say , are employed in non-productive sectors , especially public administration , and the productive sphere is not capable of supporting such a large number of bureaucrats , who only complicate life by dreaming up ever more regulations and restrictions .
Take a look at Asia , Commissioner .
They do not have such a high percentage of educated people there or as many universities as we do .
However , they do have a small public administration and an uncomplicated entrepreneurial environment , allowing them to develop the natural competitiveness which many people possess .
An uncomplicated , transparent entrepreneurial environment , less administration and more room for the independent , entrepreneurial and creative activities of our citizens : that is the best way out of the current problems .
Mr President , the economic crisis is not a temporary illness from which EU Members will soon recover to full economic health .
There are systemic flaws in the approach to economic policy of the EU and its Member States .
The goal of a single currency , eventually for 27 plus countries , is based on the false assumption that one currency can be appropriate for many very different economies .
The value of a currency must reflect the state of health of the economy it serves .
However , there are other distinct problems .
The embrace of globalisation by the EU and its individual Member States is a recipe for disaster .
We cannot allow goods and workers from low-wage countries to flood into Europe .
We cannot compete with their goods without reducing our wage rates to their levels .
Legal minimum wage levels will not prevent our workers being undercut covertly by migrant workers , the outsourcing of the work of our peoples or by moving our manufacturing to the Third World .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Rehn for his kind words and confidence in the efforts of Estonia joining the eurozone , and I can assure you that , with the present financial burden at 7.5 % of GDP , Estonia will not contribute to the increase of the average EU debt level .
I trust also that eurozone colleagues will be able to accept Estonia as a positive example ; that would send an encouraging signal also to Latvia and Lithuania convincing their people that it makes sense to make efforts and that all the applicants will be treated according to their merits .
Joining the eurozone at this moment is not just a privilege .
It means taking solidarity commitments and making our contribution to the Consolidation Pact from the beginning , but I am convinced that this is a right decision ; we shall see the EU not only as an opportunity to receive but , first and foremost , as a chance to contribute to advance our common cause .
( PL ) Today 's debate on economic governance in the European Union is a fundamental discussion , because it concerns the matter of continuing to strengthen European integration .
In view of their advanced economic links , Member States should all feel an equal responsibility for a European stabilisation mechanism and for the entire economic situation in Europe .
I do not think any of us should be in any doubt that accurate monitoring of public liabilities and expenses ( the President interrupted the speaker ) , coordination of the process of creating budgets and plans for reform in Member States at an early stage and a mechanism for aid in times of crisis are measures which are heading in the right direction .
Conscientious implementation of the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact should be a priority .
This is a key to ensuring budgetary and macro-economic stability in the European Union .
While a set of punishments and the principle of naming and shaming are essential for disciplining Member States in introducing the principles of the pact and essential reforms , I am reserved about financial penalties .
For these penalties , used in the case of Member States which are already in a difficult financial situation , could have the opposite effect , an adverse effect on the economies of these countries ...
( The President interrupted the speaker )
Therefore , I would ask that we plan the future of Europe responsibly .
( FI ) Mr President , when there is a crisis the psychological reaction is either to curl up in a ball , blame others , look for enemies or try to find solutions .
Europe is now witnessing this threeway approach : on the one hand , nationalism and protectionism are on the rise in many countries ; on the other , new solutions are being sought , as is the case with the Commission .
We have to appreciate them dearly .
The stronger the political system is in the European Union and at national level , the better we can tame market forces .
Otherwise , it will go badly .
I think there is one thing we could stop doing , and that is ridiculing Greece .
The Greek nation , Prime Minister and politicians now deserve our respect , since they are taking some very difficult decisions .
As Mr Schmidt said , Finland and Sweden were Greece in the early 1990s .
We had to take decisions that were just as hard , but we succeeded .
I am sorry to interrupt you .
You will notice in the Chamber that , although she was saying very nice things about Greece , I did interrupt her at exactly one minute , so I am trying to be as objective as I can be here .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the current debate on a functioning system of European economic governance , the long-term perspective is being neglected , in my opinion .
Now is the right time to incorporate the short-term stabilisation measures into a long-term strategy .
We need a vision of a market economy .
The fundamental principle of the social market economy is already laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must now bring it to life .
The social market economy was the successful model behind Germany 's economic miracle .
Walter Eugen , the guiding light of the economic miracle , remarked as early as 1950 that the economic activity of the state should focus on designing the regulatory systems for the economy and not on managing the economic processes .
Therefore , I am calling for a regulatory approach , in other words , measures taken by the state to influence the basic conditions of economic activity by means of general legislation .
It is not the state which creates jobs , but it must create a regulatory framework for job creation and this is what we need to focus on .
Competitiveness is not the start but the result of economic activity .
( DE ) Mr President , in the Europe 2020 strategy , we must tackle the roots of the current crisis .
Would it be sensible to introduce a monetary union along American lines without the necessary central controls on financial policy ?
The answer is ' no ' .
The euro must not be allowed to turn the EU into a huge redistribution mechanism based on mandatory solidarity .
If we are to have a monetary union , it must be a hard monetary union .
In addition , the free financial markets must not be regarded as being separate from the real economy in future .
Therefore , we need clear rules in the Europe 2020 strategy to deal with speculators and hedge funds .
The route proposed by Austria and yesterday by Germany , towards a financial transaction tax , which involves the taxation of profits made by the banks and the financial sector , is definitely the right approach .
Let us set an example to taxpayers and remind the financial sector of its obligations at last .
We also need to be braver in applying the rules to the Member States .
Any state which deliberately falsifies its figures must quite simply be ejected from the euro area .
Countries which commit fraud must leave .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Rehn , ladies and gentlemen , the Europe 2020 strategy presents us with a specific challenge .
Overall , we must focus on the small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
We should make sure that by 2020 , small and medium-sized companies have an average minimum capital quota of 20 % .
We need strong SMEs in Europe , because they employ two thirds of the workforce , produce 50 % of the gross national product and pay 80 % of the taxes .
The Commission has simply forgotten to include objectives to strengthen small and medium-sized companies in this programme .
Mr Rehn , I am calling on you specifically to take action on behalf of SMEs and to draw up objectives to strengthen the position of these companies and their employees .
( SL ) Today 's has been one of the better debates we have had on the financial and economic crisis , especially on how it has played out in Greece , and most of the contributions have essentially centred on the issue of how we should govern the European Union in the future .
However , I would also agree with what those speakers who seek to apportion blame for this situation have pointed out .
In my view , that is the right way forward and it is important that we take that route .
We need to ask questions about the responsibility of some European institutions , and not just the collective responsibility of the institutions but who exactly is responsible for what .
Might I therefore suggest that we call to task Mr Almunia , the ex-Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , for example , as he was quite critical towards some countries during his term of office and then the Greek issue came up .
I call on him to clarify his role in this story and , if he fails to do so , he should resign .
Mr President , firstly , the last few weeks have seen us put measures in place to deal with a financial crisis that has already occurred - a financial crisis caused by a lack of regulation , a lack of supervision and a lack of governance .
Today 's measures see us trying to anticipate these situations so that they will not occur in the future , and they are to be welcomed .
We all perform better when there is somebody looking over our shoulder .
That applies to governments as well as to individuals .
So I appreciate what has been done here today and I think that , from today on , we should also move on to dealing with the financial terrorists of the rating agencies and the speculators who are playing havoc with people 's lives and trying to bring down sovereign governments .
By taking that twin approach - dealing with governance at political level and dealing with the financial terrorists - we might be able to look forward to a better future .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Rehn , Mr López Garrido , we are talking today about common European economic governance .
I believe it is time for us to realise that the market does not have an independent value and that the citizens of Europe do not have to serve the market , but instead , that the market is there to serve the people , the 500 million Europeans .
I am convinced that we need consolidation and growth , but both terms are always connected with another aspect , in other words , socially responsible consolidation on the one hand and sustainable growth on the other .
We need confidence to achieve this and the people of Europe need perspectives .
However , we will only be able to offer them these perspectives if we can promise them that they will live in a Europe where they can share in the prosperity or put measures in place to ensure that this is the case .
In the Europe of the future , growth should not only benefit the few .
( FR ) Mr President , first of all , it is true that the sudden emergence and the depth of the Greek crisis have created a great deal of fear amongst our fellow citizens , fear which I think is legitimate .
Once again , this does not mean , as a Member has just said , that we should point the finger at Greece .
However , it is important , it is urgent - as we have been saying for some time now - to learn the necessary lessons so that we can build a more political Europe and move towards economic governance .
Economic governance should now be proposed as a matter of urgency .
I understand that the Commission is proposing to scrutinise the national budgets in advance .
Personally , I do not think we should switch horses .
What is fundamentally and urgently needed is European economic governance and not prior scrutiny of the national budgets by the Commission .
I think that this proposal would not only reveal constitutional inconsistencies but also create delays and complexity , which is definitely not what Europe needs at the moment .
What is urgently needed is European economic governance and not prior scrutiny of the national budgets .
( RO ) We all know that the Europe 2020 strategy was launched with the aim of helping the European Union emerge from the current economic crisis and prepare its economy for the new decade .
However , it is a serious matter that the Europe 2020 strategy does not even provide clear guidance on revising one of the most important common policies , namely , the reform of the common agricultural policy .
What makes this even more serious is that the reference to agriculture as a vital political instrument for achieving the EU 2020 strategy objectives was only made at the last minute .
This is why we are not even surprised that there is too little mention of agricultural policies in this document .
In this regard , the EU 2020 strategy includes some ideas about the future CAP .
However , it fails to assign it a key strategic role as part of a wider , global approach , taking into account the huge challenges posed by the prospects of a twofold increase in the global demand for food and of climate change .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , we do not have detailed analyses of the causes of the crisis in the euro area and the economic collapse in Greece , or of the dangers which are facing other countries .
Is the global financial crisis , which turned into the economic crisis , the cause of this situation , or are we dealing , here , with our own mistakes , neglect and lack of action ?
Let us say clearly and honestly that there was no coordination of financial policy in our Union .
The Stability and Growth Pact was not adhered to , and financial discipline was not maintained .
National budgets were often detached from reality : high costs , low incomes and lack of responsibility in governing the state .
I would like to ask : where was the European Central Bank ?
Where was the Commission ?
Let us say honestly that the problem lies in the fact that the Member States do not allow monitoring , evaluation and analysis of their budgets by EU institutions .
In recent years , we have concentrated mainly on the Treaty of Lisbon , and we have devoted less attention to economic union , and especially monetary union .
Mr President , we can really say that the European Union is facing a situation that is similar to others in its painful history that have been resolved favourably .
Europe is at a crossroads , just as it was after the Second World War , which resulted in the birth of what was not then known as the European Union .
It is what happened when the Berlin wall fell , when Europe was reunified , when there was , incidentally , a crisis in the European monetary system .
The response was to move forward and adopt a new treaty .
That is what we have done at the start of this century with the Treaty of Lisbon , and that is the only way out of a difficult situation such as the one that we are in .
The other alternatives , of course , are clearly populism or protectionism , and they are not an option .
The clear choice is to move towards a Europe that resolves its shortcomings , which were demonstrated when this extremely serious crisis arose , the like of which those of us here in this House have never known .
Therefore , the way to respond to the situation of deregulated markets ; a lack of competitiveness in the production system , which is having serious effects , with a social impact in terms of unemployment ; the deficit problem , with 20 countries out of the 27 having begun excessive debt proceedings ; and to an obvious lack of economic governance in the European Union , is not with less Europe but with more Europe .
That is the way to respond to this situation right now .
It should be said that there has been a reaction , that the European Union has reacted , and I refer to the previous speeches made by Commissioner Rehn and by me , in which we set out how the European Union has reacted .
At the moment , however , times are moving even faster , and I think that we need to be quicker in our response , which must help to resolve the fundamental problems that still exist in the European Union and have been put to the test as a result of this crisis .
I therefore want to propose that the European Union institutions and , of course , Parliament , cooperate on what I believe are the five aspects on which we need to move more quickly .
We need to speed up , round off or complete the task that was planned and begun in the correct way .
The first aspect is solidarity .
We need to deepen solidarity in the euro area , which is why the aid to Greece was so right and why the decision was so right to create this EUR 750 million fund - for a three-year period , so it is not yet completely permanent - to prevent possible difficult situations with public accounts or imbalances in public accounts .
I think that this is a fundamental element , and that it was right for the Council to propose it and adopt it on 9 May .
Alongside this there has been the action of the European Central Bank , which is intervening even now , buying debt from the Member States through the channels permitted by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Secondly , just today , Parliament has been examining a financial supervision package .
We have , to some extent , had a foretaste of this with the adoption of the regulation of hedge funds in the Economic and Financial Affairs ( Ecofin ) Council yesterday .
Therefore we can do it , of course we can do it .
This regulation has been produced , but we need to conclude the negotiations between the Council and Parliament on the whole financial supervision package as soon as possible .
This package also , incidentally , regulates the rating agencies , because - in relation to one of the suggestions or questions put forward by Members - the rating agencies are going to be subject to supervision by the European authority .
Thirdly , we need to commit to competitiveness .
It is therefore very important for the 2020 strategy to be adopted and launched in the European Council in June , and that it quantifies the targets , including on poverty and social inclusion , which have not yet been quantified .
It should be a strategy that establishes its own governance , and that governance should be much more demanding than the practically inexistent governance of the Treaty of Lisbon , as Mr Verhofstadt was saying earlier .
It should also use positive incentives to ensure that the targets are reached , such as using European funds or the Structural Funds .
The fourth important element is the package on the coordination of economic policies presented by Commissioner Rehn on 12 May , which was examined yesterday in the Ecofin Council .
It is absolutely essential that we comply with the Treaty of Lisbon when it states in Article 5 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) that the Member States are obliged - not that it is better or desirable , they are obliged - to coordinate their economic policies and employment policies , and may also coordinate their social policies .
Along these lines , we think that the implementation of Article 136 of the TFEU , established by this Commission proposal , is very important , and we also need to speed up putting it into practice .
Finally , I also believe that we must speed up the debate or the decision , which I think must be raised at the G20 , on a tax on international financial transactions .
I would ask Parliament to support these very significant and very important points , which would be a step forwards towards what is being described as the economic governance or government of the Union , so that a decision can be made on it as soon as possible .
We cannot wait much longer for this .
I believe that unity in the EU has never been as essential as it is now , and I am not just talking about unity between the EU Member States , but also between the institutions .
Parliament is a European institution , the Commission is a European institution and the Council is also a European institution .
The institutions need to work together at this time so that the move towards government of the Union and resolving the fundamental problems that have emerged can be consolidated .
Let this be an expression of our commitment to beginning a new political phase in the EU that is beneficial to citizens , who are expecting us to do so .
Do not expect anything else ; expect us to do precisely that .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you to the Members for a very serious and substantive debate reflecting the serious situation we are now facing in Europe .
Let me first say that I highly appreciate the broad support given by the European Parliament for reinforcing economic governance .
I also listened very carefully to Minister López Garrido and I thank the Spanish Presidency for their support and for the excellent cooperation on this issue as well as on other issues .
I strongly agree with those of you who have called for an economic union to complement the monetary one .
This is the way forward , and this is the critical lesson we must learn from the crisis .
We have to work on three strengths .
First of all , we need vigilance for the immediate resolution of the crisis in Greece and elsewhere in Europe .
We have avoided another Lehman Brothers happening on European soil , but we are certainly not out of the woods yet , and therefore we must continue with vigilance and determination to safeguard financial stability in Europe and thus protect the still-fragile economic recovery of our continent .
Secondly , we need to speed up , intensify and complete the regulatory reform of financial markets , bank levies , short selling and credit agencies .
It is much better to act at a European level and to do it as soon as possible .
We need to create a framework to correct the systemic errors of the financial markets and on this , I very much agree with Mrs Jaakonsaari and Mr Swoboda .
The market can be a good servant but it is a bad master and , as Mr Theurer said , we need to work for the basic idea of a social market economy in order to create a credible legal framework for financial markets through completing the regulatory reform .
Thirdly , we need to move on to decisions concerning reinforcing economic governance in Europe ; we need to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact through preventive fiscal surveillance ; we must put in place workable sanctions and they must be rules-based , as Mr Kallas said , and we need to get audit powers for Eurostat ...


( The President cut off the speaker )
Colleagues , this is the round-up of a very important debate .
I kindly ask you to try to keep your conversations to a minimum in this Chamber and respect the Commissioner 's final remarks .
The Commissioner has the floor .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am quite used to this but I would appreciate it if there were some interest in the House in what I am going to say .
Immediate crisis resolution , complete financial market reform and reinforcing economic governance : these are the three main tasks that we have to work on as soon as possible now .
I agree with Mr Marinescu , who referred to the Commission 's communication , and it is indeed more than anyone would have thought even half a year ago .
Please read those 10 pages of the communication on reinforcing economic governance in Europe .
Ten pages sounds short , but it is full of concrete initiatives .
This is heavy stuff , which is what we need in Europe .
I will come up with concrete proposals , legislative proposals , shortly .
We have taken the initiative and we shall move on .
Mr Verhofstadt said that we should not wait for the task force .
Well , we contribute actively and constructively to the work of the task force presided over by President Herman Van Rompuy but , yes , we shall use our right of initiative and we shall soon put forward concrete legislative proposals on reinforcing economic governance .
That is the essence of the Community method and that is what you have also been calling for today , and rightly so .
We do not have the luxury of time .
Instead , we must act without delay .
It is now absolutely essential to move on with these initiatives .
I therefore want to conclude by saying that we need an alliance of institutions to pursue these objectives .
The European Union has always produced the best results by an alliance of the Parliament and the Commission , so I count on your support in this regard .
It is also important that we bring the national parliaments on board by taking an inclusive approach , as Mrs Goulard has suggested .
But , most importantly , please recall that the European Parliament can help all of us in the European Union to act more quickly and with determination .
So please convince your constituencies and help us convince the Member States , and not only the Spanish Presidency , which is very convinced .
I trust you can , and will , make your voices heard , and I count on you taking a very strong and determined position in the Europe 2020 resolution in the course of this session week of the Parliament .
Dear friends , we need nothing more than full steam ahead to reinforce economic governance in Europe .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
If there is any lesson worth learning from the current economic crisis , it must be solidarity .
The fact that we are living in a globalised world where states ' economies are interdependent is nothing new .
However , countries have failed to abandon their isolationist logic where solutions to economic challenges are applied at national level , without any consideration of their impact on a wider scale .
The Lisbon Strategy failed due to a lack of political commitment on the part of Member States to take the lead in meeting its objectives .
In order to ensure that the EU 2020 strategy succeeds where the Lisbon Strategy failed , national reform programmes need to be monitored more effectively at European level .
Social inclusion must also be the main aim of good economic governance and state providers must learn to put people first before financial profit .
Little more than a decade after the creation of the euro , the warnings that we made at the time are being borne out .
The integration of economies at very different stages of development , with nominal convergence criteria , and individual monetary and exchange rate policies - all done to meet the needs of the great powers - has made the divergence crisis in the EU worse , leading to a situation whereby the peripheral economies are being called into question .
Faced with the crisis that they created , speculative financial capital 's decision-making centres - as well as their institutional extensions in the EU 's institutions and in governments - have just launched a new and different attack on the people and workers of Europe .
The lords of the EU have decided to usurp the budgetary powers of the Member States and they have done this not in the name of solidarity , which is a concept that is increasingly alien to them , but in the name of the stability that the great powers demand for the euro ; this is an intolerable affront to democracy and the sovereignty of the peoples .
This affront is accompanied by measures that are pure social terrorism , to which the national governments have meekly submitted .
The response to the so-called ' European economic government ' and to the increasingly antidemocratic nature of the integration process under way is being given by struggling workers all over Europe .
The necessary change will grow out of this struggle and its drive towards progress .
It is regrettable that the European Council and Commission have come here to state that they are taking measures to resolve financial and productive problems in a framework of budgetary discipline , and that they are presenting the creation of the task force as the ace in the hole for long-term measures .
Despite acknowledging the delays to the hesitant measures that they have taken , what the representatives of the Spanish Presidency of the EU and the Commission have reaffirmed here was that they are going to continue down the same path of capitalist integration and go further with it ; they are running around like headless chickens .
They prefer to ignore that the so-called ' temporary stabilisation measure ' and related fund will be nothing more than means of easing the pain of the financial crisis , used to conceal the fact that only a break with current policies and a change of course can bring social progress .
To this end , it is vital to prioritise production , quality public services , the creation of jobs with rights , salaries , living pensions , social inclusion , and the fair division and distribution of income .
However , all this requires true economic and social cohesion , with a clear strengthening of the Union budget , solidarity , more public policies and monitoring of the essential sectors of the economy by the state .
The way out of the economic crisis is a bumpy one and , in addition , the fiscal problems in Greece and other Member States have rocked the euro area .
These problems have raised the question as to whether Europe is capable of competing with the economic strength of the United States or China .
With its EU 2020 strategy , the European Union must , therefore , give an effective response to the economic and financial crisis and ensure that the economic capacity of this bloc of 500 million people remains competitive , in other words , that the EU27 do not fall behind their economic and political rivals .
The complexity of today 's challenges requires an integrated set of political instruments .
The EU must give primary importance to research and innovation in tackling challenges such as climate change and finding solutions to increasing global competition .
Since , in the period after the crisis , providing stimulus to growth and to job creation through research and innovation has become more important than ever , I suggest that this be set as the prime objective of the EU 2020 strategy .
We are justified in our concern , however , that the current budget does not adequately cover the monetary needs to meet the challenges of the 21st century .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I ask the European Commission to propose a new budget model that is bold and ambitious but also practicable , in order to guarantee the success of the EU 2020 strategy .
It is excellent that the Europe 2020 strategy should take account of young people .
It does not , however , go far enough .
The content is limited and pessimistic .
There are not enough concrete objectives and more of them are needed .
The figures for youth unemployment are alarming .
It is more than double than what it is in other unemployment categories .
Almost half of young people are unemployed in Latvia and Spain .
The longer people remain unemployed , the greater the risk , not just of poverty , but of exclusion .
Young people with just a little work experience are in a worse off position in the labour market , especially when it comes to staff cuts .
Predictions suggest that there will be a shortage of workers .
We cannot take it for granted , however , that the young people who are unemployed now will be able to meet this future need for workers .
It is not necessarily such a straightforward procedure to integrate long-term unemployed young people back into society .
We need concrete measures .
The young need jobs , not promises .
It is very important that we take responsibility for the future , and that children and young people remain at the core of all our plans .
Launching the EU 2020 strategy intended to harmonise the Member States ' economic and employment policies in accordance with common principles is perhaps the most important task facing us .
I welcome the fact that , in addition to the aspects concerning a sustainable social market economy , environmental protection and innovation , the strategy also places great emphasis on the fight against poverty and exclusion , in other words , on strengthening social cohesion , a prerequisite for the abovementioned aims and one of the basic pillars of the Spanish-Belgian-Hungarian Trio Presidency 's programme .
I consider it an important step forward that the European Commission has , in the second half of its integrated guidelines on the strategy , set out ambitious , quantitative targets in this regard .
Two of these targets are that 75 % of the working-age population should be employed and that the number of people living below the national poverty line should be reduced by 25 % .
For the purposes of monitoring and verifying progress in meeting these targets and an assessment of the struggle against social exclusion , it is worth considering the ' Laeken indicators ' adopted by the 2001 European Council at Laeken , along with their components that have , in the meantime , been expanded and defined in greater detail .
The Laeken indicators provide a detailed , reliable image of the position occupied by various social groups in certain segments of public life .
They have been used successfully in the past few years by numerous EU institutions , including Eurostat .
The main objective of the Europe 2020 strategy we are discussing should be to ensure economic growth in the European Union and to increase employment .
The measures we take should aim to increase economic activity and , in this way , to achieve sustained economic growth in the long term .
The indicators proposed by the Commission should be supplemented with an indicator of infrastructure saturation in the areas of teleinformatics , transport , energy , environment and social matters .
A well-developed infrastructure is the basis for the efficient functioning of the internal market which , consequently , leads to a growth in internal demand and economic activity .
In addition , a well-developed infrastructure is necessary to reduce differences in development between regions , leading to higher competitiveness and stronger economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Furthermore , I would like to refer to the employment indicator , which should be treated as a priority .
The steps we take should concentrate not only on structural reforms , but also on better preparation and use of the EU 's workforce and intellectual capital .
I suppose none of us is in any doubt that , along with implementation of the EU 2020 strategy , we will need stronger leadership and greater political responsibility from Member States , and also the European Commission , in the area of undertaking structural reforms .
In this context , it would be helpful to make a thorough evaluation of the EU 2020 strategy around five years after its introduction , in other words , at the end of the mandate of the current European Commission .
This would allow political responsibility to be strengthened and actions to be correlated with results .
in writing . - The implementation of the EU 2020 strategy should emphasise economic cohesion , meaning that it is still crucial to reduce economic disparities between EU regions which lag behind and those which are more prosperous .
I believe that the EU 's attention should be still largely paid to the principle of solidarity and instruments for levelling out the income disparities .
The focus should be kept on the EU regions which have suffered the most from the economic and financial crisis , and the specific situation of each of these regions should be assessed and appropriate reaction to the corresponding challenges should be taken .
In the Europe 2020 strategy , the agricultural sector is regarded like any other sector in our modern economy , and I welcome that .
I am a strong supporter of a Common Agricultural Policy which secures a level playing field for all Member States .
Fair competition in the internal market is a key to the competitiveness of European agriculture in the global marketplace .
There has to be a synergy between the 2020 strategy and reform of the CAP post-2013 - both have to focus on promoting intelligent green growth .
The Polish Minister for Culture and National Heritage , Bogdan Zdrojewski , has pointed out that one aspect which should be included in the Europe 2020 strategy is culture .
I must admit that the Minister 's argument is convincing .
For what he wants to do is to ' stress the need to make full use of the potential of culture and the creative industries - Europe 's intellectual and social capital ' .
The creative industries can be treated as something which will allow Europe to build a competitive advantage .
The Europe 2020 strategy was discussed at an informal meeting of Ministers for Culture in March this year .
As a result of that discussion , the Spanish Presidency called on ' the Council to recognise and use the creative potential of Europe through culture and its related industries in the 2020 strategy ' and on ' Member States and the Commission to work in their respective fields to achieve the objectives ... through representative initiatives related to innovation , competitiveness , the digital agenda and social inclusion . '
I hope these appeals will be heard and put into practice .
The large-scale economic crisis of the last few years has contributed to the failure of the objectives set by the EU at the start of this century .
This is the reason why it is important for us to identify the shortcomings of the Lisbon Agenda and focus on the positive results that have been achieved , as well as avoid the mistakes made in the past .
I believe that it is important for us now to be able to learn the lesson from the Lisbon Strategy 's failure and also to have the ability to take action to mitigate the impact of this in future .
I think that we have the great advantage of knowing the reasons for failure and of successfully avoiding them as part of the new EU 2020 strategy .
I would particularly like to focus at this point on strengthening multi-level governance .
We must involve local and regional authorities , as well as civil society , in the governance process since , according to EU statistics , local and regional authorities enjoy the highest level of trust among ordinary citizens .
At the same time , reinforcing the regional aspect is included on the list of the EU 2020 strategy 's priorities .
In this respect , I feel that the role of the future Cohesion policy is to identify and utilise specific local potential .
The report spells out exactly the important contribution made by the Structural and Cohesion Funds to Europe 's economic life and in achieving the objectives which have been presented to us as part of the EU 2020 Agenda .
Some ideas are worth highlighting : the key role played by cities in achieving these objectives and the role of research and education .
At the same time , I would like to express my dismay that the report is not more comprehensive , by including the role played by the rural development funds .
By revitalising rural economic life , modernising agriculture in Europe , helping to set up young farmers and spreading best practice , the rural development funds themselves make an important and welcome contribution to general economic advancement across the European Union .
Mr President , when outlining the Europe 2020 strategy , the Commission certainly managed to express many of the things we would wish for , yet they seem to have forgotten the present reality .
Several Member States , including Estonia , have made large cutbacks in the interests of balancing the national budget .
While fulfilling the Maastricht criteria for the euro area , Estonia has been able to stabilise its own budget .
At the same time , the consequences of the irresponsible budgetary policy which has operated hitherto in several Member States will obviously remain to haunt the European Union for some years to come .
Taking into account the current complicated economic situation , it remains unclear how the Commission 's strategy and the large projects incorporated in it intend to deal with this .
We could learn from our mistakes so that , unlike with the failed Lisbon Strategy , we would have a clear understanding of how we will achieve the objectives set , what kinds of financial resources we will be able to use , and whether our resources will enable us to achieve any of the objectives .
We do not need grand words at the European Union level ; every Member State , too , must strive to balance its budget and achieve economic growth .
While noting the structural changes taking place in the world economy , mainly the tightening of competition , and also the demographic changes in Europe , we must , instead of lofty but empty-worded ideas , focus on radically reforming the entire economic and social system of the European Union .
There is no other way to escape today from a welfare society which , although still comfortable , is quickly becoming uncompetitive and is therefore deteriorating .
We necessarily face some unpopular decisions , but by making these decisions today , we will adapt much more quickly to the new reality .
The economic crisis we are seeing is made up of a continuum of three crises that are linked to one another .
These are the financial crisis , the crisis in the real economy that followed it , and the crisis in the public economies that now comes from them .
These crises reveal the problems of European and global control and supervision : the economic crisis is largely a matter of a crisis in the system that once prevailed and in policy .
Both the world of finance and economic activity no longer know their limits .
It is not possible to manage activity that goes beyond its limits merely by resorting to national tools : we need regional and global rules .
As Mr Monti 's report , which appeared last week , states , a single ad hoc solution to each crisis is no longer enough for Europe .
We need predictive and longterm solutions and tools to help us manage future crises better than we do now .
Crucial here are the willingness and ability of the Member States to cooperate , and that still leaves a lot to be desired .
The Council deserves praise for its decisive action in its solution to the crisis that has threatened the whole of the Union , but not for its very prompt action : real action on the part of the Member States only followed because it had to .
The dawdling probably caused the situation to escalate .
One of the most obvious forms of action in the future is the need to reform the EU 's budget and ensure that national budgets are more closely in line with common objectives .
Financial controls and regulation are already being made more effective , but we still need more measures to ensure that all financial products are brought within the scope of effective and viable regulation .
Achieving a minimum 25 % reduction in the EU poverty level by 2020 is a target closely linked to the growth of employment among the population , which is a priority of the social inclusion policy .
This is the reason why an ambitious long-term strategy is required to combat poverty , with large-scale poverty reduction targets , whose ' key points ' must include an increase in the employment rate and in good quality jobs , including for women , young people , the elderly and poor workers .
This strategy must include measures aimed at achieving a work-life balance and greater involvement in an open labour market , which also means lifting access restrictions for Romanian and Bulgarian workers .
Another objective for reducing poverty is to establish a minimum income of at least 60 % of national median equalised income , a minimum salary of at least 60 % of the average salary in the relevant sectors at national level , along with a coordinated housing strategy in Europe .
All these measures must be accompanied by a clear timetable which is easy to implement and monitor .
One of the targets of the Europe 2020 strategy is to raise the employment rate among people aged 20-64 to 75 % .
Another is to fight poverty , which is intended to improve the situation of 20 million people .
These effects are much to be desired and very ambitious .
Our objective is a modernised labour market with a highly specialised , precisely oriented and very efficient workforce .
However , I think this will be difficult to achieve .
At present , 15 % of young people do not complete a full secondary education .
Over 30 % complete tertiary education but , in spite of this , do not find work because the qualifications they have gained do not meet the needs of the market .
The lifelong learning programme does not take account of the particular situation of people who do not possess a university education .
If , however , we are talking about the phenomenon of poverty , the same social groups are most at risk from it : the unemployed , the poorly educated and the elderly .
Such high unemployment is undoubtedly an effect of the crisis , which has caused , among other things , a drop in industrial production to the level of 20 years ago .
I support the Commission in its consistent efforts towards making the EU economy competitive in relation to the United States and Japan , but I suggest a more realistic approach in the exceptionally difficult financial situation .
The economic and financial crisis has made it necessary in many Member States to introduce cost-saving measures and to reform existing structures .
It has , once again , proven to be the case that a crisis can speed up the introduction of major changes and reforms .
The European Union must also consider in which direction it needs to move in order to meet the new challenges and enhance competitiveness , and whether it will be able to harmonise the interests of Member States more successfully and thereby strengthen internal cohesion .
I think that increased scrutiny of the particular situation in the new Member States during the process of implementing reforms is of crucial importance , not only for the success of the Europe 2020 strategy , but for the future of the Union itself .
I ask the Council to pay closer attention to this matter , especially with regard to structural changes in the areas of the common agricultural policy and the Cohesion policy .
Various aspects of the Lisbon Strategy in which there was little success can be identified .
Few of the established objectives were achieved , owing to various factors : amongst others , the lack of political will and of instruments - not least financial ones .
Local and regional authorities have also been pointing out that they were not involved enough , in either defining or implementing the strategy , and that European and national objectives did not match up well .
All this tarred the Lisbon Strategy 's programme with a credibility deficit , which is also a result of the fact that , while it was defined in great detail , the way in which it was executed was not responsible enough .
At a time of economic uncertainty , fragile public finances and high unemployment , the new 2020 strategy must be seen as an opportunity for reflection on the direction that the public wants for the European Union .
Nevertheless , it will be difficult to all be headed in the same direction while the Member States and their regions - particularly the outermost regions - remain as unequal as they currently are .
Perhaps it is also time for us to develop new types of economic , financial and even budgetary links , particularly in the euro area .
I am convinced that such links can make a decisive contribution to achieving the goals that are currently being set , particularly those relating to territorial cohesion .
In March , the European Commission presented a new economic development plan for Europe .
After the Lisbon Strategy , Europe 2020 is the next attempt at reviving the European economy .
However , this time the challenge is more difficult , because the plan has to be put into effect in a situation of economic crisis .
Smart growth , sustainable growth and inclusive growth are the priorities proposed in the new strategy , and they define where the EU wants to be by 2020 .
However , before we begin to act upon these priorities , we must draw some lessons from the economic collapse , which has spread permanently across the world .
The economies of Europe are strongly linked .
None of the Member States is able to mount effective resistance to global threats on its own .
When we act together , we are stronger , and therefore , to emerge successfully from the crisis and put the principles of Europe 2020 into effect , we need close coordination of the economic policies of all the countries of the European Union .
Not doing this may lead to another lost decade , a lasting halt to growth and mass unemployment .
The new strategy is based on very ambitious ideas .
In relation to this , we must make every effort so that this attempt to develop another economic strategy for Europe does not turn out to be just wishful thinking and does not end up like the Lisbon Strategy , which was supposed to transform the European Union into the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 , but which was a spectacular failure . Thank you .
Calendar of part-sessions
Before going ahead with the vote , I must inform you that , at its meeting on 12 May last , the Conference of Presidents decided , in accordance with Rule 134 of the Rules of Procedure , to hold an extraordinary session on Wednesday , 23 June from 15.00 to 17.00 .
At that session , the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , will have an opportunity to inform the Parliament about the conclusions of the European Council meeting to be held on 17 June , pursuant to Article 15 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , I rise on a point of order to enquire whether it is going to become a precedent that we are to find , on our desks in this House , items of information relating to motions to sign .
Regardless of the merits or otherwise of the case , surely it is to be deplored that we get junk put on our places over which we have no control whatsoever .
Can you please stop it ?
( Applause )
Mr Atkins , we take good note of your remark or protest or whatever it is .

( DE ) Mr President , on the subject of the same point of order , it is not enough for the President to take note of this .
I am calling for this to be stopped .
The Presidency has taken note to act accordingly .
However , taking note is the first step . After taking note , one acts accordingly .
Welcome
I am delighted to inform you that a delegation from the National Assembly of Kuwait is present in the House in the public gallery .
We would like to extend a warm welcome to the Kuwaiti Delegation .
( Applause )
The Delegation is led by Mr Ali Al-Debaqbasi and has come to Strasbourg to meet with Members of our House .
Relations between the European Union and the member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council , which this year is chaired by Kuwait , are very important for our Parliament .
We are convinced that a fruitful dialogue between the European Parliament and the Parliaments of the member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council will serve to strengthen cooperation between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council and thus encourage a swift and successful conclusion to the free trade agreement negotiations .
We therefore wish Mr Al-Debaqbasi and his colleagues a fruitful stay with us .
1 .
Request for consultation of the European Economic and Social Committee - Citizens initiative ( vote )
2 .
Request for consultation of the Committee of the Regions - Citizens initiative ( vote )
3 .
European Refugee Fund for the period 2008-2013 ( amendment of Decision No 573 / 2007 / EC ) (
4 .
Labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products ( recast ) (
5 .
Amending budget no 1 / 2010 : Section I - Parliament (
6 .
2008 discharge : EU general budget , Council (
After the vote :
It might be said we are in a significantly better position than last year , because then we did not grant discharge until November .
This time , we have the opportunity to do this six months earlier , although it should be said very clearly that Parliament finally has to convince the Council , firstly , to submit documents earlier , and secondly , to submit full documentation which really does cover the reporting period in question .
We have been given , for example , documents from the year before .
I think this situation - one of a certain crisis in relations between Parliament and the Council - points to the need for the European Parliament to put greater pressure on the Council concerning greater transparency over budgetary expenditure .
In view of the Treaty of Lisbon in particular , which increases the role of the European Parliament , this is simply indispensable .
7 .
Standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation (
Before the vote :
Today is a great day for European citizens and for European patients .
Through the adoption of this directive on human organ donation and transplantation , we are enabling treatment and a high quality of life at home and at work for thousands of people who are desperately waiting for a transplant .
I would like to thank all of the political groups who are intending to support my directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is not about politics , it is about people 's health .
Thank you very much indeed .
8 .
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2011 ( vote )
- On Amendment 4 :
Mr President , on a point of order , can you confirm that voting for Amendment 4 will succeed in reducing the number of times that we visit Strasbourg but , at the same time , will comply with our treaty obligation to hold 12 sessions ?
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I see from the voting list that you , Mr President , intend to declare Amendment 2 inadmissible .
I would like to ask you to reconsider this .
It is correct that Article 229 of the treaty requires a session of the European Parliament to take place on the second Tuesday in March .
However , this does not conflict with the amendment tabled by my group .
My group 's amendment aims to move the Strasbourg week from week 10 to week 11 .
That does not prevent you from holding a plenary session on the second Tuesday in March .
We want the Strasbourg week to be week 11 , but this does not mean that our amendment is inadmissible .
I would like to ask you to reconsider this .
You have read my mind , Mr Lehne , because I was going to proceed exactly as you had anticipated .
- On Amendment 4 :
( FR ) I shall be very brief , Mr President .
I think that , despite its ambiguous wording , Amendment 4 should have been declared inadmissible because it contradicts the treaties and , even more so , the interpretation of these treaties that has been given very clearly in a judgment by the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg , which provides that the current number of part-sessions in Strasbourg must be maintained .
I understand that some Members may disagree with this but , nevertheless , the treaties make this absolutely clear , and the judgment by the Luxembourg Court is equally clear as the law stands at the moment .
I must inform you before voting that the Presidency believes that Amendment 2 is in breach of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and , therefore , declares Amendment 2 to be inadmissible .
Article 229 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states that the European Parliament , and I quote : ' shall meet without requiring to be convened , on the second Tuesday in March ' .
The Conference of Presidents has approved a calendar proposal for 2011 that includes a part-session period from 7 to 10 March , thus complying with Article 229 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Amendment 2 proposes that this part-session period be postponed to the following week .
If Parliament were to approve this amendment , we would be in breach of Article 229 .
Accordingly , it is declared to be inadmissible .
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , I am sorry , but it is not as simple as that .
You have quoted Article 229 completely correctly , but it is not in conflict with our amendment .
Article 229 refers to a specific day , which is the second Tuesday in March .
Our amendment refers to the Strasbourg week as a whole , which consists of four days .
Therefore , it must be admissible to move this plenary week in Strasbourg from week 10 to week 11 .
That does not prevent anyone from holding a plenary session in Brussels on the second Tuesday in March .
As you say yourself , those are the terms of the treaty .
Mr Lehne , this amendment raises a question that could very well be open to different interpretations .
The Rules of Procedure stipulate that in these cases , the Presidency has the last word as regards the applicable interpretation .
For the reasons I have explained , the Presidency has decided to declare Amendment 2 to be inadmissible as a result of being in breach of Article 229 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
It goes without saying that any other interpretation merits respect .
However , as the Presidency has to decide , it has so decided .
Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , please excuse me for taking this opportunity to state that intervention is needed to provide direct flight connections without complications between Strasbourg and the European capitals for those who are currently forced to take three or four flights to reach Strasbourg .
I request that you take appropriate action .
( Applause )
9 .
Food additives other than colours and sweeteners ( bovine and / or porcine thrombin ) (
Before the vote :
Mr President , we do not need to take a detour with regard to this vote .
We can decide directly .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has recommended that plenary bans the sticking together of separate pieces of meat and therefore does not allow thrombin to be used as an additive .
A steak must be a steak and a ham must be a ham .
I am sure that this is what the constituents of all the Members of this House want .
Therefore , please vote in favour of our amendment not to include thrombin as an additive in our food regulation .

Mr President , thrombin is an additive that can be used to stick meat because the fact is that there are no technological or food safety problems related to its use . Indeed , it is already used in some countries .
The proposed amendment to the annex states that meat processed with thrombin can be sold pre-packed and labelled ; thus , the consumer will not be deceived , which is the basic principle of the resolution .
Whatever the case , I would like to ask the Commissioner if the European Commission can commit to products that contain thrombin not being able to be considered as imitations as a result of a suitable label , especially within the framework of the present study of the proposed Regulation on the food information provided to the consumer .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , when considering the authorisation of the food additive thrombin , the Commission 's collaboration with all Member States considered carefully all four requirements set out in the Regulation on food additives . These are : the safety aspect ; whether there is a reasonable technological need ; information aspects ; and advantages and benefits to consumers .
As regards safety and hygiene , EFSA evaluated the product and concluded that this additive raised no safety concerns .
As for hygiene , I cannot share the view that , in this case , the risk of contamination is higher than other products , for example minced meat .
Secondly , the reasonable technological need for this product has been established .
The enzyme preparation functions as a stabiliser in the final meat product .
This technological function is explicitly described in the Food Additives Regulation , which was adopted by Parliament .
Thirdly , information aspects and , in particular , the major concerns expressed in the report that the product would mislead the consumer .
Because we are fully aware of the possible risk of this , our proposal includes the following strict requirements - which , incidentally , go further than what is usually required for food additives .
Firstly , the product can only be sold pre-packed to the final consumer .
Secondly , the product must carry additional labelling and the term ' combined meat parts ' must be mentioned in the proximity of the sales name .
The consumer , therefore , will be well informed about the nature of the product .
Thirdly , the name of the enzyme and its animal origin must be mentioned in the list of ingredients .
I must emphasise that these labelling requirements are more stringent than the requirements that apply to products to which other ingredients , such as blood proteins and authorised additives , have been added for the same purpose but for which no additional labelling is required .
If more stringent labelling requirements are indicated , they will be considered .
The enzyme preparation in question is already used in several Member States as a processing aid without any labelling requirements .
Our proposal clarifies the situation and would oblige Member States to apply the required labelling rules .
As a consequence , the consumer would be better informed .
Furthermore , consumers , especially those who need more support , will benefit from the availability of cheaper meat products as better use is made of valuable meat pieces occurring during the processing of meat .
This additive is , in my opinion , an example of a food-sector development which will benefit consumers .
I see no reason for its suppression and hope very much that you will appreciate the entirely valid reasons I have set out as to why it should be approved .
I have made a commitment to Parliament ; I will not tell people what to eat .
But I will tell them what they are eating .
My position is in line with this commitment .
10 .
Action plan on organ donation and transplantation ( 2009-2015 ) (
11 .
Institutional aspects of accession by the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (
12 .
Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Kampala , Uganda (
Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
Mr President , in Amendment 3 , I simply want to replace the word ' notes ' with the word ' welcomes ' .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I have a high opinion of you and your chairmanship , but today I must make a protest .
You have given the floor to many Members , including twice to Mr Lehne and to Mr Gollnisch and Mr Fox .
I also raised a point of order concerning the calendar and it is an important point .
I would like to ask you to check whether Amendment 4 was unlawful .
I know that we rejected the amendment , but this is a question of principle .
The treaty does not refer to 12 plenary sessions per year , but to 12 monthly plenary sessions per year .
The amendment tabled by Mr Fox attempted to combine the August and the September plenary sessions in one week .
This is not about a September I and September II plenary session , but about an August and a September plenary session .
I would really like to clarify that this is unlawful .
The fact is , Mr Posselt , that this issue has already been voted on and we cannot therefore reopen it .
Nonetheless , you can rest assured that all the amendments to the calendar have been carefully considered by the Presidency .
Mr President , the Commissioner informed us just before the vote about the thrombin issue .
I wonder if you could ask him to provide the statistical data to justify his statement that it is economically beneficial to consumers to replace cheap meat parts and put them in beef-like products , rather than using them today in sausages and other products .
I would like him to show the statistical evidence that it is economically better for consumers , because they have so far not proven that .
The Commissioner also made a comparison with minced meat but we know that the hygiene standards for minced meat are not the same as for prepared meat products , so I would question if both statements by the Commissioner are correct .
If he misinformed Parliament , just before the vote , that would be a serious error .
I would like you to write a letter to the Commissioner to justify those statements .
We are not dealing with that item now , Mr Schlyter .
We are dealing with explanations of vote .
We are dealing with explanations of vote concerning the amending budget .
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) I voted against the report of Vladimír Maňka setting out the EU budget for this year .
At a time of economic crisis , when it is essential to reduce public expenditure , I do not agree with the European Parliament going in completely the opposite direction and sharply increasing its expenditure .
I do not agree with the European Parliament taking on an additional 150 staff , nor do I agree that Members of the European Parliament should receive additional new funding for their assistants , over and above what we already receive .
MEPs are to receive EUR 1 500 more per month this year under the Maňka report , on top of the additional EUR 1 500 per month under the Helga Trüpel report , which was passed yesterday .
This will cost taxpayers an additional EUR 13.4 million per year .
MEPs are already the subject of public criticism over the large sums of public money they receive .
A further increase will meet with justified public anger throughout Europe , and I have therefore not supported this proposal .
( PL ) In contradistinction to the previous speaker , I endorsed the amending budget .
It is not an amendment which only concerns accounting .
This amendment makes very good sense .
How is this ? Well , it comes from our new function as Parliament , as a body which has been given legislative powers .
The voters expect from us , MEPs , that we will be able to revise proposals submitted by the Commission , and that we will be able to revise proposals submitted by the Council .
Let us remember that each Commissioner has a team of hundreds of people working with them .
We have just one or two people to support us .
So it is not a saving which we are ostensibly talking about , here .
It is simply a response to a new function , a new role .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Maňka , for his superb report .
( BG ) Mr President , I wish to say that I supported the reports on the organ transplantation action plan , as well as the report on organ quality and safety .
However , I wish to say that there are great differences between Member States in this respect .
I therefore hope that this action plan and the report on quality and safety will help Member States to standardise their criteria and that they will be used as a benchmark for the future .
I am mentioning this because my country , Bulgaria , has 35 times fewer donors than Spain .
The problems in this area are linked to the whole chain of actions : from providing information to citizens to the actual transplant itself and post-transplant treatment .
We do not have a network of donor facilities .
There is insufficient equipment available , and we do not have a reliable donor database .
Bulgaria is not a member of Eurotransplant and post-transplant treatment cannot be provided either .
We do not have dispensaries built for hospitals which carry out transplants .
This is why I hope that this report and the decisions made by Parliament will provide some impetus and that this directive will be implemented as soon as possible .

( ET ) Mr President , I also voted in favour of this report , because it establishes uniform and binding requirements on quality and standards for human organs used in transplants in all the Member States , and thus guarantees the protection of donors and recipients while , at the same time , enhancing cooperation between the Member States .
With this report , we have given the opportunity of a better quality of life to those people - more than 56 000 European Union residents - who are currently waiting for an organ transplant .
( LT ) I also voted for this important document on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation .
It really would be excellent to establish and organise a community-wide organ transplantation system that would be transparent and clean and which would ensure quality and safety at EU level .
That is one of the most important objectives .
56 000 citizens are waiting for donors and this shortage of organs intended for transplantation also causes other problems , criminal activity and criminal problems .
Therefore , I believe that this document will contribute to the creation of a suitable system that will ensure safe and reliable organ transplantation methods .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of this report and I would like to congratulate Mr Mikolášik on the excellent work he has done .
I believe that today is an important day , because we have ensured that donors and recipients of organs will have consistent standards and greater safety .
I hope that this will also help to simplify the cooperation between countries and , therefore , I am very pleased that we have voted in favour of this report with a large majority .
Mr President , I very much welcome this report and the new European rules for organ donation .
If you die in another European Union country , why should your organ not be used to save life ?
If you need a rare match from another European country , surely these rules are sensible to implement .
Although it has not been part of the debate , I would also like to put on record my personal support for an opt-out rather than an opt-in system for organ donation .
Eighty per cent of European citizens say they support organ donation , yet only twelve per cent hold organ donation cards .
We have to close the gap .
Last year , 25 people in my East of England regional constituency died because they were on the organ donor waiting list but no donor could be found in time .
At Addenbrooke 's and Papworth hospitals in my constituency , we have European and worldwide expertise in lung and heart transplants .
Let our surgeons do their work .
Let our patients be treated .
This is the gift of life .
( DE ) Mr President , I can only agree with the previous speaker .
I am also very grateful that this report was adopted today with a large majority .
When we hear that 56 000 Europeans are currently waiting for a matching organ in order to be able to have a reasonable or a high quality of life , or even simply to survive , it is clear that we urgently need to harmonise and improve the standards and to make it possible for recipients to access organs from throughout Europe .
( PL ) I , too , was in favour of adopting this document , because it is certainly a step in the right direction .
However , while I agree with these principles , and that we are going to be concerned about the quality of donors and organs , I want to say clearly that this is only the first step in the right direction .
If we want to bring about a fundamental increase in organ donations , the Union needs a significantly broader campaign , and measures of a prophylactic and informative nature .
If this is not followed by promoting donation , it seems to me we will simply stop half-way .
Mr President , firstly , I would like to compliment you for the manner in which you handled this difficult topic here today , for explaining with courtesy the presidency 's interpretation and for sticking to your guns .
If you hadn 't done so , it would probably be the case that we would be still here .
I 'm not saying I agree with you , but I am not qualified enough to give an opinion so I took your opinion as gospel .
Secondly , I think the point made by Mr Salatto is valid , that we do need to have quicker and more accessible routes in and out of Strasbourg for the benefit of Members and others .
Also I would like to compliment the quaestors , including my own compatriot , Jim Higgins , and others who are working hard to get Frankfurt-Hahn designated the same as Frankfurt airport and Strasbourg , from the point of view of transportation .
Finally , I would like to say , regarding the accommodation charges here in Strasbourg , it would be helpful if they were the same for the weeks that we are sitting in Parliament as the weeks when we are not sitting .
All this would make Strasbourg more attractive because it is a beautiful city .
I understand why we are here , and once we are here , we are very happy .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on the transplantation of human organs .
Many people die every day because they suffer from organ failure and because organs are unavailable .
The EU can help patients waiting for organs across Europe and , as a consequence , save lives .
What we need is a well-coordinated system of organ donation and transplantation .
I would like to stress once again a very important point , which is a political point : namely , the principle of voluntary and paid donation for human body parts .
Reports from the World Health Organisation and the Council of Europe say that in several countries in the world , people are given a great deal of money to donate an organ .
There are even reports that people are deliberately killed to get their organs : for example , practitioners of Falun Gong in China .
We are also aware of cases in some countries where the medical risk for the donor is high and the transplantation is often done under very bad medical conditions .
So , finally , I would like to thank those who initiated the resolution we adopted today , and especially our rapporteur , Mr Mikolášik .
( SV ) Mr President , I and the other Swedish Conservatives have voted against the proposal to ban thrombin .
The Commission proposal calls for clear labelling of meat that has been stuck together in this way and states that it should not be permitted in restaurants and large-scale catering establishments as it is difficult , in places like this , to provide customers with clear information .
We must defuse the debate about meat glues .
Thrombin is naturally present in all meat .
To avoid thrombin , it would be necessary to stop eating meat completely .
The Commission 's experts state that thrombin is not hazardous to health , and this opinion is scientifically based .
The important thing is that food is safe and that consumers are not deceived .
Packaging must include accurate information about thrombin and the labelling must be clear .
Why should we ban thrombin ?
To do so would be to open Pandora 's box .
Is it really the job of politicians to manage our food ?
Where will it end ?
There are no grounds here for limiting consumers ' freedom and their right to freedom of choice .
When it comes to scaremongering politics about food that is not dangerous or unhealthy , I say ' that is enough ! '
Do not resort to a ban - tighten up the rules on labelling instead .
( DE ) Mr President , adopting the resolution banning thrombin in foodstuffs today simply means giving in to public opinion .
It is pure populism .
We are not fulfilling our responsibilities if we do not follow the scientific evidence .
What is the evidence ?
What is thrombin ?
Thrombin is a natural enzyme .
It forms part of the blood and therefore of meat .
All of us have a lot of thrombin in our bodies .
If we ban it as a food additive , can we continue to exist or do we have to gradually dispose of ourselves as hazardous waste ?
Of course , we must prevent consumers from being misled by products which look like and are designed to look like other products .
We can do this by using labelling in line with the new Regulation on the labelling of foodstuffs . We will be voting on the first reading of this regulation in June .
We have a number of rules that prevent misleading advertising and we also have additional labelling for special products .
The Commission has proposed exactly the same solution for labelling products in which thrombin is used as a glue .
I would like to point out that there is a large number of similar enzymes which are not banned and are still used .
( DE ) Mr President , consumer protection is a very , very important matter for me and therefore I am against consumers being misled or deceived in any way .
This is why I am fighting for better labelling of food imitations in the Regulation on the labelling of foodstuffs , for example .
I am calling on the Council to follow this approach , which is also supported by the Commission .
Today , we had to vote on glued meat .
Glued meat is meat which is glued together and sold as a high-quality product .
In my opinion , this should not be happening , in particular , when consumers are not aware of what is going on .
The decision today was not an easy one for me .
The Commission has proposed comprehensive labelling rules , but consumers may still be misled , because it is difficult to prove that a product contains thrombin .
This means that it may be used but not indicated on the label .
Therefore , I think a labelling requirement is not sufficient in this case .
I have now voted in favour of the resolution and of a ban on thrombin .
( HU ) Over the past eight years , the post-communist dictatorship in Hungary has systematically trodden underfoot the rights of Hungarians .
Among other things , it has unlawfully disbanded or had disbanded nearly every single street demonstration .
With the help of nearly 100 excellent lawyers and solicitors from the National Legal Defence Service , the majority of cases have already succeeded in obtaining legal redress before the Hungarian courts , but there have been cases , such as the now famous Bukta case , which had to be taken to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
The European Union is now scheming to dismantle , under the guise of accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , the smoothly functioning ' Strasbourg ' system .
I call upon every single Hungarian and European human rights organisation to scrutinise this process and protest against things such as the Atondo report that has been adopted today , which , as I say , undermines and dismantles the European human rights protection system .
It is Hungary 's historic responsibility to see that under the Hungarian Presidency , we do not speed up but rather prevent this dangerous process .
( LT ) This topic is actually quite sensitive and has been the cause of much debate in the European Parliament and , of course , in society at large .
I still think that banning some products or additives is not a solution and perhaps we have to agree with the argument that it is the consumer who has the right to choose , having full information , what he wants to buy and what he wants to consume .
On the other hand , controlling the process would be rather difficult .
In this day and age , the age of public awareness , with a lot of accessible information , we have yet to formulate wordings , unambiguous of course , that are acceptable to society , so that when people buy one product or another , they can obtain appropriate information and can understand what the product 's ingredients are .
Therefore , I feel there need to be more consultations with society , its education and perhaps additional consultations with scientists .
( DE ) Mr President , the citizens of Europe are right .
They like honest foods and they like honest politicians .
I respect public opinion of this kind .
We cannot simply ignore public opinion and we cannot simply dismiss it as populism .
That is not the case .
We must take notice of what our citizens are saying to us .
If our constituents and our citizens are of the opinion that real meat must be real meat and that it must not be made of pieces of meat glued together , then we must make sure that it is not possible for meat to be processed in this way .
This is why I have voted against allowing thrombin to be used as a food glue .
( DE ) Mr President , I have also voted in favour of the resolution banning the use of thrombin as a food additive , because the Commissioner 's arguments did not convince me .
We do not want glued meat in Europe .
Even if thrombin is an enzyme which is not harmful to health , by using it to glue together scraps of meat to make one large compressed piece of meat , the risk of bacterial infections must be significantly increased .
On the other hand , the decision made today was clearly for the benefit of the consumers of Europe and in opposition to the purely financial interests of the industry .
Consumers who want a steak must be given a steak and not a piece of meat that has been glued together .
This means that we must call on the Commission not to authorise the use of thrombin .
( DE ) Mr President , the current debate about so-called glued ham shows that some manufacturers do not deal honestly with consumers .
I would like all food to be labelled in such a way that it is not possible to mislead consumers .
If this enzyme is used , consumers must be able to identify its presence .
This is the basis for effective and fair consumer protection .
Our job is to ensure that mature consumers have sufficient information to make decisions in their own interests .
One final remark about glued ham .
The discussion with consumers about whether or not they want it has not yet taken place .
However , it is important that consumers at least know what they are actually eating .
( ET ) I welcome the action plan , and I therefore voted in favour of it .
This is a step in the right direction , and in order to solve this problem , we must all work together .
Measures at European Union level will help us to enhance the efforts of the Member States to ensure the quality and safety of organ donation and transplants , to deal better with problems resulting from the lack of organs and , at the same time , to make the system of transplants more effective .
The action plan which has been approved will give the Member States the opportunity to use the ten priority measures set out by us as a basis for putting their national action plans together in a better way .
We are obliged , within the scope of our competency , to give help towards high-level health protection across the entire European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , acceding to the European Convention undoubtedly represents progress in the process of political integration of the European Union , whose system of protection for fundamental rights is supplemented and strengthened by the integration of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in its primary law .
We consider it enormously important and politically significant that Parliament has been granted the right to appoint and send a certain number of representatives to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe during the election of judges to the European Court of Human Rights .
Let us remember that promoting the respect of human rights is one of the fundamental values of the European Union enshrined in a founding treaty .
I would also like to underscore how important the Convention and the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights are in outlining a new legal and regulatory framework that lays down guiding principles in the areas of civil liberties , justice and internal affairs , above all , in light of the new forms of integration and harmonisation implemented with the enactment of the Treaty of Lisbon and the adoption of the Stockholm Programme .
It will also provide an additional legal instrument which makes it possible to present a claim before the European Court of Human Rights against an action or a failure to act by a European institution or a Member State in the context of the implementation of European law .
Lastly , it is significant that Article 1 of the European Convention will extend protection not only to citizens of the European Union and other persons within its territory , but also to persons who fall within its jurisdiction , even if they are outside the territory .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of the European Union acceding to the European Convention on Human Rights because , as clearly summed up by the Atondo report , it represents progress in the process of European integration .
This means a step towards political union and a strong sign of the coherence between the Union and countries of the Council of Europe and its policy on human rights which will strengthen the credibility of Europe in non-European countries .
Lastly , it represents a clear desire to harmonise the issue of human rights and fundamental freedoms at a legislative and court level .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union is an international entity with its own legal personality for the first time .
I hope that signing the convention is only one of the first steps towards the affirmation of the European Union as a single body at the level of major international negotiations .
( FR ) Mr President , I am somewhat more reserved on this issue than the Members who have just spoken .
Indeed , on the face of it , the idea of European law being subject to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights is quite attractive .
It was rather alarming that national laws could be , as it were , censured by that Court .
However , the way in which national jurisdictions implement these laws means that European law falls outside their scope , all the more so as this European law , in my country , France , for example , takes precedence , under Article 55 of our constitution , over French domestic law .
One might wonder , however , if this procedure will not result in a certain kind of overlap .
Indeed , on the one hand , European law is rarely directly applicable within Member States ; it first has to be transposed into domestic legislation by means of secondary legislation .
On the other hand , the Court of Justice of the European Union in Luxembourg has shown itself to be keen to protect fundamental rights .
It has also assimilated this legislation as arising from the adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The fear is that we could end up with rather protracted proceedings , particularly if , as some people are demanding , a preliminary question procedure is instituted .
This is why we would have preferred a distinction to have been made between compliance with the rules and participation in the appeals procedure .
( FR ) Mr President , at a time when such tragic events are occurring in Thailand , we cannot fail to appreciate the need for major crimes committed against civilian populations to be referred to the courts .
However , past experience is less encouraging than was indicated yesterday by several Members during the debate .
At the first International Criminal Court , those who , without any military objective in mind , decided to use napalm to burn the civilian populations in the city of Dresden ; those who decided to use atomic radiation to burn the civilian populations of Hiroshima and Nagasaki ; and those who decided to kill the imprisoned Polish officers by shooting them in the back of the neck were the judges , when they really should have been included among the accused .
The track record of the former International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , particularly in the Milosevic and Šešelj cases , is not very satisfactory either .
With regard to the creation of a trust fund , if Member States are required to make a contribution , does this mean that Europe will compensate the victims of genocides that take place outside its territory ?
There are hundreds of thousands , indeed millions of people who fall into that category .
I fear that we are getting mixed up in something rather complicated .
The idea of ultimately pursuing the defeated parties , in spite of the assurances that they are sometimes given , in order to reach a peace agreement would be to risk indefinitely prolonging conflicts ; this is the basis for our reservations about this report .
( LT ) I voted for the resolution on the Review Conference on the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court that will begin at the end of this month in Kampala , Uganda .
In 1998 , 138 countries agreed to set up the International Criminal Court and adopted the Rome Statute on the basis of which this court has now been operating for 7 years , since 2003 .
The time has come to review the Rome Statute , in particular , the so-called ' temporary provisions ' on which we were unable to agree in 2002 .
All EU Member States have ratified the Rome Statute .
However , some of our partners , like the United States , Russia and China , have not joined the International Criminal Court in its work .
With its resolution today , the European Parliament again calls on these countries to ratify the Rome Statute and cooperate with the International Criminal Court .
In the 21st century , people responsible for genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes should expect not only moral condemnation from the international community but legal sanctions .
These crimes cannot be committed with impunity .
Written explanations of vote
As well as speeding up decision-making mechanisms , the Treaty of Lisbon is contributing to the fight against the democratic deficit , strengthening the roles of national parliaments and the European Parliament , and stressing the exercise of European citizenship .
The introduction of the legislative petition , or the ' right to citizens ' initiative ' , as it has been named , is of particular importance .
This new device allows a group of not less than one million citizens of a significant number of Member States to request a legislative initiative from the Commission on the areas in which the Union has jurisdiction .
The Treaty of Lisbon also makes clear the importance of consultations and dialogue with other institutions and bodies , with civil society , and with social partners , amongst others .
I believe that Europe must be the citizens ' Europe , and this can only happen if we make it more democratic and transparent .
In this context , I agree that the opinions of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions should be sought .
It must seem that I am repeating what I expressed yesterday in relation to Mr Tavares ' report .
However , the refugee problem is a European problem and it cannot be left to the national governments to manage , also in light of the geographic and economic differences .
Therefore , I am in favour of creating a fund at a European level .
The creation of such a fund must serve two purposes : it must support the refugees who arrive in our countries , frequently on our coasts , searching for help , as well as support the states which receive the greatest numbers of these desperate individuals due to their geographic location .
In fact , the problem is , and must be , a European problem , and it cannot be left to the management of certain states .
I hope that the fund is only the beginning of a path which approaches this entire issue from a more European perspective and in a spirit of solidarity .
The proposal for a directive on the indication by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products is part , along with the two proposals on the energy performance of buildings and the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency , of the Energy Efficiency Package tabled by the Commission in November 2008 .
We voted for it because we achieved , through the agreement signed between Parliament , the Council and Commission , the introduction of an improved labelling system .
Labels will contain more energy consumption information for domestic appliances and energy-related products .
In future , this labelling will also be applied to energy consuming products intended for industrial and commercial use , which was not possible until now .
Last but not least , any kind of future advertising promoting the price or energy efficiency of categories of products will also have to indicate their energy class .
Providing accurate , relevant and comparable information on the energy consumption of energy-related products will allow consumers in future to make correct , effective choices , thereby reducing both their energy consumption and household expenditure .
in writing . - The Maltese Government is against the Recommendation for second reading relating to labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products .
The reason given is that the nationalist government disagrees with an explanation statement in the report , in particular , with the following phrase : ' Construction products with significant impact on the consumption of energy shall also be included in the priority list . '
It is inconceivable that the government does not agree to this recommendation on this basis .
It could have agreed with the recommendation and made it clear that it had a reservation in relation to construction products which have a significant impact on the consumption of energy .
It is useless for the government to appear to be in favour of energy efficiency when the potential savings could be achieved through the labelling of some of these products given that buildings account for 40 % of total energy consumption in the European Union .
I supported this important report .
The Energy Labelling Directive has a crucial role to play in the achievement of the EU energy efficiency target of 20 % by 2020 .
In that context , it holds a key role regarding the fight against climate change , the transition of the EU to an efficient , sustainable and competitive economy , and the strengthening of Europe 's energy security .
Our aim is to pave the way towards a win-win situation , both for the market and consumers , by guaranteeing every consumer access to proper information and full awareness about the impact of his or her choices .
In that framework , the agreement reached on the Energy Labelling Directive brings important added value .
I welcome the position fought for by the European Parliament to maintain the model of an A-G scale which , according to a survey , is the most convenient and easiest for consumers to understand .
There is an obligation to include reference to the energy label in all advertisements of energy-related products , where price- or energy-related information is disclosed .
I am pleased that the new legislation on the energy efficiency of products has finally been approved , following a lengthy tug of war between the European Parliament and the Council , and that I had the honour of being the shadow rapporteur for it on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party .
The benefit is an expansion of Class A , allowing distinctions to be drawn among the constantly increasing group of energy-saving appliances while , at the same time , motivating producers to make appliances that are as energy-saving as possible .
It is also important that there has been no expansion in the number of classes indicating the energy consumption of individual products , as this preserves the clarity of the whole concept .
The fact that there are seven levels in total enables consumers to make effective decisions when selecting goods on the market , thereby helping to reduce energy costs through their behaviour .
As far as new features are concerned , involving the obligation to indicate the energy classes of products in advertising materials , I consider it a success that this obligation has been restricted to advertisements providing information on price or information connected with energy consumption .
Fortunately , the view prevailed that the regulation of advertising is acceptable only in case of need , and only to the extent necessary .
I voted for this recommendation because it effectively contributes to helping European consumers choose products that use less energy or which indirectly lead to less energy being used .
By adopting this recommendation , the European Parliament is playing a part in moving closer to the realisation of the EU 's objective of a 20 % improvement in its energy efficiency by 2020 .
It is a balanced text that ensures a situation that is beneficial to the market and consumers .
This initiative , like the one that we voted on yesterday regarding the energy efficiency of buildings , is part of a legislative package on energy efficiency that was presented by the Commission in November 2008 and has been the subject of ample debate in Parliament , the Commission and the Council ; agreement is now , at last , being reached on the final text .
As well as having positive consequences for the environment , for the European objective of reducing emissions and for the creation of an economy that is sustainable in energy terms , this initiative also has the benefit of making consumers central to the decision .
With the correct markings and labels , consumers will know exactly what they are getting , and will be able to make their choice on the basis of criteria such as energy efficiency and the lowest environmental cost .
The directive on energy labelling guarantees that consumers will receive adequate information thanks to the compulsory inclusion of the energy label on advertising .
In the context of European efforts at achieving energy efficiency and the reduction of energy consumption levels , along with combating climate change , it is vital to mobilise the public for this cause .
This can only be achieved if consumers are given clear and effective information about energy consumption on products that have been bought or are for sale .
In this way , all members of the European public will become involved in combating climate change .
It is absolutely crucial to ensure that consumers are able to consciously make more environmentally friendly choices .
As this directive now ensures , levels of energy consumption caused by products are assessed against universal criteria and parameters , which allow them to be compared in a way that can be trusted .
This will also lead to an increase in confidence in technical assessment and the information content on labels .
This directive therefore has an important role in consolidating the 2020 strategy and , in particular , a 20 % improvement in energy efficiency by 2020 .
Following this vote , products that consume energy - whether for domestic , commercial or industrial purposes - must start displaying the new energy efficiency label , in order to better inform consumers .
There is provision in the directive adopted today by the European Parliament for new types of energy efficiency classification to be added , and it is also applicable to products that consume energy in an indirect way , for example , windows .
Some of the details are debatable , for example , that the format of the label will be based on the a classification between A and G - like that already used for refrigerators - with the possible addition of the classifications A + , A + + and A + + + : in principle , the total number of classes must be limited to seven .
Nevertheless , the directive seems to have the right objective .
All advertising for products related to energy or their respective prices must include a reference to the energy efficiency classification .
The information provided must guide consumers towards choosing products that use less energy or indirectly lead to less energy being used .
Therefore , in future , any advertising of the price or energy efficiency of refrigerators , washing machines or cookers must indicate the product 's energy class .
Much is said about the rights of consumers to know about the food , domestic equipment or home fittings which they buy .
We want to know where they come from and how they were made , and the nutritional values of food .
At a time of climate change , we all want to protect the environment and prevent abnormal weather , and this is why , when choosing food and everyday products , we are guided by ecological principles .
It is important , therefore , that consumers are aware of how much energy is used by their equipment , and so I think they have the right for that information to be on the labels .
Putting this information on product labels also shows the high quality of the product .
It can then be a tool to protect the European market from cheap imitations of equipment from outside the European Union .
I voted for this report .
It acknowledges that the market is incapable of ensuring rational energy use .
This is a definite concession that echoes our arguments , which I welcome .
I also welcome the stated desire for top-down harmonisation of energy saving labelling .
However , it is regrettable that total ecological footprint labelling for products is not proposed anywhere , when we really should implement it as quickly as possible .
The EU is continuing to look determinedly for the best ways of ensuring excellence in energy efficiency , so as to succeed in improving its efficiency by 20 % by 2020 .
This new labelling is very pertinent to consumers because it allows them access to better information so that they can make fully informed choices and recognise their impact in matters concerning energy efficiency .
This means raising consumers ' awareness of the energy-related consequences of their choice whenever they look to buy any consumer item which has a bearing on energy efficiency .
The approval of this directive is especially important in increasing this awareness .
That is why I voted as I did .
If the energy consumption label is introduced , then provided that it can be easily understood , it will soon become clear whether or not it will really be accepted by consumers .
Public awareness has changed in this area and consumers are paying greater attention to energy efficiency classes , in particular , in the case of electrical appliances .
Of course , the public procurement process should set a good example in this respect .
However , the Member States must not be told that they can only buy products with the highest performance levels which belong to the highest energy efficiency class .
Particularly at a time when everyone will have to make savings , the purchase price will increasingly be the deciding factor .
The choices available in the public procurement process are not specified clearly enough , which is why I have abstained .
I voted for the resolution on the labelling of products using electricity and the provision of basic information for consumers .
We talk about citizens ' rights very often in Parliament - about the right to choose , the right to obtain accurate and correct information .
In my opinion , that is particularly important in all areas of life .
In this case , the question is related to the electricity used and its efficiency .
People actually want to save energy , and mostly do this for two reasons , economic and environmental .
Today , with advances in technology , when residents have the opportunity to choose electrical appliances according to their energy efficiency , the labelling that we agreed on will also help consumers make a conscious choice and contribute to energy saving ( hence , citizens would choose more economical devices ) and the preservation of the environment .
I have no doubt that when Europeans see the amount of energy consumed , they will take advantage of the opportunity to choose more efficient and environmentally friendly products and equipment .
Once more , I welcome the position of the European Parliament on this issue and I hope that such decisions will become a real stimulus and opportunity to realise our commitments to reduce energy consumption by 2020 .
The recast of the Energy Labelling Directive has the objective of extending the scope of labelling information to include all products that impact on energy consumption , and not just household appliances .
The directive is part of the Sustainable Consumption and Production and Sustainable Industrial Policy Action Plan and it also envisages initiatives for incentives and public tenders .
It will establish the fulcrum of an integrated and sustainable policy from an environmental standpoint .
One of the most controversial points concerns which type of scale to use in order to avoid causing consumer confusion : it was decided to maintain the A-G closed scale layout after the European Parliament adopted a resolution in this regard .
Energy efficiency ratings will also be displayed on all advertising containing information on energy consumption or which relates to product prices .
For the reasons I have explained , I agree with the stance taken by Mrs Podimata and I support the report .
The Energy Labelling Directive has a crucial role to play in the achievement of the EU energy efficiency target of 20 % by 2020 .
It provides an important added value for both the market and consumers .
In essence , the mandatory mention of the energy label in advertisements will put an end to misinformation of end users , giving them all the information they need to make fully informed choices .
At the same time , due to Parliament 's strong insistence , the introduction of an open scale layout was avoided , and maintaining the model of an A-G scale , which has a well proven value for consumers so far , was guaranteed .
Moreover , the addition of a general review clause allows for a thorough re-examination in the light of technical evolution and consumer understanding of the label no later than 2014 .
This is one more safeguard that the consumer friendly scale as decided so far will remain unchanged at least until the review takes place .
I therefore repeat with conviction that I fully support the directive .
I voted for this report since , by including all energy-related products , the amendment to the Energy Labelling Directive will help achieve a EUR 4 million reduction in the transposition costs for each implementation measure updated and produced from scratch ( if regulations / decisions are going to be used instead of directives ) .
It will also produce additional reductions amounting to approximately 78 Mt of CO2 emissions .
In future , energy efficiency labelling will also be applied to energy consuming products intended for industrial and commercial use , such as cold storage rooms , retail display cabinets , industrial cooking appliances , vending machines ( selling sandwiches , snacks , coffee , etc . ) , industrial motors , energy-related products , including construction products which do not consume energy but ' have a significant direct or indirect impact ' on energy saving , such as windows and door frames .
One important factor in ensuring the proper application of this directive is guaranteeing every citizen access to correct information and making consumers aware of the impact of the choices they make .
Providing accurate , relevant and comparable information on the specific energy consumption of energy-related products will help end users make a decision based on energy-saving potential in order to reduce energy bills in the long term .
I have voted in favour of the Podimata report because I believe that Parliament and especially the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) have managed to make extremely important advances with respect to a crucial directive in order to achieve the energy efficiency goal that we have set ourselves .
Not only have we managed to maintain the A-G scale , which is known and accepted by European consumers , but we have also ensured that it is now obligatory to refer to the energy label of the domestic appliance as long as information on the price appears in its promotional or advertising material .
Another noteworthy aspect introduced by Parliament is the obligation on the Commission to draw up a priority list of products related to energy , including some building products that are liable to be subject to measures in the future .
Lastly , given the leadership role that must be taken by the public sector , I feel it is essential for administrations to acquire products that belong to the highest energy efficiency class in public tenders .
Mr Maňka 's report proposes several amendments to the European Parliament 's 2010 budget .
I voted for this report and , in particular , for its provisions that follow on from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December 2009 .
These include the EUR 1 500 per month increase in Members ' assistance expenses .
This increase is designed to enable Members to meet their new responsibilities arising from the Treaty of Lisbon , which considerably extends the scope of Parliament , thereby increasing its influence on EU decision making .
Parliament needs to increase its expertise in legislative issues in order to match the Commission and the Member States .
We represent European citizens and we need appropriate resources if we wish to defend their interests .
I therefore supported this report .
I believe that those committees that will have a heavier workload as a result of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon need to be reinforced .
This justifies an increase in the number of staff for Parliament 's and the groups ' secretariats in these committees .
However , I do not share the view that we MEPs need more staff .
I would have liked to have seen Parliament 's resources being enhanced first and foremost by means of redistribution and measures to improve efficiency , so that the total budget is not increased .
In my capacity as group leader for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament in the Committee on Budgets , I also took this line in the negotiations with Parliament 's Presidency .
In the end , we reached a compromise to the effect that the proposal will now be partly funded through savings of EUR 4.4 million .
I still believe that further savings should have been included in the proposal but , as I played an active role in the negotiations , I have chosen to support the compromise achieved .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon will probably cause a significant rise in Parliament 's workload .
In particular , this will lead to more extensive use of the ordinary legislative procedure , which will affect around 95 % of legislation passed .
Additional budgetary and human resources will allow Parliament to fulfil its new role as colegislator on an equal footing with the Council .
in writing . - I supported the Maňka Report on the European Parliament amending budget while conscious of the sensitivity of increasing budgets at a time when citizens are being asked to take pay cuts and jobs are being lost .
The work in the European Parliament has undoubtedly increased because of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I intend to use the additional assistance allowance to provide opportunities to young students who are applying in large numbers to my office for work .
This will provide them with remuneration for their work and valuable work experience , which I hope will assist them in their future careers .
However , I believe that the Parliament needs to review our entire working methods and staffing with a view to improving our effectiveness and efficiency .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given Parliament new responsibilities .
This situation means additional administrative work , with the result that Members need qualified staff to act as advisors .
This new situation leads to two problems : increased costs arising from the need for more assistants , and additional space required in order for them to carry out their duties in good working conditions .
This situation leads to increased costs .
That is difficult to explain during this time of crisis , but if Parliament 's work is to be excellent , it needs to have the necessary financial and human resources .
That is why I voted as I did .
I voted in favour .
Though it may seem like demagogy or another caste privilege , in this case it is not .
The budget amendments are important and essential for the proper management of the life and activity of Parliament .
In our role as Members of the European Parliament , following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , we are called upon to undertake an important and conspicuous task .
For that reason , we need collaborators and experts who are able to support us in our jobs on a daily basis .
To do that , resources are needed .
On behalf of myself and , I hope , my fellow Members , these resources will translate into even more effective , efficient and focused work .
in writing . - I have signed and voted in favour of the Amendment rejecting the tranche , together with 16 other MEPs from my group .
The reason is that I think it is of utmost importance to show that there is a substantial group of MEPs that do not agree with the increase of the assistance allowance in these times of economic crisis .
At the final vote , however , I voted in favour of the Maňka report , amending Parliament 's budget for 2010 .
I voted against the report on the supplementary budget for 2010 .
To increase MEPs ' secretarial allowance by EUR 1 500 per month in order to deal with the increased workloads resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon is not tenable .
For one thing , you cannot employ highly-trained experts for EUR 1 500 per month .
Secondly , there is no room for new staff in Parliament 's working premises .
Thirdly , a proportion of the budget funds have been taken out of the reserve specifically for building investments .
Fourthly , for the 2011 budget , Category 5 , the rapporteur , Mrs Trüppel , stated that secretarial allowances cannot be guaranteed in future until a proper evaluation of their benefits has been carried out .
I regard this increase as an unjustified supplement for the already high secretarial allowances , and this at a time when the unemployed , single women , pensioners and other socially vulnerable groups are forced to make sacrifices to rescue the floundering euro project .
In the name of transparency - which the citizens require - and thoroughness , I do not believe that the Council is free of its obligation to be publicly accountable for the funds made available to them .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur 's decision to postpone the decision on discharging the Council 's accounts until the requested additional information has been submitted .
I am in favour of postponing the decision on releasing the implementation of the EU general budget for the year 2008 in the interests of transparency and rigour , not only in terms of implementing the budget , but also the complete supervision of the use of all the EU 's financial resources .
This will afford the Council the opportunity to obtain all the explanations and information that are needed to secure a decision endorsed by Parliament .
This is absolutely vital to the credibility of the European institutions and public confidence in those in power .
Moreover , basic respect for the policies and guidelines set out by the democratic bodies and those legally empowered to do so is at issue here .
The procedure of discharging the budget is important and the legislative and supervisory activities of Parliament hinge upon it .
There is no need for me to reiterate the supervisory power that Parliament has acquired over the years , thanks not least to the budget procedure , on the basis of which it has managed to turn the mandatory reporting of European institutions into a serious and important matter .
Moreover , it is also fundamental in light of our citizens ' expectations .
In a moment of crisis such as the current one , European citizens are called upon to make extraordinary sacrifices and we must carry out careful and accurate supervision of bureaucratic or actual management expenses .
For the reasons I have stated , I commend the rapporteur and express my agreement .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of this report because I agree with the fact that we need to postpone the discharge decision until October .
I voted against granting discharge in respect of the Council 's budget for 2008 because the Council 's financial documentation was received in Parliament too late .
The European Parliament 's supervision of the Council 's finances is far from being transparent .
The last few years have seen a steady , rapid rise in the need for organ transplants within the European Union .
Although the organ shortage remains the biggest challenge facing us at the moment , there are far more difficulties related to the different transplant systems which are used in Member States .
Back in 2008 , the European Parliament called on the European Commission , via the resolution adopted in April , to draft a directive setting out the legal framework for guaranteeing the quality and safety of organ donations within the European Union .
The Commission subsequently tabled a proposal for a directive , which was debated in the European Parliament , featuring the following three objectives : guaranteeing quality and safety for patients across the EU , providing protection for donors and facilitating cooperation between Member States .
We voted in favour of the compromise reached between Parliament , the Council and Commission as we need common quality and safety standards at EU level for the procurement , transport and use of human organs .
This is a measure which would facilitate organ exchanges , thereby benefiting the thousands of patients in Europe who require this kind of treatment every year .
I support this report on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation .
With the growing demand for transplantations in the European Union and the imbalance between patients waiting for a transplantation and the number of organs donated , we must aim to avoid the commercialisation of donation and end the illegal trade in organs .
Therefore , we must apply strict legislation on living donors , ensure the transparency of organ waiting lists , lay down strict confidentiality rules in order to protect the personal data of donors and those waiting for organs and define the responsibility of doctors .
Once common quality and safety standards have been adopted , opportunities would be created for cross border exchanges of organs and this may increase the number of transplantations performed .
Over the last five decades , the transplanting of organs has become an effective practice at global level , which has contributed to improving the quality of life and increasing the life expectancies of sufferers .
This directive establishes rules that seek to guarantee high standards of quality and safety for organs of human origin to be transplanted into human bodies in order to ensure a high level of protection of human health .
The directive introduces quality national programmes in which standards and practices for transplantation processes in the Member States are defined .
It also sets out in more detail the procurement process and issues connected with the information system .
The traceability and protection of donors and recipients also deserve special attention .
I voted for this report because of its three main objectives : guaranteeing quality and safety for patients at Union level , ensuring the protection of donors , and facilitating cooperation between Member States .
Nevertheless , I would stress that organ transplantation programmes must comply with the principle of voluntary and free donation that is already enshrined in previous legislation on substances of human origin , and that they may not be sold in any way .
in writing . - UKIP believes that ongoing development and improvement in the present international network of facilities and agencies for organ exchange will not be facilitated by the EU 's attempts to invade and regulate this network .
On the contrary , organ donation in the few countries where there are many donors is likely to decrease if demand for organs from the many countries where there are few donors becomes EU-mandatory .
In the latter countries , moreover , the resulting relative abundance of foreign organs is likely to reduce organ donation there also .
Consequently , UKIP members voted against this report .
I voted for the draft directive on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation .
The directive covers every stage in the chain , from donation to transplantation , and provides for cooperation between Member States .
An effective transplantation system is not solely based on donors ' support ; it also depends on the correct use of information and on the quality of the network by which this information is shared .
I therefore supported the idea of creating a European database recording information on the organs available , and a pan-European certification system guaranteeing that the human organs and tissues available have been obtained legally .
Indeed , in order to ensure equal access to available organs , organs must only be donated on a voluntary basis , without any payments being made .
However , the principle of not paying for organs will not prevent live donors from being compensated , provided that such compensation is strictly limited to covering the costs and loss of income resulting from the donation .
Such a transparent , safe and efficient donation system is the only way to combat organ trafficking .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a directive for the following reasons : 1 .
Given the increase in the demand for organs for transplant and the limited supply , which often forces patients to look for solutions to their problem beyond national borders , the adoption at Community level of a common framework of quality and safety standards and the creation of a network of cooperation and mutual information is absolutely necessary in order to improve protection for public health and services to patients .
2 . National provisions governing the procedure for providing consent to organ donation , the selection of which remains within the jurisdiction of the Member States , are not affected in any way .
On the contrary , the proposal for a directive supplements the current legal framework of each Member State of the EU with specific quality and safety standards throughout the transplantation procedure and , at the same time , safeguards the absence of any form of speculation and maintains the anonymity and security of both the donor 's and the recipient 's personal data .
3 . Cases of organ smuggling are minimised and the confidence of potential donors is strengthened , with the ultimate aim of increasing the number of donors .
4 . Sanctions are imposed by the Member States in the event of infringement of legislation relating to the identity of donors or recipients .
I voted for the report on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation because it contributes to reducing operation waiting lists for European sufferers .
It is unacceptable that , on average , 12 people awaiting a transplant die every day .
This directive will make it easier to donate and transplant organs , and to exchange them between EU Member States , benefiting thousands of ill Europeans .
The scarcity of organs for transplantation has been feeding a terrible market which affects , above all , developing countries , but which has also hit deprived people in Eastern Europe .
I share the concern about the difficulty of combating this brutal trade and the terrible consequences for those who are deprived , forcibly or not , of their organs : savage drops in quality of life , chronic illnesses and , in many cases , death .
The adoption of common rules puts the European Union on a level footing in terms of requirements and responsibilities , in stark contrast with the sombre situation that I have described .
Patients and donors will have the conditions , the monitoring and the protection that those involved in the trafficking networks lack , and the Member States will start to be able to cooperate effectively .
I agree with the rapporteur that donation must be altruistic , voluntary and free , and that the donor must only be compensated for any expenses or inconvenience incurred by the donation .
I believe that my colleague , Mr Mikolášik , has proposed some good alterations that improve the basic text ; they must be a result of his medical training and of his following this subject since the last parliamentary session .
I warmly welcome this proposal and its three principal objectives : guaranteeing quality and security for patients at Union level , ensuring the protection of donors and facilitating cooperation between Member States .
In general in the EU , there is a broad social consensus on the donation of organs for transplantation .
However , due to differences of culture and tradition , and also in the system of organisation , there are different approaches to this issue within the Member States .
I would stress that although the directive is aimed at maintaining or attempting to achieve harmonisation between quality and security measures , it should not create an extra administrative burden for Member States .
Rather , it should have a sufficient margin of flexibility for it not to jeopardise good practice already in force .
The proposal for a directive establishes common , binding standards of quality and safety for organs of human origin to be transplanted with the aim of guaranteeing a high level of protection for health throughout the EU .
I endorse the Commission 's view that , in principle , organ transplantation programmes must comply with the principle of voluntary and free donation .
Organ donation must always be free and protected from any potential commercialisation .
Organ transplants are an important means of rehabilitation for patients suffering a multitude of illnesses that cause fatal problems with certain organs .
The number of transplants in the European Union has increased , saving and prolonging many lives .
However , there are still long waiting lists for transplants .
Our vote in favour expresses our agreement with the improvements that the report is attempting to introduce to the current situation .
As well as affecting quality and safety , and the establishment of procedures necessary for procurement and transport , these improvements relate to the protection of donors and recipients , with due consideration being given to ethical principles and the principle of non-remuneration .
The report also tackles the worrying issue of human organ trafficking in a way that seems appropriate to us .
This aim of this directive is clear enough : we need more organs for patients and greater cooperation between Member States on this matter and on combating organ trafficking .
Hence , one of the foundations of this new legislation provides for the designation of a new authority in every Member State to be responsible for compliance with the standards of quality and security of organs .
These authorities will be responsible for ensuring the quality and the safety of the organs ' throughout the entire chain , from donation to transplant , as well as in evaluating the quality and safety during the recovery and subsequent monitoring of the respective patient ' .
The new directive also requires that the health professionals involved in all stages of the chain , from the donation to the transplantation or removal of the organ , are properly qualified .
Specific training programmes should thus be developed for these professionals .
For all these reasons , we voted for this proposal .
That is why I voted as I did .
Organ transplants can save lives , but only when a healthy organ from a matching donor is transplanted .
Unfortunately , errors have occurred repeatedly in the past and this makes it even more important to impose quality and safety standards in this area .
It is also worth discussing the fact that Muslims are often happy to accept organ donations , but are not generally prepared to donate organs because of their religion .
I hope that the report will contribute to improving quality and safety standards , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
I would like to express my vote in favour of Mr Mikolášik 's report .
The growing need for available transplant organs in a context of cross-border exchange and of significant differences among the transplant systems adopted by the various Member States requires cooperation and common regulations regarding the quality and safety of the organs to be strengthened .
The proposal for a directive aims to reach those objectives by focusing on increasing the number of transplants and raising the quality standards in donation , procurement , control , preservation , transportation and transplant processes .
Furthermore , by underlining the principle of voluntary donation as against the trade or trafficking of organs , it aims to guarantee the rights of donors and patients .
Though recognising the need to harmonise quality and safety measures , the rapporteur stresses that the directive must not create an additional administrative burden for Member States and must leave enough flexibility without jeopardising current good practices .
Transplantation is one of the medical specialities to have made the greatest advances over recent decades , having achieved considerable success and been crucial in saving human lives .
Paradoxically , it is the success of transplantation that , alongside other factors , has led to a growing number of candidates for organ transplants , resulting in long waiting lists .
It has also led to the human drama associated with the death of approximately 12 patients per day in the EU because they have not been able to receive the organ that they need in order to survive .
One of the ways of minimising this problem is exchange between EU Member States , ensuring greater compatibility between donor and recipient in a shorter space of time , and with a higher level of organ acceptance .
This exchange , however , requires quality and safety standards across the board , as set out in the present directive by Parliament and the Council .
The Mikolášik report on safety and quality standards for organs intended for transplantation thus makes an important contribution towards minimising organ shortage and towards basic protection of the health of the recipient and the living donor .
Therefore , we are pleased to welcome it .
Organ transplants are , without a doubt , one of the most positive aspects of progress in the health field but , at the same time , they open up a whole series of problems in terms of donors ' and patients ' rights which must be dealt with from the ethical , social , legal and economic points of view .
It is a question of setting a positive process in motion to address the major imbalance between the need and the numbers of organs available , without compromising the principle of free , voluntary donation in order to prevent all forms of commercialisation and illegal trafficking and whilst guaranteeing the quality and safety of organs for transplantation with measures that ensure both confidentiality and traceability .
The adoption of common quality standards is definitely a step forward that should be welcomed as part of a framework in which the World Health Organisation may make a further contribution .
However , in setting up a European database , it is important that we take care not to introduce an unnecessarily rigid framework or create additional red tape that would hamper the current perfectly proper and efficient process .
in writing . - I have supported the report lead by our colleague Mikolášik on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation as one very urgent measure to improve the life expectation of more than 60 000 people in Europe waiting for a transplant .
I hope this will make the possibility of getting an organ easier and safer .
I voted in favour of the report , even though there is a need , concurrently with the desired effort to unify safety and quality requirements for human organs designated for transplant , to focus , in particular , on increasing donor numbers in the various Member States , taking account of the different national traditions of health systems .
It is therefore necessary to assess this area rigorously from the perspective of the subsidiarity principle .
in writing . - I was pleased to support this report in its vote through Parliament .
Within the South-East of England , many families are victims of the harsh reality of a poor supply of organs necessary for transplantation .
This report assists in creating an EU cross-border standard which could provide for an improved supply into and across the EU so that such families of individuals needing organs can be more easily met with the hope of relieving their conditions .
I endorsed the report on standards of safety in organ donation because the report includes the principle of non-commercialisation .
The European Parliament has adopted the calendar of plenary sessions for 2011 .
It is regrettable that EUR 200 million per annum of the taxpayer 's money continues to be spent on holding 12 sessions in Strasbourg every year .
The hypocrisy is reaching the point of not even complying with the provisions of the treaties , as compliance would involve one session per month ; in other words , including August .
The city of Strasbourg 's legitimate aspirations could be satisfied with the permanent establishment here of one or two European Union agencies .
As for the ' circus ' , it should obviously stop !
Furthermore , it makes no sense at all for the European Parliament to meet 48 days of the year in a city that does not have direct air links with virtually any of the Member States ' capitals .
Moreover , those that do exist have commercial timetables , which are totally incompatible with parliamentary activity .
It is easy to see that the Heads of State or Government who make these decisions travel by private aeroplane and do not lose dozens or hundreds of hours per year getting to Strasbourg .
I have voted against the proposal made by some Members to divide a session into two parts , but still to hold it during one week .
Apart from the fact that this does not make much sense , the additional travel to and from the session would give rise to unnecessary costs and waste valuable working time .
in writing . - I enthusiastically supported the amendment proposing to reduce the two September part-sessions to one .
I am a big supporter of the idea of reducing the two EP seats to one , based in Brussels .
Thus , I support any initiative willing to get rid of the Strasbourg seat .
Issues relating to the diet and health of citizens are extremely sensitive and must be considered carefully and objectively .
This is very much the case with the debate on the authorisation of food additives such as thrombin .
Thrombin is a product obtained from animal ( cow or pig ) plasma and blood , the cicatrising characteristics of which are used by the agri-foodstuffs industry to reconstitute meat from a collection of pieces .
This additive fulfils the four criteria in Regulation ( EC ) No 1333 / 2008 permitting authorisation : food additives must be safe when used ( confirmed by the EFSA in its opinion of 2005 ) ; there must be a technological need for their use ( very useful as a stabiliser ) ; their use must not mislead the consumer ( use limited to pre-packaged and , hence , labelled , products ) ; they must be of benefit to the consumer ( end product is stabilised ) .
In addition , the overwhelming majority of Member States are calling for thrombin to be authorised .
Therefore , since this additive does not pose any risk to health and has a genuine role to play in food preparation , there was no reason to oppose its authorisation .
I voted for this resolution which aims to limit the use in food products of food additives that are dangerous to health , in order to protect the health of consumers .
Legislation currently in force in the European Union provides that food additives may be used if they benefit the consumer .
As the benefit of thrombin ( ' meat glue ' ) for consumers has not been proven and the process of binding together many separate pieces of meat significantly increases the risk of it being infected by bacteria , I did not support the proposal to allow this food additive to be used in bovine and pork products .
In addition , we must strive to prevent such products processed with ' meat glue ' from finding their way into public establishments serving food .
I voted for a resolution calling for thrombin not to be used in meat .
Thrombin is used as a ' glue ' in reconstituted meat .
It poses a health risk because the process of bonding together various scraps of meat significantly increases the surface area of the foodstuff , which might have been contaminated by bacteria .
In addition , reconstituted meat could mislead consumers seeking to buy meat .
I voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution because it does not allow the use of foods containing additives and enzymes , such as thrombin , which are dangerous and compromise the quality of food and consumer safety .
The guarantees given by the Commission are not only unconvincing and inadequate but they also increase my concerns .
Furthermore , the Commission , and the Commissioner himself , have not demonstrated the necessary awareness , as their recent decision on licensing modified potato crops also demonstrated .
The motion for a resolution expresses some reservations regarding the use of an enzyme preparation based on thrombin with fibrinogen as a food additive for reconstituting food , which seem pertinent to us .
The Commission 's proposals do not fully deal with these reservations .
Doubts persist about the possibility of using unpacked reconstituted products , compromising the information necessary for the consumer , as well as about the effectiveness of banning the use of these products in restaurants and other public establishments that serve food .
The Commission itself recognises that using this food additive could mislead the consumer as to the state of the final food .
The proposed solution to the above problem of labelling could not be enough , on its own , to deal with this problem .
Doubts also persist about the process of binding foods ( for example , cold bonding without the addition of salt and without any subsequent heating process ) and the safety of the final product .
We therefore deem this resolution worthy of our support .
I very much regret the adoption of this resolution relating to the banning of porcine and bovine thrombin .
The text has no valid scientific basis .
Indeed , this food additive , which is derived from animal plasma and blood and used in pre-packed products to bind together separate pieces of meat , meets all the health and safety criteria laid down by the European Food Safety Authority .
It is authorised in France and used in black pudding , for example .
It is therefore important that we take our decisions on the basis of data provided by the scientific community , not by the media .
Let us not lapse into an emotional debate !
What is more , the labelling requirements for products containing this additive are said to have been tightened up .
The word ' thrombin ' and the phrase ' reconstituted meat ' have seemingly been clearly shown .
It has therefore never been a question of misleading consumers who have , by all accounts , been better informed .
Food safety and the health of European citizens are at stake .
This issue has been raised within Parliament with the case of thrombin , which is a food additive used to ' glue ' pieces of meat together , and whose final appearance could easily mislead the consumer .
The agri-foodstuff industries were already pleased to see how widespread the use of this substance had become , and for good reason , because it enabled them to get rid of their meat waste and sell poor quality pieces cheaply .
Although the European Food Safety Authority has concluded that thrombin is harmless , I am still very sceptical about these results .
It is time to show the Commission that food safety and health are major concerns for the European Parliament .
I therefore welcome this vote rejecting this enzyme .
We cannot allow the consumer to be misled by the food additive thrombin .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1333 / 2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 regulates the conditions for food additives throughout the EU and we are now looking to include new substances in it .
The key thing here is the safety of substances .
In order to meet consumer demand for food which looks attractive , the food industry has created substances which are added just for the sake of better appearance .
One such substance is thrombin , which is obtained from edible parts of animals and which is not harmful to health .
Its role is to combine individual pieces of meat together into a single meat product .
Although not in itself a health hazard , parading individual pieces of glued together meat as a single piece of ham does constitute consumer fraud .
Although such products cannot therefore be banned on health grounds , they must be labelled very clearly and unambiguously by indicating not just the name of the product but also its effect and a clear designation of the processed product .
A piece of meat glued together with thrombin should never be allowed to go on sale as ham .
Instead , it must be clearly labelled as ' combined meat parts treated with thrombin ' . I will vote in favour of the approval of this substance only if we impose a clear labelling requirement .
in writing . - Today , Parliament voted to block the authorisation of thrombin for use as a food additive .
We do not yet know the implications of this decision , which is based on an emotional reaction to reconstituted meat and not on a scientific assessment of the actual enzyme .
The Commission outlined with clarity that EFSA , the European Food Safety Authority , has said there are no safety issues involved .
The Commission proposal would allow for the product to only be used in pre-packaged , clearly labelled combined meat products with the name of the enzyme , thrombin - a blood-derived product - in the list of ingredients .
Thrombin is currently in use .
After today , it will not be permitted .
Is it wise for this Parliament to start telling people what to eat , rather than providing them with information of what they are eating ?
There is a difference .
The proposal which suggests that thrombin from cattle and / or swine should be included on the list of food additives approved in the EU does not give us any guarantee that this substance has a clear benefit for consumers , and ultimately this may mislead consumers .
In addition , the whole process of linking different pieces of meat greatly increases the surface that can be infected by pathogenic bacteria .
That is why I voted as I did .
When we consider , in particular , the increasing levels of allergy and food intolerance and the fact that knowledge is constantly being developed in this area , it is imperative that we regulate additives .
Precisely because of past scandals , it is very important that we prevent any possibility of the consumer being misled .
More research into the safety and tolerability of some additives , such as aspartame , would be desirable , but that was not the subject of this resolution .
I voted in favour of it , nonetheless .
I voted against the resolution , given that thrombin is an additive which cannot be regarded as a cause for concern in terms of food safety .
Meat which includes thrombin among its ingredients could be sold only with a label stating ' combined meat parts ' , while all the ingredients could be specified on a label , in compliance with legal provisions .
This would allow citizens to make an enlightened choice , which means that we cannot mislead anyone .
The use of thrombin could enable many citizens to purchase food products at much more affordable prices .
I oppose the use of thrombin to glue together different pieces of meat which are mostly of poor quality .
Consumers are generally unaware of what is happening and are being deceived .
On the other hand , the process does not result in any demonstrable benefits for consumers .
Therefore , I have voted in favour of this report , which aims to restrict these practices .
I voted for this resolution , because I agree that the use of food additives must be moderate - it is only justifiable when it gives consumers an added benefit .
However , I do not think that thrombin ' meat glue ' complies with this requirement .
If the use of ' meat glue ' became very widespread , it would be difficult for consumers to differentiate between real meat and pieces of meat that have been glued together .
As mentioned in the report , that increases the risk of meat infection .
Thrombins would only be of benefit to producers , who would be able to bring to market pieces of meat that would otherwise be of no use to anyone .
In all other industries , the European Union is trying to combat fabrications and forgeries .
I do not think that the food industry should be an exception .
Consumer protection is one of the European Parliament 's key tasks and European consumers are often unaware of the nature of the products they are about to buy and the additives they contain .
Clear , accurate labelling is obviously important .
However , in our capacity as legislators , we need to ban certain harmful products .
Whilst the draft Commission directive would not permit the use of thrombin as a food additive in meat products served in restaurants or other public establishments serving food , there is , however , a clear risk that meat containing thrombin would find its way into meat products served in restaurants or other public establishments serving food , given the higher prices that can be obtained for pieces of meat served as a single meat product .
The labelling conditions contained in the draft Commission directive would fail to guard against the creation of a false or misleading impression to consumers as to the existence of a single-meat product , and therefore there is a risk that consumers would be misled and prevented from making an informed choice in relation to the consumption of meat products containing thrombin .
I therefore agree with the opinion expressed in the resolution .
I am very pleased with today 's vote banning thrombin .
This is a victory for consumers .
The problem with thrombin is not the risk it poses , although there are indeed health issues involved , but its misleading nature .
If not forewarned , it is impossible to distinguish with the naked eye between a piece of meat and another piece of meat that has been bound together with thrombin .
This is highly deceptive .
Using thrombin amounts to placing on the market a sort of prefabricated , artificial meat .
I cannot quite see how this benefits consumers .
Yet thrombin is used in some Member States without consumers being informed .
The attempts to deceive consumers and to try to hide the truth must stop .
That is not the way for manufacturers to restore consumer confidence .
in writing . - I fully support this resolution and the efforts to prevent the authorisation of thrombin or ' meat glue ' .
It is misleading for consumers because they assume they are buying a single piece of meat , but in fact , they are buying many pieces which have been artificially stuck together .
Industry has argued that use of this substance enables them to create cheap meat for people who cannot afford more expensive products , but the fact is that it enables industry to sell smaller pieces of meat for more money , not less .
And there is a health issue here too - many small pieces of meat glued together have a much larger surface area than a single , larger piece , which significantly increases the area on which pathogenic bacteria can thrive .
Misleading the consumer is contrary to EU law , and there are potentially serious health implications of using this substance in this way .
This is why I voted in favour of this resolution .
I welcome the adoption , by a ' very close margin ' ( 370 votes , when we needed 369 ) , of this resolution , which protects consumers from the use of thrombin as a ' meat glue ' , as a food additive used to glue pieces of meat together to form a single meat-based product .
Its use is clearly potentially misleading for consumers , in terms of the quality of the product they are buying .
Therefore , it was my duty and that of my fellow MEPs to strongly oppose the Commission 's desire to allow the agri-food industry to use a new food additive of which the sole purpose is ultimately to generate further profits , with a concomitant disregard for the protection of the rights of consumers , one of which is to receive accurate information about the food which they choose to consume .
In 2008 , the European Commission presented an Action Plan on Organ Donation and Transplantation ( 2009-2015 ) , with the aim of strengthening cooperation between Member States in the area of organ donation through the exchange of good practice .
The actions stipulated in this plan complement the European legal framework set out in the Commission 's proposal for a directive on organ donation and transplantation .
Although there are significant differences between Member States in terms of practices and results at the moment , the exchange of information and good practices will help countries where there is a low availability of organs to improve the level of availability .
The other actions stipulated in the plan are aimed at improving the quality and safety of organ transplantation , creating a register for evaluating post-transplant results and setting up an organ exchange system for particular cases , such as children or adults with special requirements .
I voted , along with my other fellow MEPs , to support such a plan which will facilitate cooperation between Member States as well as combat illegal organ trafficking .
Organ transplantation has proved to be indispensable in treating certain illnesses and provides the possibility of saving lives , offers a better quality of life for patients , and has the best cost / benefit ratio when compared with other replacement therapies .
Nonetheless , there are several issues of concern as regards this therapy , not least the risk of transmission of diseases , the limited availability of organs , and organ trafficking .
There is currently no database covering the whole of the European Union which contains information about organs intended for donation and transplantation or on living or deceased donors , nor a pan-European certification system which provides proof that human organs and tissues have been legally obtained .
I voted for this report , because I welcomed the Action Plan on Organ Donation and Transplantation ( 2009-2015 ) , which was adopted by the Commission in December 2008 , and which sets out a cooperative approach between Member States in the form of a set of priority actions based on the identification and development of common objectives and the evaluation of donation and transplantation activities through agreed indicators that might help to identify benchmarks and best practices .
Every day , 12 people die in Europe because they have not received a transplant in time , and 60 000 people are currently waiting for a transplant .
However , no organ exchange network has yet been set up at the EU 27 level .
Although a directive will soon see the light of day , I voted with the other Members for a resolution which sets out the direction to be taken by Parliament on this issue .
There are three particularly sensitive issues : cross-border exchange of available organs ; information for citizens ; and the identification of potential donors .
The resolution suggests , for example , that citizens ought to be able to use the Internet to declare themselves ' willing donors ' .
An organ transplant is the last chance of life for thousands of people every day .
In Romania , 13 people on the transplant waiting list die every day due to the lack of donors .
Romania is faced with a tragic situation at a time when there is one donor per million inhabitants .
The Romanian Parliament has tried to introduce the concept of presumed consent , but public debate has blocked this step being taken every time .
The measures taken by the Commission and European Parliament only serve to bring some order and make recommendations in a system which is important in terms of saving as many lives as possible .
Funding the medical system does not come cheap .
Removing organs and carrying out the transplant , along with post-transplant care , are expensive medical procedures , but every Member State must make efforts to encourage this type of medical procedure .
In fact , Spain provides a good model because it has successfully achieved the highest number of donors in the European Union .
There is no need to reinvent the wheel as long as we have , right in our midst , a successful model .
In these circumstances , measures such as promotion through this directive , cooperation between Member States and organ exchange , all tightly regulated by quality and safety standards , give us encouragement .
The figures speak for themselves .
Approximately 60 000 patients are on a waiting list for a transplant in the Member States of the EU .
Every day , 12 of them die .
The availability of organs differs considerably from one Member State to another : from 33.8 dead donors in Spain to 1 dead donor in Romania per one million people .
The divide between the supply and demand of organs is exploited by criminal gangs , who have turned it into a profitable business .
The Commission 's action plan on organ donation and transplantation has added value , because the proposed strengthening of cooperation between the Member States will increase the availability of organs , improve the efficacy and accessibility of transplant systems , improve the quality and safety of organs , and promote exchanges of best practices .
I voted in favour of the Perello report because it proposes a package of priority actions which maximise the percentage of donations by donors , introduce the concept of transplant coordinators in all hospitals in which organs may be donated , target public awareness , improved knowledge and skills on the part of health professionals and patient support groups and the introduction of registers to facilitate the evaluation of post-transplantation results .
The number of organ donations and transplantations is increasing every year in Europe , thus enabling thousands of lives to be saved .
However , a large number of obstacles still need to be removed because there are still not enough organs to meet demand .
Every day , 12 patients die in the EU due to a lack of compatible donors .
Organ donation varies considerably from one Member State to another ; there are , for example , 34.6 donations per million inhabitants in Spain , compared with 0.5 in Romania .
What is more , organs are rarely exchanged between Member States .
Parliament 's vote is the first step towards a European network to meet the requirement for swift , flexible and safe transplantations on the model of Eurotransplant ( Austria , Benelux , Croatia , Germany , Netherlands and Slovenia ) and Scandiatransplant ( Sweden , Denmark , Finland , Norway and Iceland ) .
The EU is also going to extend the use of the donor card which , although supported by 81 % of Europe 's citizens , is held by only 12 % of them .
The Member States must ensure that no payment is made for donations and must guarantee their traceability and confidentiality , in particular , to combat transnational trafficking of organs .
The discrepancy in the percentage of organ donors in the various countries of Europe seems to suggest that the systems in some Member States are more effective than in others .
These systems must , therefore , be studied and , potentially , adopted by those that are shown to be less successful .
In an area that is closely tied to the health and lives of the public , in addition to adopting best practices , it is clearly becoming necessary to optimise resources and make collective use of the European scale of organ availability .
It makes no sense for someone to die because there is no organ available in their country , when it may exist and be available elsewhere .
I support the idea that anyone who encourages or promotes so-called ' transplant tourism ' must be punished , as must recourse to organ trafficking networks .
Punishments must be particularly severe for health professionals or insurance companies .
I would stress the need for effective monitoring both of recipients , and of altruistic and voluntary donors , to whom the public cannot fail to owe a debt of gratitude .
Currently , there are 56 000 patients in the EU waiting for a suitable organ donor , and every day , 12 people die waiting for a solid organ transplant .
Organ transplantation represents the only therapeutic alternative for patients in the final stage of liver , heart and lung failure .
There is , however , a considerable discrepancy between the number of patients waiting for a transplant and the number of patients who actually receive one .
This discrepancy is the result of a shortage of organs for transplantation in comparison to need .
The inclusion of more patients on waiting lists coupled with the minimal increase in the number of patients receiving transplants is reflected in the longer waiting time .
This time is expensive and can have a negative impact on patient survival rate and the rate of success for implants .
The Commission 's proposal to draw up a European plan of action on donation and transplantation for the 2009-2015 period sets out an approach for cooperation between the Member States , formed around a set of priority actions , and is based on the identification and development of common objectives , the establishment of consensual , quantitative and qualitative reference indicators and parameters , regular reporting and identifying best practice .
The transplantation of organs can deliver many years of full and healthy life for people who would otherwise frequently need intensive care , or would simply not survive .
The number of transplants in the European Union has increased , saving and prolonging many lives .
However , there are still long waiting lists for transplants .
There are currently 56 000 patients waiting for a suitable organ donor in the European Union , and it is estimated that every day , 12 people die while waiting for a solid organ transplant .
The number of deceased organ donors , on its own , is not enough and the number of live donors fails to satisfy requirements .
Furthermore , there are wide variations between Member States in deceased organ donation rates and , at present , there is neither a database covering the whole of the European Union which contains information about organs intended for donation and transplantation or on living or deceased donors , nor a certification system which provides proof that human organs and tissues have been legally obtained .
It is in this context that the report under discussion suggests steps that we consider important for strengthening cooperation between the Member States in this area , from which all of them could benefit .
in writing . - A permanent shortage of organs for transplantation hampers the wonderful efforts of health care professionals to help patients .
It is also a sad fact that there is a shortage of donors , and that this drives some vile criminal activities .
To seek to address these problems by creating an EU-wide database is , however , a mistake .
It is naive to place hopes in a database covering the whole of the EU , with all its different languages and IT systems , when the failed attempt to produce a Health Service database for the UK alone has wasted billions of pounds .
Health services across Europe are unable even to fund basics , and face savage cuts as ordinary citizens pay for the bust of globalism .
This being so , far more can be done to encourage organ donations by investing in education programmes at national levels , than by diverting funds to pay for well-intentioned bureaucratic meddling .
Additionally , there are tight time constraints on organ viability .
Thus , an EU-wide network would be of use to very few patients .
Proposals to set one up are another pretty-sounding excuse for the further advance of an agenda that has nothing to do with patients ' welfare and everything to do with federalist dogma .
Several thousand people die each year in Europe because they have been unable to receive a transplantation in time .
The need to implement EU-wide measures to facilitate intra-Community exchanges of human organs for transplantation , through improved quality and safety standards in this area , was therefore becoming an increasingly urgent issue .
This is why I voted for this directive , which aims to protect live donors and the individuals who benefit from their donations , and safeguards basic ethical principles , such as anonymity , volunteering and the inalienable character of the human body , which must not be a source of profit .
The idea of establishing a network of competent authorities in the Member States also seems to me to be particularly positive , as does the idea of online registration in national or European registers .
Of course , every possible precaution must be taken to ensure that these measures work properly .
I voted in favour of the report on the Action plan on Organ Donation and Transplantation for 2009-2015 .
The technical progress achieved in the area of organ transplantation is a huge source of hope for all those individuals for whom transplantation remains the only possible treatment .
The main challenge today is the shortage of organ donors , which is evident from the long waiting lists for transplantation .
To meet this challenge , it is essential that measures are adopted to identify potential donors , and a great deal of progress can be made to boost the numbers of organs donated in Europe .
As the rapporteur emphasises , the appointment of a key organ donation person in hospitals is probably the key factor in improving arrangements in this area .
Increased cooperation between Member States will ensure better exchange of information and good practice aimed at increasing the numbers of donors .
For example , enabling citizens to add their names to a donor register when they apply for a passport or a driving licence is one initiative which should be considered by Member States and which I , and most of my fellow Members , regard as positive .
We approved this new directive for various reasons , but especially because we believe that this is a plan that will be crucial in saving many lives within the EU .
Twelve patients die every day and 60 000 are waiting for a compatible donor for organ transplants within the EU .
Transplantation has increased continuously over the last two decades and it is the only available treatment for cases of terminal deficiency in organs such as the liver , lungs and heart .
Mortality rates among people waiting for a heart , liver or lung transplant are between 15 % and 30 % , so patients who need an organ transplant will have to wait less time for that operation , thanks to this new directive .
That is why I voted as I did .
The three key objectives in the area of organ donation and transplantation are ensuring quality and safety for patients at EU level , ensuring protection of donors and facilitating cooperation between Member States .
A European approach to the issue is important , considering , among other things , the mobility of patients within the European Union .
Generally , in the European Union there is a broad societal consensus on organ donation for the purpose of transplantation .
However , due to different cultural , traditional or organisational system backgrounds , there are differences between Member States in approach to this issue .
Some countries have a high rate of donations , whilst the donation culture still needs to be developed in others .
Sharing of best practices , models and expertise across the European Union could prove very useful in increasing organ donation rates .
Cooperation should be fostered in order to identify successful elements of different transplantation systems and promote these on the European level , thus leading to the improvements in provision of high quality and safety of organ donation and transplantation .
I therefore voted in favour .
The present report establishes a set of actions that are aimed at promoting cooperation between the Member States in the field of transplantation in order to contribute to the increase in transplants , the reduction of waiting lists and a consequent reduction in the number of patients who die while waiting for an organ .
At the same time , the action plan also establishes common quality and safety standards for the Member States , which not only contribute to the protection of patients but also facilitate cooperation between countries .
The creation of national and EU records of the processes involved in transplantation ( avoiding discrimination , monitoring the results , etc . ) also stands out .
This will lead to greater and more thorough awareness of the current situation in Europe , as well as reducing opportunities for organ trafficking .
The report supports the action plan and underlines the necessity and urgency for the courses of action that it points out , taking a firm stance against all forms of trading in organs that currently take place in different parts of the world .
I believe that this report is an important addition to the Commission 's output and a valuable contribution to an acute human cause within the context of health care provided to the European public .
I would like to congratulate Mr Perello Rodriguez of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats for Europe on the report on which we have just voted .
The action plan should mean that the 60 000 people who are currently hoping to receive an organ will see their life expectancy considerably increased .
It is also important to highlight the leading position held by the Spanish health system as regards this issue .
This has been acknowledged by all the rapporteurs and groups .
I voted in favour of the report , although I think there is primarily a need to focus , in particular , on boosting donor numbers in the various Member States , taking account of the different national traditions of health systems .
It is therefore necessary to assess this area rigorously from the perspective of the subsidiarity principle .
Ladies and gentlemen , the statistics speak for themselves .
According to this report , there are currently 56 000 patients in the European Union waiting for a suitable organ donor .
Every day , 12 people die waiting for an organ transplant .
Sadly , many people are simply dying because of the great shortage of organ donors and insufficient cross-border coordination .
This sensitive issue is linked to various legal and cultural aspects .
However , matters are complicated still further by the EU Member States ' different national policies and fundamentally different organ donation rates .
It would be possible to ease some of these shortages through an EU database and certification system , which would provide information about the availability of organs and would guarantee their quality and legality .
It is also important to mobilise and inform society .
Many EU citizens are not fundamentally against donation , but are afraid of adding their names to the register .
Therefore , donation should be as accessible as possible - promotion may often be effective .
For example , I welcome forms which would give citizens the opportunity to add their name directly to the organ donor register when they apply for a driving licence .
The shortage of organs for transplantation is also a powerful stimulus for the trade in organs and people .
The EU should establish better donation and transplantation coordination because , as we can see , the poorest regions of Europe are becoming fertile ground for the illegal trade in organs .
The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates that the EU must accede to the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) , and I welcome this .
To render this accession effective , the unanimous agreement of the Members of the Council and approval by the European Parliament are required .
For my part , I fully support this accession , which will supplement the European system for the protection of fundamental rights .
The Treaty of Lisbon stipulates that the EU must accede to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
This accession is not merely symbolic ; it enables the protection of the fundamental rights of EU citizens to be improved .
It will also have the effect of making the decisions taken and the actions implemented under the Common Foreign and Security Policy subject to the European Convention , even though they are outside the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The Treaty of Lisbon lays down the legal basis for EU accession to the ECHR - the most important instrument for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Europe , the core of Europe .
EU accession to the Convention will further strengthen the EU 's system for the protection of fundamental rights .
I agree with this proposal , since it is an historic opportunity making it possible to safeguard human rights and fundamental freedoms for EU citizens and Member States on the same basis .
The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg will be given jurisdiction to examine whether the legislation of EU institutions , bodies and agencies , including rulings of the European Court of Justice , are in compliance with the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is very important that people will have a new opportunity to defend their rights .
Once they have exhausted all national remedies , they will be able to bring actions to the European Court of Human Rights on violations by the EU of fundamental human rights , encouraging the development of a more harmonious case-law system in the area of human rights .
The uniform and full application of the Charter of Fundamental Rights at EU level is equally essential to ensure the Union 's credibility .
As accession to the convention will have a huge legal influence on the creation of a harmonious system for the protection of human rights , I call on the Commission and the Member States to consider the opportunity to develop guidelines with clear explanations of all the implications of accession , the impact on human rights and the envisaged procedure for submitting complaints .
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are the body of values and principles that mark us out as human and the basis of our coexistence ; they are universal , indivisible and interdependent .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon represents an important step in human rights terms , not just because it makes the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding , but also because by giving the European Union legal personality , it enables the EU to accede to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) .
This accession is of the greatest significance at both political and legal levels in the creation of a true area of human rights .
As regards action on the part of the Union , to which substantial powers have been transferred by the Member States , this makes it possible to guarantee protection for the public similar to that already enjoyed as regards the Member States .
European institutions are obliged to comply with it , not least during the process of drawing up and adopting draft legislation .
On the other hand , legislative and case-law harmonisation between the EU and the ECHR in the field of human rights must contribute to creating an integral system in which the European human rights courts ( the Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of Human Rights ) must operate in synchrony , with a relationship that is not a hierarchical connection but rather one of specialisation .
in writing . - I support this report on the EU 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) , as provided by the Lisbon Treaty .
Now , the Union 's institutions will fall within the scope of this fundamental rights protection system .
EU accession to the ECHR improves the Union 's standing when calling on third countries to abide by its human rights standards and extends to people in the EU the same level of protection against Union action that they enjoy with regard to Member State action .
Despite the fact that the EU will not join the Council of Europe ( CoE ) , accession to the convention should entail the right to nominate candidates for the post of judge , and allow for European Parliament representation in the Parliamentary Assembly of the CoE when this body elects judges to the European Court of Human Rights .
Further to this progress , the Commission should be mandated to negotiate accession to the protocols supplementing the ECHR which concern rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The next logical step , also in harmony with the Charter of Fundamental Rights , is the accession of the EU institutions to the European Social Charter .
The protection of fundamental human rights must remain a national competence because interpretations vary from one country to another and from one culture to another .
This is particularly the case with the concepts of discrimination , secularism and the very definition of human life ( from conception to its natural end ) .
The Court of Justice of the European Union - an institution of which the decisions are becoming increasingly political - will endeavour to dismantle a little more the national constitutional systems and the foundations of European civilisation .
Apart from being useless and a waste of resources , the EU 's accession to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms will lead to confusion and unresolvable legal conflicts with the Strasbourg Court .
For reasons of logic , I oppose this new consequence of the legal personality of the EU , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted for this report because I believe that the accession of the European Union to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) is a strong message that enhances the credibility of the Union in the eyes of third countries which it regularly calls upon to respect the ECHR .
The European Union 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is a result of the process that began in Maastricht , in the sense that it gave the European Community legal personality and culminated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , initially with a reduced scope and later on extended by being integrated into the treaty , constituted an important stage in this process .
The European Union is now participating more intimately in a continent-wide human rights area .
I welcome this development .
I hope that solutions can be found to the various legal , technical and institutional issues that are arising at the moment , and that these solutions will be based on the principle of subsidiarity , on voluntary cooperation between the Member States , and on respect for their sovereignty and national legal systems , and on the rule of law .
I welcome the adoption of this report , which contributes to the EU 's commitment to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) .
This commitment is a step forward in the process of European integration and another step towards political unity .
Moreover , since the EU system for the protection of fundamental human rights is consolidated and strengthened by incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Rights into its primary law , the EU 's adhesion to the ECHR will constitute a strong message in terms of coherence between the EU and the countries that belong to the Council of Europe and its pan-European regime in matters relating to human rights .
This adhesion will further increase the EU 's credibility in the eyes of the third countries which it regularly urges to respect the ECHR as part of their bilateral relations .
With regard to the activities of the EU , this adhesion also guarantees the public protection similar to that which they already enjoy in their relations with all Member States .
I voted for this report in order to give the green light to the negotiations on the accession of the EU , as a legal personality in its own right , to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights .
This accession will actually provide citizens with a new means of recourse : they will now be able to refer a case to the European Court of Human Rights if their fundamental rights are infringed by an EU Institution or a Member State on account of an action or failure to act on their part .
We must also insist that the EU accedes to the additional protocols of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and to the revised EU Social Charter , because the EU must also make progress on these fronts .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union makes it compulsory for the European Union to accede to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
I support this measure as it will enhance the EU 's credibility in the eyes of its citizens by guaranteeing respect for rights .
Accession to the convention will provide citizens with protection against the actions of the EU and its institutions , just like the protection they enjoy at the moment against the actions of Member States .
At the same time , we will also achieve closer cooperation between the Court of Justice of the European Union , the European Court of Human Rights and national courts .
The judgments of the European Court of Human Rights with regard to the separation of Church and State are in line with the secular tradition of the French Republic .
The rulings supporting the ban on a female teacher wearing the veil in the classroom and opposing crucifixes in schools testify to this .
However , the Court of Justice of the European Union proposes restricting civil liberties only if the values enshrined in the EU 's fundamental texts require it .
The fact is , those texts never once mention the compulsory separation of Church and State or the secular nature of institutions .
The European Union is therefore incapable of guaranteeing the freedom of conscience of Europeans .
One of the foundations of the European Union at its inception was respect for human rights - a value which remains permanently at the centre of the EU 's interests .
EU law bears witness to this , but so do constitutional provisions of each of the Member States .
Accession of the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) is a significant step towards stronger protection of the fundamental rights of the individual .
This decision makes the EU part of the international system of protection of rights , thanks to which it has strengthened its credibility in the eyes of third countries , and also of its own citizens .
The convention , while not altering the institutional construction of the EU , does , however , add another court , the European Court of Human Rights , which will keep watch over the way in which the Union fulfils its obligations in relation to the provisions of the ECHR .
In view of the fact that the report on the institutional aspects of accession by the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms presents provisions which are in accordance with the above remarks , I decided to vote for its adoption .
The importance of the EU acceding to the ECHR is linked both with its symbolic and political credibility and with the fact that the EU and its institutions will be under stricter obligation to uphold individuals ' fundamental rights .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon provides the legal basis for starting negotiations regarding the EU 's accession to the ECHR .
I support the accession of the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
However , one vital preliminary matter is the observance of certain guarantees that the agreement on the European Union 's accession to the ECHR should contain , especially with regard to preserving the specific characteristics of the Union and EU law .
Accession must not interfere with the Union 's competences , nor with the obligation of Member States not to submit disputes that fall within the scope of EU law to external dispute resolution systems .
It is therefore important to safeguard the prerogatives of the Court of Justice wherever the Strasbourg Court is called upon to rule on the compatibility of a Union act with fundamental rights before the Court of Justice has had the opportunity to do so .
I thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on the accession of the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) , which will be beneficial for Europe 's citizens as it will provide us with a new court that is not part of the European Union , and will ensure that the rights of European citizens are always upheld by the European Union and the Member States .
In keeping with the principles of democracy , the European Union and the Member States must always have the right to defend themselves .
Therefore , I believe it is vital that each country that accedes to the convention should have a judge who will explain the background to each case , just as I feel it is important that the European Parliament should have an informal body in order to coordinate information sharing between the European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
It is also important , moreover , that Parliament should be consulted and involved in the negotiating process .
I voted for the resolution because I take the view that the accession of the European Union to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) would be a good step forward in creating legal certainty and consistency .
In recent decades , the European Court of Human Rights has adopted a raft of decisions which make the defence of the fundamental rights of European citizens concrete .
Acceding to the convention as the European Union would also contribute to the Union 's credibility in the eyes of third countries .
I am delighted with the adoption of the report drawn up by my fellow Member , Mr Jáuregui , on the signing up of the EU to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
I am concerned that some Europhobe Members persist in denying the need for this measure , whereas I believe that signing up to this convention implies a greater guarantee of protection for human rights , also within the EU .
The EU 's accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was already advocated in the Treaty on European Union ; the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon made it obligatory .
Accession will strengthen protection of human rights in Europe and submit the Union 's legal system to external legal control .
This will ensure harmony of case-law between the Court of Justice of the European Union ( CJEU ) and the European Court of Human Rights , and will grant the European public protection from the action of European institutions , under terms similar to those that already exist with regard to the Member States .
It should be noted that accession does not grant the EU membership of the Council of Europe , or call into question the autonomy of Union law , since the CJEU remains the only authority adjudicating on issues relating to the validity and interpretation of Union law .
I would also stress the importance given to the possibility that the Union should be able to submit candidates and choose a judge to represent it , and the need that is mentioned for Parliament to be kept duly informed about accession negotiations and for a mechanism for exchanging information between the parliamentary assemblies of both institutions to be established in the future .
I support the report , most of all because it extends the system of protection of human rights in the European Union and gives it greater credibility in the eyes of its citizens .
When it is not possible to appeal at national or EU level , when a petitioner is refused permission to institute proceedings , or when an action cannot be brought against an EU institution - these are situations in which the added value will be apparent .
Therefore , let us continue the fight to strengthen the system of protection of human rights in the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you are aware , respect for human rights is a fundamental value of the European Union which is anchored in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
There is no doubt that , if everything is done properly , EU accession to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) could be an historic opportunity to strengthen the human rights situation in the EU and all of Europe .
This could be our chance to guarantee the human rights and fundamental freedoms of EU citizens .
EU accession to the ECHR would give Europe an excellent opportunity to act as a moral lighthouse , to be an example .
This event would not only enhance the EU 's credibility , in terms of relations with non-EU Member States , but would also improve public opinion about EU structures .
However , this would only happen if we use all our joint efforts to eliminate double standards in our political programme and legal system .
Unfortunately , as shown by events in recent years , accusations often have a purely political overtone .
Courts both in my country and in the rest of Europe are still very often susceptible to political manipulation .
Unless that changes , very promising events like EU accession to the ECHR will simply be a waste of time .
Therefore I support wholeheartedly accession to the ECHR , provided this really will defend fundamental human rights and freedoms and , most importantly , within the EU itself .
in writing . - I am supportive of the ECHR while recognising that judicial interpretations of certain provisions of the convention have created obstacles to the deportation of terrorist suspects .
This needs to change .
Notwithstanding any statements of respect for the position of Member States in relation to ECHR , EU accession to the convention will complicate and possibly hinder the freedom of Member States to derogate from or individually interpret aspects of the ECHR .
Politically , I fundamentally object to the driving motive of EU accession to ECHR as ' a move forward in the process of European integration [ involving ] one further step towards political union ' .
This misconceived aspiration is further underlined in the statement that EU accession constitutes ' an accession of a non-State Party to a legal instrument created for States ' .
For all these reasons , I voted against the resolution .
The organisation of the International Criminal Court conference in Uganda is an important sign of this international institution 's acceptance across the continent of Africa , especially as the Court 's initial investigations , after it was established in 2002 , were launched here .
No one can deny the importance of such an international court which investigates serious cases involving breaches of human rights , genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes .
Consequently , it is important that an ever-increasing number of states acknowledge the authority of the International Criminal Court and that the signatories of the Rome Statute ratify the agreement as a matter of urgency .
The notion of setting up an international court for investigating crimes against humanity emerged as far back as 1919 , during the Paris Peace conference .
It has taken 83 years to reach an international agreement and set up the ICC .
At the moment , states which have ratified the ICC 's Rome Statute must also regulate the Court 's right to investigate crimes of aggression .
Furthermore , signatory states must harmonise their national legislation with the provisions of the Rome Statute , in keeping with the commitment they have made .
The European Union has been a firm advocate of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) and all its Member States are sharing in its accession to this important court .
I hope that the State Parties are able to live up to their responsibilities and that the result of the Kampala conference is an ICC that is better able to face up to the challenges of our times , that receives adequate cooperation from national legal systems , and that is granted sufficient means to effectively exercise its authority ; the grave seriousness of the crimes on which its activities will focus , for the most part , demand it .
The EU is a staunch supporter of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) , which promotes universality and upholds the integrity of the Rome Statute with a view to protecting and consolidating the independence , legitimacy and effectiveness of the international judicial process .
The proof of this is that the EU is systematically promoting the inclusion of a clause relating to the ICC in negotiating mandates and agreements with third countries .
The EU has already provided over EUR 40 million over ten years under the European Instrument for Human Rights and Democracy for projects aimed at supporting the ICC and international criminal justice .
The Review Conference on the Rome Statute of the ICC in Kampala , Uganda , represents a unique opportunity for the State Parties , the non-State Parties , civil society and other interested parties alike to strongly reiterate their commitment to justice and responsibility .
There are 111 State Parties to the ICC , with some regions under-represented , such as the Middle East , North Africa and Asia .
I hope that the Member States will participate in this conference by providing representation at the highest level and publicly reaffirming their commitment to the ICC .
I note with satisfaction that the resolution proposed by Parliament on the review of the Rome Statute requires the crime of aggression to be officially included as a war crime and that no jurisdictional filter will be necessary to determine whether such a crime has been committed .
Yet how can this new legislation be implemented if the main states that have committed crimes of aggression since the coming into force of the Rome Statute in 2002 ( the United States and Israel ) are not required to ratify it ?
How can it be rendered effective if these states are not urged to cease pressurising the states that are party to the International Criminal Court into guaranteeing the immunity of their nationals ?
It is also regrettable that a Parliament which professes to be in the vanguard of the fight against climate change is not proposing to include ecological crimes as crimes against humanity , as was proposed at the Cochabamba Summit .
The most serious crimes against humanity must be punished .
The International Criminal Court could be a useful tool in this area .
It is just a question of actually giving it the resources .
As this is not happening , I am abstaining .
I feel bound to express my agreement with the motion for a resolution on the Review Conference on the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in Kampala , Uganda .
Europe itself sprang from the need to put an end to the expressions of racial hatred that reached a peak in the atrocities of the Second World War .
The European Union has always been consistent in seeking to strengthen cooperation between states in order to prove and prosecute crimes against humanity .
It is right that eight years after the entry into force of the Rome Statute , states should reaffirm their strong commitment to building on peace , stability and the rule of law .
In particular , states should commit to policies aimed at collaborating with the International Criminal Court and protecting the victims of violence .
In many cases in practice , victims encounter major difficulties in accessing information about the court and fail in their attempts to have their rights protected .
in writing . - I enthusiastically voted in favour of the resolution and I am especially glad that the oral amendment by my colleague had been adopted , i.e. to include ' indigenous people ' in the list of groups that need special attention .
in writing . - I welcome the motion for a resolution on the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) in Kampala , Uganda , as it contains very crucial and important points and requests regarding the ratification and the implementation of the ICC .
Therefore , I voted in favour .
But I want to express my deep concerns about certain phrases in the resolution , which refer positively to the ' Stockholm Programme ' , the ' EIDHR ' and to the European Union as a ' Global Player ' .
In this matter , the ' Stockholm Programme ' and the ' EIDHR ' might have had a positive impact , but in many other areas , these two programmes / instruments are not used in a democratic and transparent manner .
The European Union has indeed been acting as a ' Global Player ' but , in my view , not at all in a positive way towards a more fair and solidary world order .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Implementation of the synergies of research and innovation earmarked funds in Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 concerning the European Fund of Regional Development and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development - Delivering a single market to consumers and citizens - Long-term sustainability of public finances for a recovering economy - Contribution of the Cohesion policy to the achievement of Lisbon and the EU 2020 objectives ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mr van Nistelrooij , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the implementation of the synergies of research and innovation earmarked Funds in Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 concerning the European Fund of Regional Development and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development in cities and regions as well as in the Member States and the Union ,
the report by Mr Grech , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on delivering a single market to consumers and citizens ,
the report by Mr Hoang Ngoc , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the long-term sustainability of public finances for a recovering economy [ COM ( 2009 / 0545 - 2010 / 2038 ( INI ) ) ] , and
the report by Mr Cortés Lastra , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the contribution of the Cohesion policy to the achievement of Lisbon and the EU 2020 objectives .
This is indeed a very coherent package .
Following this morning 's debate on the support package and on tighter , sounder financial and economic governance , we are now discussing a number of underlying dossiers that are important as regards the commitment required in connection with the EU 2020 strategy .
Parliament wishes to expressly steer these proposals by the Commission and , particularly , the Council ; it is unacceptable for the Council to take decisions in June without us having expressly reached agreement on a number of underlying matters .
We are talking about the direction , and also about implementation in the near future .
Take , for example , the flagship projects that will also require our joint support before long .
It is really important , therefore , that we invest enough time in this now .
Well , then , both the Cortés Lastra report and my report on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development concern policy synergy with a view to increasing output , or results , for Europe .
The beauty of it is that we can do better ; indeed we must do better .
Our activities are rather fragmented in various fields - if we look at developments in the world , competition and the kind of things we want to tackle .
To summarise : things must be made smarter , greener , more sustainable and more inclusive .
The reports tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs also concern governance and ensuring sufficient financial resources , including for education .
In short , it is my hope that , this afternoon , we shall lay clear foundations for this resolution .
I do not know whether a vote will be held tomorrow , whether a consensus will be achieved on governance .
In any case , however , I anticipate that Parliament will be able to adopt a final position on the EU 2020 strategy in June .
Returning to my report : it is an implementation report .
We have taken a proper look at how things work in the fields of research and development , regional policy and small and medium-sized enterprises , and I wish to thank my fellow Members , including those from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy - the committee with joint responsibility in accordance with Article 50 - for helping us achieve a good result .
What have we laid down ?
1 .
In Europe , we have first-class research .
Yet what is lagging behind is the utilisation of this research .
Knowledge is free ; it travels around the world , and cannot be kept to oneself .
Although we are very good at investing in research , we are lagging behind in the utilisation of this research , in bringing innovation to the market and , subsequently , keeping high-quality production in this part of the world .
2 .
My report notes that we are currently spending one quarter of regional funds on research infrastructure and innovation .
That is a substantial change , a prioritisation that has been working in the current period thanks to Commission initiatives .
Earmarking is among the instruments that have been effective and have also definitely influenced the agenda in the regions , towns and cities .
It leads to a better profile in the knowledge-based economy into which we are evolving , and to greater specialisation .
3 .
In my report , together with my fellow Members , I have made a series of proposals for improvements throughout the research / innovation / production chain with a view to greater effectiveness .
We must also realise the importance of the territorial dimension laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We need to focus on a number of areas in order to achieve a large-scale effect ; we need the courage to specialise production in a region - incidentally , the principle of specialisation is an old one in the European Union - provided that good links exist for transmitting that knowledge ( broadband or traditional infrastructure ) .
If the Union invests money , there should also be cooperation between the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the own-initiative report on which we are voting this week is of particular symbolic importance at a time when the markets are unable to assess the risks associated with the economic situation in the euro area .
Having demanded severe budget adjustment policies , they now doubt the capacity of Member Sates to kick-start their growth and , hence , to obtain the tax revenue necessary to pay the interest on their debt .
Unfortunately , no risk assessment can be carried out in the deeply uncertain context in which the global economy now finds itself .
Such an assessment is all the more important in the European Union , where the production capacity utilisation rate is at an all-time low .
Instead of investing , companies are mothballing machines because , despite the initial signs of recovery at the end of 2009 , demand is lacking .
Growth would even end up going into reverse if restrictive measures were to nip the recovery in the bud .
The first aim of our report was precisely to determine the optimum time for launching policies for emerging from the crisis .
We proposed maintaining the support measures until the normal production capacity utilisation rate was restored .
We therefore suggested ratifying the principle of anti-cyclical budgetary policies , which were successfully established during the first phase of the crisis in 2008 and 2009 , and which are in line with the spirit of the reform of the 2005 Stability Pact .
These policies entail using automatic stabilisers , in other words , in earmarking surpluses from the primary budget for debt repayment at the top of the cycle , and in allowing Member States to borrow the resources necessary for stimulus packages at the bottom of the cycle .
We are currently at the bottom of the cycle .
Interest rates are definitely under pressure and are threatening the sustainability of the debt .
This being the case , the European Central Bank was right to announce that it would buy back some debt to enable Member States to diversify their sources of finance .
Nevertheless , in addition to the fact that this concept of sustainability has never been defined in the economic literature , can the risk premiums demanded by the markets be deemed justifiable ?
No , if we consider that risk in the mortgage derivatives market , just as in the public-debt market , is impossible to assess .
This is why , in our report , we proposed that particular attention be paid to the structural deficit indicator rather than the focus being ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
This is why , in our report , we proposed that particular attention be paid to the structural deficit indicator rather than the focus being on the current account deficit , the scale of which is due to the deterioration in the actual budget deficit .
This is the result of the crisis , which has weakened growth and concomitant tax revenue .
This revenue has also been adversely affected by the lowering of taxes , which did not have the expected impact on supply .
Our report seeks to offer three recommendations combined with some operational indicators .
The first is to maintain support measures until the recovery has been consolidated .
The second is to monitor the structural deficits , which are still close to equilibrium , despite the deterioration in actual budget deficits , in order to send a reassuring signal to the markets as to the state of public finances .
The third is to assess the efficiency of tax expenditure and , in particular , of certain tax reductions which are related to the fall in tax revenue .
Unfortunately , for the liberals and the conservatives in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , common sense counts for little ; the impact of the crisis counts for little ; and the fact that the massive debt is also due to the bank bail-out plans counts for little .
Only their blind faith in the efficiency of the financial markets counts ; only dogmatic compliance with a manifestly out-of-date Stability Pact counts .
They do not see any need to create the tools required for economic governance , which is essential in order to strengthen the Union .
It is a case of putting Europe on a starvation diet and doggedly trying to meet the criteria in the pact without any guarantee of success and at the risk of destroying the recovery , and too bad for social cohesion .
That is the position that they have defended in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Since that vote , the economic health of Europe has deteriorated further .
The European Central Bank and the Commission have finally come up with monetary and budgetary instruments which should enable us to improve economic governance in the euro area .
However , the markets have fallen once again , unsettled as they are by the austerity plans .
The Ecofin Council had to start all over again on Monday .
Against this background , the amendments which we are tabling are , all in all , very moderate ; and we are tabling some new ones too .
They argue for flexible implementation of the Stability Pact , so that an unwelcome austerity cure can be avoided .
They advocate a public credit rating agency to shield Member States from the diktat of the markets .
These are the signals that Parliament must send out .
Mr Karas , the time for ideological knee-jerk reactions has passed , as has the time for short-term national electoral moves .
Europe needs policies which are motivated by a real desire to strengthen the Union .
If you and your group are not up to this task , if you are no longer capable of representing the general interest , you can be sure that our citizens will be able to draw their own conclusions , for the future of the euro area is now at stake .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and their assistants , the Secretariat of the Committee on Regional Development for their contributions , as well as the European Commission 's Directorate-General for Regional Policy and the Directorate-General for Employment , Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities , the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the trade unions and the European regional networks and associations for their cooperation .
I had meetings with several regional associations and institutions while preparing this report , especially the Committee of the Regions , the Conference of Peripheral Maritime Regions , the Assembly of European Regions , the European Regions Research and Innovation Network , the European Economic and Social Committee and the European Commission 's Directorate-General for Regional Policy and its Directorate-General for Employment , Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities .
I would like to thank all of them for their availability and interesting contributions .
Having changed the title , which now includes the reference to the Europe 2020 strategy , the main aim of the report is to defend Cohesion policy as a strong , well-financed policy , and one that is present in all European Union regions , as well as its key role in the Europe 2020 strategy .
The report was approved practically unanimously by the Committee on Regional Development : 40 votes in favour , 1 abstention and 1 vote against .
The first part of the report makes a brief analysis of the contribution of the Cohesion policy to the Lisbon Strategy and points to the limitations of the involvement of regional and local authorities , of the social , economic and civil society actors in the Lisbon Strategy , which made its adoption , communication and effectiveness difficult .
The report also calls for the need for assessments , not only of the actual expenditure , but of the real impact as well .
The second part deals with recommendations for the future Europe 2020 strategy and highlights the importance of the regions , multi-level governance and the principle of partnership , basic pillars of the Cohesion policy that must be incorporated into the Europe 2020 strategy as a prior and necessary condition for its successful implementation .
Moreover , it is essential that the participation of the social and economic actors , as well as those of civil society in general , be strengthened in order to avoid the strategy becoming disconnected from and discredited by its key stakeholders .
This part underlines the key role of education , training , research and innovation , the importance of facilitating the establishment of the so-called knowledge triangle , and the need to support small and medium-sized enterprises , which quite often play a pioneering role in innovation .
However , at the same time , we should not overlook the specific needs of the regions and social groups with the most difficulties .
Thus , a certain flexibility should be allowed for .
Specifically , in order to foster the leverage effect of investment in research and development , in education and in training , we defend the need to increase the synergies between the National Strategic Reference Frameworks and the National Reform Programmes , as well as greater coordination and coherence between the different European , national and regional policies linked to strategy objectives .
The European Investment Bank plays , and must continue to play , an important role by means of the financial engineering , cooperation and support instruments in supporting the regions and small and medium-sized enterprises .
However , in order to facilitate its task , and that of all the beneficiaries , advances need to be made towards greater simplification .
In conclusion , the report defends a solid and well-financed Cohesion policy for the future , one that is present in all European regions and which has a key role to play in the Europe 2020 strategy .
Mr President , in essence , my report is concerned with the protection of the Single Market from a micro perspective , to regard the market as a single project and to take the 2012 framework , the 2020 strategy and the recent financial crisis into consideration .
Strategies and courses of action that are intended to breathe new life into the European Single Market and the European Market ought to be based on a pragmatic , extensive and comprehensive agreement which is inclusive of all Member States and which focuses primarily on the priorities that the Member States are truly willing to take on .
Europe needs to develop 2020 strategies enabling the market to be the leading agent in economic regeneration while , at the same time , generating acceptance by the citizens by protecting their interests , by the consumers by defending their rights , and by small and medium enterprises by providing them with the right incentives .
My report proposes a series of strategic legislative and non-legislative initiatives , geared towards the rehabilitation of the European Single Market .
These initiatives reach their pinnacle in the creation of the Single Market Act , which combines immediate action ( 2012 ) together with the long term vision of the 2020 strategy .
I have also put forward specific non-legislative proposals on the drawing up of the citizens ' charter which lays down their rights and what they are entitled to .
It is also encouraging that I received positive reactions from Commissioner Barnier and Commissioner Dalli regarding my proposal on the top 20 frustrations as expressed by European citizens , on the creation of a collective remedy mechanism and on a communication strategy specifically targeted at every day problems experienced by our citizens .
We need to adopt a truly new political line of thought that is based upon consumer protection and the social dimension , which will serve to draw up the laws and tasks to be undertaken by the European Union .
Only in this way can we achieve a truly social market economy as is stipulated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Unfortunately , in the past years , the Single Market has not managed to convince our citizens that it represents their interests and aspirations .
What is even more alarming is that our citizens and consumers are experiencing an increasing sense of uncertainty and lack of faith in the Market .
We need to come to terms with the fact that the traditional definition of the Single Market as something solely tied to the economic dimension needs to be revamped .
We need to come up with a new common line which is holistic and which fully integrates the sentiments of our citizens , consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises .
This can be done by offering them a leading part in the re-launch of the European Single Market .
Every effort that is wasted by trying to explain away the Single Market in a dogmatic fashion will be underestimating the challenges , inconsistencies , interests , differing beliefs and perplexities that we must face up to .
The Single Market integration process is not an irreversible one .
Its current situation needs to be challenged .
The European Single Market is in danger of becoming extremely weak and therefore irrelevant due to the protectionist attitudes that the crisis brought along with it .
The Single Market is not an end in itself but an instrument that has to contribute in a significant manner to a better quality of life for all European citizens so that , as Evelyne Gebhardt said , ' the Single Market works for the citizens and not against them . '
So as to guarantee a viable and strong Single Market , we need to reconcile what Mario Monti referred to in his analytical and stimulating report as the tensions between market integration and social objectives .
In the final analysis , the predominant system is one that succeeds in striking a balance between a vibrant and competitive economy that incentivises innovation and job creation and which provides consumer protection as well as social and environmental safeguards required by our citizens .
All this needs to be achieved within a spirit of compromise and solidarity .
Finally Mr President , I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs and coordinators for their contributions .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I do nonetheless wonder for a moment about our programming and our ability to organise our debates .
I am very happy to share this debate with all these European Parliament initiatives , but I do feel as though I am in a melting pot which I am not sure offers an exact definition of the European Parliament 's vision for the EU 2020 strategy .
Perhaps I am being too demanding , though .
On the other hand , I hope that you share my concern , Mr President , because , on behalf of this House , you raised an extremely important question with President Van Rompuy , on 10 May , which relates to the following .
With regard to the adoption of the employment guidelines , this year - dare I say it , as an exceptional measure - as part of a special partnership between the Commission and the European Parliament , and in a spirit of good cooperation with the Council , bearing in mind the somewhat revised timetable - the employment guidelines are normally published at the end of the previous year ; this year , they were published in April and , even though they commit us to a long cycle for the years to come , we will have to deliberate them before the spring European Council - you kindly supported , on behalf of us all , the request we sent to President Van Rompuy calling for the European Council to grant the European Parliament the right to exercise its powers under the Treaty of Lisbon itself .

Clearly , neither the Commission nor the Council has any intention of considering this request and they therefore consciously intend to violate the treaty .
I think that the authorities in this House will have to shoulder their responsibilities and learn lessons from this .
As regards the challenge of these employment guidelines , which will be a factor in the implementation of the 2020 strategy , we must draw the attention of the authorities to their importance at a time when 17 % of Europeans are living below the poverty line - I would point out that these figures are taken from 2007 , that is to say , from even before the start of the crisis - and when 23 million of our fellow citizens are going to end up unemployed .
There is currently great concern within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs about two issues .
Firstly , about the poverty reduction target , which I think was the initiative of Commissioner Andor ; this target was included in the 2020 strategy , and we welcome that .
We do not understand how this issue can be the subject of discussions , hesitations and the calling into question of the Union 's competences within the Council , when the treaty clearly indicates that this is an area in which the EU also has responsibilities .
Then , the other issue relates to the relationship and consistency between the various policies , because the Commission clearly tells us that it has fundamentally changed things in this 2020 strategy , since it has reduced the number of targets .
I believe that fundamental change must be about much more than simply reducing the number of targets .
However , what we are convinced about is that the 2020 strategy must take account of the reality of the situation in the EU .
The reality is that those who are currently suffering the most as a result of the crisis , those who will be hardest hit , are the ones who actually create the EU 's wealth .
The fact is , we are seeing debates starting up here and there which are liable to go against Europeans ' very interests , because they would lead to a reduction in investment just when it is needed the most , in other words , in our long-term capital : education , training and health .
This is why , faced with this challenge , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs calls on the authorities to be aware of how public investment might be reduced in these fields , at the very time when weak growth and reduced private investment cannot take up the slack and , therefore , ensure the recovery of public finances in the short term .
This is a crucially important timetabling issue , and we cannot but regret that the Ministers for Economic and Monetary Affairs were able to argue for a withdrawal of non-conventional employment support and unemployment reduction measures , when the Ministers for Social Affairs had not been consulted in what we know is a tragic employment and social affairs situation in our European Union .
author . - Mr President , the EU 2020 strategy proposes action to enhance the performance of education systems , reinforce the attractiveness of Europe 's higher education , open up more mobility and training programmes for young people , modernise labour markets , boost labour mobility and develop skills and competences to increase labour market participation .
This has been endorsed by the Spring Council , which stated that key objectives requiring action at EU level included better conditions for research and development , improved education levels , a reduction in early school leavers and increased participation of youth , older workers and low-skilled workers in the labour market .
However , the global economic crisis has led to budget cuts in the education sector in Member States across the European Union .
For instance , Latvia is suffering a deep economic crisis and it has faced severe budget cuts in the country 's 34 higher education institutions with a threatened 50 % cutback to the higher-education budget .
Irish universities face a 6 % cut , and Britain is not exempt from this because in England , the Higher Education Funding Council reckons there may be a cut of up to EUR 500 million from higher education .
This is not all doom and gloom .
Some Member States , such as France , have been doing well , but the problem is that there is a divergent level of funding across Member States .
In order for the EU 2020 strategy to work , we need a strong , coordinated approach .
I am therefore asking for the Commission to explain , firstly , how it intends to ensure that Member States make good on their commitments to the educational goals in the 2020 strategy by ensuring that this area receives sufficient support and funding and is not forgotten amid the rush to balance the books in the light of the economic crisis and , secondly , how it intends to secure extra budgetary means for these important EU-level strategies and programmes .




Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , and of President Barroso , I should like to make a few comments about the 2020 strategy and echo the very interesting reports from Mr Grech and Mr Hoang Ngoc ; next , my colleagues and friends , Commissioners Hahn and Andor , will speak in turn - in this debate in which we are participating - on the other oral questions which affect other sectors : cohesion , employment , the social dimension , research and development .
On behalf of all three of us , please allow me to thank all the rapporteurs and Parliament for this initiative , which is being taken at an extremely serious and challenging time for all of us , at a time of economic crisis , with the recent difficulties of the euro , which clearly highlight the interdependency of all our Member States and the need to coordinate our countries ' economic policies .
This is the time to respond and to act and , as far as possible , together , in this context of uncertainty and crisis .
The decisions taken over the last few days are - we think - very important .
I will not go back over the long debate which was held this morning with my colleague , Commissioner Rehn .
It is obvious that we have to put in place instruments for improved coordination of our economic policies , and we think that this Europe 2020 strategy may be the first instrument of a new , strengthened and coordinated economic policy .
In its proposal concerning this strategy , the Commission had already emphasised , at the beginning of March , the need to stabilise our public finances .
The euro crisis which we have just been through proves to us just how relevant this position still is .
Like my colleague , Commissioner Rehn , I have taken note of the proposals in Mr Hoang Ngoc 's report on these issues .
Moving on , there is , ladies and gentlemen , a second preliminary requirement for the success of 2020 , which is putting our economy , our economies on a sound or improved footing .
I am , of course , thinking about the need to supervise and regulate the financial market , so that it serves the real economy and not the other way around .
I promise you that the Commission will keep to its roadmap in these areas .
Within the next year , we will have put all the necessary legislative proposals on the table , so that we can formalise the commitments we made together at the G20 on four major issues : transparency , responsibility , supervision and crisis prevention .
With regard to several of these issues , which have already been considered in the legislative debate , I truly hope that Parliament and the Council will be able to rapidly overcome their differences with regard to the texts under discussion .
I am thinking about the ' financial supervision ' package and the hedge funds document .
We must restore confidence .
We must also utilise every single resource to free up the growth potential of our economy .
This work clearly comprises many aspects .
The debate , this afternoon 's debate in fact , demonstrates this : the relaunch of the internal market , regional policy for all the regions , including the most distant ones , such as the outermost regions , cohesion , economic governance , the viability of public finances , employment , education and research .
When we talk about Europe 2020 , what are we talking about ?
I think that this 2020 strategy must enable us to have a better perspective on the economic policies of our Member States , in order to avoid certain imbalances or even certain instances of competition in the future .
These imbalances have been very obvious in the current crisis but , at the same time as urgently addressing this crisis , we must work on the economy in the medium and long terms .
This is why , on the basis of the Commission proposals , the European Council adopted five common objectives : an employment rate of 75 % , 3 % of GDP invested in research and development , as well as a restriction on leaving school too early , increasing the number of people with a university diploma to 40 % , and the 20-20-20 targets in the field of energy and climate change .
Finally , there is also the promotion of social inclusion by combating poverty .
Quantified indicators for education and social inclusion will have to be set at the June European Council .
Work on these two objectives is in progress in various forums of the Council .
It is very important to clearly understand that the 2020 strategy is not merely a vision .
It is , above all , a concrete programme of reforms to be implemented , and that is why we are proposing seven flagship initiatives as part of this strategy .
In addition to these flagship initiatives , European instruments , in particular the single market , financial levers and foreign policy instruments will also be mobilised to eliminate certain obstacles .
I should also like to commend the Monti report presented a few days ago , and I wish to pay homage to the intelligent work of Mr Grech , who is giving a humanist and more concrete dimension to the internal market , as I myself should like to do .
There are also certain requirements where implementation is concerned .
Therefore , more efficient governance mechanisms have been proposed , which require the involvement of the Member States , as well as the Commission , at every level of the monitoring process .
Europe 2020 also means adopting reforms to be implemented within the Member States themselves .
The latter will have to submit national reform programmes between now and the end of the year in a coordinated fashion , with a stability and convergence programme , while also showing respect for the Stability and Growth Pact .
Mr Hoang Ngoc , I should like , if I may , to point out that this pact has been supported for about 10 years now by both left- and right-wing governments .
Finally , the Commission is calling on the European Parliament to do what it does so well and play a still greater role in this new strategy .
During a crisis , we wish to send out clear messages to the Member States .
This is the purpose of the integrated guidelines proposed by the Commission .
These will only be adopted once you have tabled your opinions .
However , bearing in mind the urgency of the situation , we must implement this strategy .
We must aim for a political agreement at the European Council meeting in June .
Let us be clear , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen : in the rest of the world , socio-economic strategies are already being implemented for the medium term .
Europe cannot be left behind .
To conclude , the European Parliament is playing its role , and we thank it for doing so , for mobilising the citizens , in particular , via the national parliaments ; I was very impressed by the initiative taken by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and its Chair , Malcolm Harbour , on the Services Directive , which brought together national parliaments and the European Parliament .
There are other examples , and this is a very important undertaking .
To conclude , I should like to confirm that the Commission will do as you wish and play its role in a purposeful manner so as to implement this strategy and to build , with you , this new , higher quality , more sustainable and fairer growth , which the citizens expect .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( BG ) Mr President , Commissioners , if we were discussing the Europe 2020 strategy without the economic crisis having occurred , everything would be fine .
The problem is that in the current crisis and after what has happened , the Europe 2020 strategy is not ambitious and dynamic enough .
The problem which all the questions asked in recent weeks have been about is whether there is a sufficient degree of coordination , as was the case even up to now in European policies , for the European Union to make progress .
From what we see , this coordination is good at a time of growth , but during a crisis it is not up to requirements .
Alternatively , many more functions need to be transferred , not only coordination , but also decision making at European level so that Europe can set itself much more ambitious tasks and play a much more leading role in this coordination .
This is the fundamental question to be answered .
If we fail to do so , we will not be able to set out the 2020 programme properly either .
I think that in the coming weeks , we ought to focus mainly on this issue .


Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to see Mr Hahn , Commissioner for Regional Policy , and Mr Barnier , Commissioner for the Internal Market , sitting side by side because it is essential that we do not play off regional policy against the internal market .
Instead , we should ensure that the one complements the other and that both of them are strong so that we can achieve the objectives of Europe 2020 .
Europe 2020 must begin here and now and should not be just a catalogue of objectives .
Europe 2020 is a project for growth and employment and we need concrete projects , we need the instruments , we need the procedure , we need mechanisms for sanctions , so that this can be successfully implemented .
I am convinced that we will only be able to implement Europe 2020 if we are ready , if Europe is ready to think of the EU in terms of the United States of Europe !
To think in those terms and with each of us making a contribution to the whole .
Europe 2020 means the willingness to bring about a political union .
That presupposes reinforcing and expanding the monetary union , reinforcing and expanding the internal market , unfettering it and calling on people to use the opportunity that is Europe , to use Europe and break through borders .
We have to create an economic union which is part of a political union , as well as a social union .
None of these things are ready and there is a great deal that has not even been addressed .
Europe 2020 is a community Union , not a nationalist or obstructive Europe .
We therefore need a financial review , an EU impact assessment , implementation of the Small Business Act and , obviously , very specific European projects for growth and employment and the expansion of the freedoms of education , science , research and innovation in Europe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Karas if the United States of Europe to which he referred in his speech is going to take place with the consent of the peoples of Europe or without the consent of the peoples of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , each one of us who represents the citizens of Europe and is constantly in contact with them has one objective : working with the citizens of Europe in order to further develop Europe and make it more competitive and to achieve growth and employment for the benefit of Europe 's citizens .
Unless we take action together to become stronger and if each person looks after their own interests , this Community will not be reinforced , but weakened , in these times of increasing globalisation .
The citizens are our most important allies in achieving our joint objectives .
Mr President , the Europe that we are taking decisions about today is also the one that decides how Europe will look in 2020 .
The decisions that we are refusing to take today will lead to new crises .
The decisions that we take today must be long-term decisions .
It is a serious problem that so many of the decisions continue to be short-sighted and governed by a right-wing philosophy where economies in crisis are put on a starvation diet .
It is also a serious problem that we are discussing Greek pensions instead of the behaviour of the big bankers and of the players in the property and financial markets .
We need to correct this situation or else the Europe that we will see in 2020 will perhaps be in a worse crisis than the one we are in at present .
I call on the Commission to make a serious effort to bring about a change of course so that we abandon our blind faith in market solutions , we regulate the markets and we make major investments in those things that are for the good of everyone .
This may mean the transport system , it may mean energy supplies , it may mean other important solutions where the Member States cannot stand alone but where the EU and the Commission must act .
I also hope that the Commission is ready to table proposals that show that we take the transition to a sustainable society seriously .
We will , in other words , restructure our industry so that it is competitive and can create new jobs .
We cannot do this by convincing ourselves that we can keep following the same old tracks .
This also requires investment , but it may make an impact on the current figure of 28 million registered unemployed .
I also call on the Commission to show the workers of the EU the respect that will be required in this economic crisis in order to bring them with us to build a stronger and better society .
For us to be able to master this crisis , we need trade union rights and we need Europe 's workers to be made into stakeholders .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I used to say that we had a triple crisis in Europe with financial markets , jobs and climate . But now , sadly , we have a quadruple crisis if we add the state budget crisis .
It has made it painfully clear that the European Union is in dire need of vision .
European integration has , until now , focused on creating new projects without making sure that they work properly .
I believe that the time has now come for us to deal with our problems and instead work hard to deepen the existing institutions .
The mistakes that have been made can be corrected and the Union can still work for - and with - its citizens .
Europe needs a forward-looking Union .
For me , the direction is clear : I want a Europe which is open , inclusive and green .
The flagship proposals in the Commission 's Europe 2020 strategy are important tools to create that Europe , provided that we can make them come true .
And here I have some question marks .
Firstly , the overarching goal of the strategy is to create a more dynamic and competitive economy .
In some countries , the participation of women in the labour market is as low as 40 % , and this is shameful .
A gender-equal labour market is a precondition for boosting jobs and for tackling the demographic challenges .
I hope that the Council and Commission really take seriously the fact that the Council 's conclusions have included gender equality for a couple of months .
An inclusive society needs more jobs .
Unemployment is the main reason why poverty exists .
Youth unemployment in Spain , at 44 % , is devastating .
We have endless opportunities to create green jobs , but our policies must be aimed in the same direction .
An energy-efficient Europe is also a driving force of innovation , and the energy equivalent of fast trains , supergrids and high-tech smart grids is needed to improve Europe 's competitiveness .
I must commend the Liberal Commissioner , Neelie Kroes , on being the first to really outline a clear flagship proposal on the digital agenda , and I am looking forward to having the same kind of in-depth material on the rest of the flagship platforms before June , so that we can also cooperate in the decision making .
But , Mr Commissioner , we have the EU strategy pointing in one direction , and your budget proposal is , to be truthful , pointing in another direction .
As well as regional funds , social funds and the agricultural fund , we have to streamline and have coherence in our common tools .
We need transparency , and we need the same kind of statistics and we need sticks and carrots for Member States , not only to sign up to promises , but also to keep them .
This is important for the European citizens and for us in Parliament .
We need to strengthen the Growth and Stability Pact , and we fully support the package of Commissioner Olli Rehn .
To re-establish trust , as you mentioned , Commissioner , we need the indicators on the rest of the flagship proposals .
That would re-establish our trust in you as a Commission , and maybe , if we can cooperate on decision making , citizens ' trust in us .


Mr President , Mr Barnier , in your speech you mentioned Mr Monti 's report , which was submitted to you a few days ago .
There is a very interesting aspect in Mr Monti 's report , and that is the emphasis it places on the pressing need for us to move on to the next stage of fiscal cooperation .
It clearly explains that the Stability and Growth Pact criteria do need to be applied , but that if they are applied solely to expenditure , through cuts in expenditure , this will almost certainly lead to a recession .
It is therefore crucial to use both pillars and , in particular , the fiscal pillar , to enable the Member States to collect a number of additional receipts from the economic activities and economic operators whose tax burden has been repeatedly reduced over the last few years : the profits from companies , capital , and financial transactions .
To do this , we absolutely must have European coordination .
This is the conclusion reached in Mr Monti 's report , which was submitted two days ago .
However , there is no mention whatsoever of this issue in the EU 2020 strategy presented by the Commission .
There is no mention whatsoever of this issue in Mr Rehn 's communication published a few days ago .
This is one of the major pillars , one of the fundamental added values which the Commission can provide at the present time .
Do this , and this will establish the link - Mrs Berès was just saying that this debate is a bit like a melting pot ; fiscal coordination will help establish the link between the EU 2020 strategy , the report on the governance of the euro area , on the single market , and employment and education issues .
We are well aware that , if we abide by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact - which , incidentally , is vital - but do so only by cutting expenditure , then we are on course for social regression and economic recession .
Therefore , my question is very clear : Mr Barnier , as a representative of the Commission , what are you going to place on the table over the coming weeks ?
How are you going to convince your colleagues - assuming that you are already convinced yourself - of the need for an action plan , for a fiscal coordination plan so that Member States are able once more to raise new revenues on the basis of a number of agreements ?
What are your proposals ?
You are not entitled to stay silent .
The Commission has a right to initiate legislation , but , today , on these issues , that right has become a duty .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , on behalf of my Group , I particularly wanted to welcome all the reports , but especially the report from Mr Grech , for which I was the shadow rapporteur in the committee .
I want to refer to some points on that in a moment but I just want to support what Mrs Berès said about the wide-ranging nature of the debate this afternoon .
But , on the other hand , it is rather an unfocused debate .
There are some really important contributions from many colleagues but , frankly , and I say this to the Commission and Commissioner Barnier , this also reflects the nature of the EU 2020 document .
It has lots of great ideas but it is very unfocused and it is also very underdeveloped at this stage .
He talked about the seven flagship initiatives .
Well , we do not know the details of those yet .
So the first point I make is , please , can we ensure that the Council does not adopt in detail this proposal at its next meeting in June , because it is not ready to be adopted ?
We need to spend more time on it together to work through the details .
My second point is that I think we need to make the relaunch of the single market an eighth flagship initiative .
That will not be overcomplicating things because it ought to be the number one initiative .
Colleagues , you heard from Mr Grech that the potential is there to create jobs , to encourage more innovation and to move towards a more sustainable economy but we need to get the support of citizens and consumers for this proposal .
It was like the question addressed to Mr Karas just now by the Earl of Dartmouth .
Citizens need to buy into that process , but it is there for them to do .
They will get the benefits .
We have this instrument of huge potential and , particularly with public budgets still amounting to 16 % of the European economy , why are we not using our public procurement budgets to drive innovation , to buy those new technologies , to encourage SMEs to take those up ?
It is the biggest single underdeveloped policy that we have .
We heard from Mr Barnier and Mr Grech today , and we made a contribution with Mr Monti 's report .
We have the instruments , but we need to carry them out .
Mr President , we are in the middle of the most fundamental crisis the European Union has witnessed in its history and yet almost all decisions on the strategic direction are taken at government level .
The European Parliament has been allowed to sit on the sidelines but no more than that .
Time and again , the entire debate today has circled around specific issues concerning the Europe 2020 strategy for employment and growth , which gives the false impression that we are talking about the future of Europe and the course of its further development .
We might be able to ask oral questions about the political relevance of the EU 2020 strategy in the context of the current economic and financial crisis , but we are not allowed to bring our demands to bear on this strategy and change it , make up for shortfalls or , perhaps , even change the priorities .
Instead of being involved in this strategic cross-roads , what we have experienced on almost every single point that we have debated here in this House in recent months is getting caught up in the power play between the institutions in spite of , or perhaps even because of , the Treaty of Lisbon .
This has mainly been to the detriment of the European Parliament .
Both the EU 2020 strategy and , for example , the integrated employment guidelines , which the Chair of the Employment Committee has spoken about , regard Parliament as a body that is merely to be informed or consulted .
Also , all the individual reports tabled here today far from present an overall view of the demands or the positions of the European Parliament regarding the European strategy .
We want to introduce a whole raft of specific changes .
In the last parliamentary term , the European Parliament put specific demands to the Council and Member States concerning the fight against poverty , the introduction of minimum income benefits and an EU-wide poverty-proof minimum wage .
None of that has been incorporated into the strategy .
On the contrary : there is even the risk that objectives , such as the fight against poverty and the reduction of poverty by 25 % , may even disappear from the current strategy text because they do not accord with the skill and the interests of the Member States or the governments .
Even the EU 's employment record over the past ten years has clearly shown that atypical and precarious jobs , in particular , have risen to 60 % .
However , the huge rise in atypical jobs should lead us to set up a model in the strategy and in the guidelines which is directed at secure and poverty-proof jobs .
Now , that is a fundamental demand which we are dealing with here .
However , as long as the European Union , the institutions and their specific policies do not send out signals to those who are marginalised , who live in poverty or who have no work , or to young people who have no future prospects , we will not be able to win these groups over to the idea that a common European Union is a future-proof project .
That is a democratic deficit which the current EU 2020 strategy does nothing to address and we should be fighting it together with our citizens .
The problems experienced by Greece and the euro area make for a serious situation , which calls for a structural approach .
The proposed EU 2020 strategy aiming to contribute to economic growth and employment seeks to provide this .
The strategy rightly covers healthy public finances .
However , the initiative will be useful only if two conditions are met .
Firstly , the functioning of the Stability and Growth Pact needs to be strengthened so that this kind of situation does not recur .
It is not just a matter of structures and rules , then , but of mentality .
The crucial point is that Member States meet their budgetary commitments , as I pointed out during a conference in Athens last week .
It is to be welcomed that Member States are to call each other to account more intensively in a Council context regarding the structural reforms needed to put their public finances back in order .
As far as I am concerned , strengthening of economic coordination ought to cover this .
The second condition I wish to draw attention to is the undesirability of the European Union turning its attention to the policy fields of social affairs , employment and social cohesion .
Objectives in those fields cannot be enforced at European level ; and rightly so .
We saw in the case of the Lisbon Strategy that such an approach does not work .
Here , too , it is true that it is in restraint that the master is revealed ; the European master .
( NL ) Today , we are discussing Europe 's economy from a long-term perspective , and how to achieve sustainable economic growth .
When Europe discusses this , I do not sleep as easily , as Europe has not proposed a great deal up to now .
I would remind the House of the Lisbon Strategy , in which Europe agreed to become the most competitive economy in the world .
That proved to be a complete failure , of course .
All that this European Union has done is to increase bureaucracy , create unnecessary rules - particularly in my country , the Netherlands - and bring tax increases , mass immigration , crime and a lack of security .
Moreover , let us now take a look at the list of countries wanting to join the EU , with whom we sit round the table every day : Albania , Bosnia , Turkey - all poor countries , Muslim countries , and corrupt and criminal to boot - and Iceland - a bankrupt state .
In addition , every day in this Chamber we hear members of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , and even the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , say that we need a green economy , that we must provide billions of euro in subsidies for wind turbines and green electricity , even though our industry is becoming increasingly less competitive in relation to China , the United States and India .
Are you surprised that our economy is stagnating ?
There is only one recipe for an economically strong Europe , and that is less bureaucracy and fewer officials in Brussels , and also less bureaucracy in the Member States ; tax cuts instead of tax increases ; and putting a stop to mass immigration .
Greece clearly must be expelled from the euro area .
Let us hold up a mirror to ourselves for once and look at the MEPs here : what have you done in recent years to hold Greece to its commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact ?
I already know your answer : absolutely nothing .
You have all been asleep here while countries such as Greece , which have received billions from Europe each year , have squandered that money and let the government grow out of hand .
If Europe does not succeed in this , I predict that my country , the Netherlands - and also Germany - will leave the euro area .
Mr President , the financial support package that was presented almost two weeks ago was a necessity , but not a solution to the problems that Europe is facing .
Now there is a need for action , for decisions and for restored confidence in public finances .
I would say that we need to discuss the 2020 strategy , but we need even more a 2010 strategy , describing the action that needs to be taken now in order to restore growth , reduce deficits and create optimism .
But there will be none of the growth which is needed without restored confidence in public finances .
On this point , the Socialists are failing .
They are defending the same policies that led to the deficits and the crisis of Greece , Spain and Portugal and other countries .
The rapporteur , Mr Hoang Ngoc , is saying that we should prolong those policies and that we should wait before reducing the deficits .
Mrs Ulvskog from Sweden proposes increased spending .
The Socialists have become a threat to prosperity , recovery and the new jobs that Europe needs .
I can assure you that , where Socialists fail , we in the EPP will stand up for the action needing to be taken - reduced deficits , restored confidence and the reforms for growth and new jobs .
That is what Europe will need , and we will stand there and take the tough decisions and take the responsibilities where others fail .
( ES ) Mr President , I have to take a few seconds to ask that the speaker before me go to Greece and ask there who is responsible for the problems workers are experiencing at present .
They are not waiting on the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
No , Sir .
They are hoping for a real political change , such as that which can be brought about by the 2020 strategy .
If our analysis is faulty , our solutions will likewise be faulty .
The analysis we need to make is that Europe is suffering greatly from greed , from a lack of regulation , from a lack of economic governance , from an insufficiently educated and cohesive population , from a lack of social justice , from low economic growth , from low employment growth and from having enormous groups of poorly skilled people outside the job market .
Mr President , the effort over the next ten years must be aimed at increasing the amount of people that work and ensuring that people are much better prepared , in educational terms , to win the productivity battle .
Europe will not gain in competitiveness without winning the productivity battle .
We will not gain a place in the world by lowering salaries , by destroying social standards , but rather by increasing our level of knowledge , by raising the level of solidarity and social cohesion in our society .
These are our strong points .
We must turn Europe into a genuinely united continent , with a clear project , clear objectives , with an economic governance that not only enables us to respond to the emergencies of today , but also to the challenges of tomorrow .
These are our hopes .
These are the hopes that have been forged by a sizeable majority of the Members on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , leaving aside the siren calls of those who want to return the ' every man for himself ' idea , thus destroying solidarity with all .
That is , Mr President , what we hope : that the 2020 strategy will get through to all European citizens , who are asking us for more jobs , more high-quality employment and for economic governance and tax consolidation .
Tax consolidation is fine , but there must also be social and economic consolidation , otherwise we will not achieve anything .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , as we have heard , the financial markets need to be packaged in a new regulatory framework so that in future , we can avoid the excesses that have led to the crisis .
However , if we highlight the underlying causes of the indebtedness of governments , then it becomes clear that , here in Parliament , we talk too much about public debt and too little about how we can achieve prosperity and growth .
What determines our growth ?
Our growth and prosperity depend on people in the European Union developing products and generating new ideas that can also be sold on the global market .
It is therefore right that one chapter in the EU 2020 strategy is Innovation Union .
We need to focus on inventions and on how we can reinforce research and development .
With that , it is important that we enhance the synergies of research funding and regional development policy .
A great deal more could be done in those areas .
Together with the Liberals and the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) , I would argue that we focus on small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should see to it that we , as the EU , spend our funding so that SMEs really get access to that funding and so that there is a technology transfer between universities and colleges and SMEs .
We should encourage people to take their destinies into their own hands through personal responsibility and self-initiative .
Governments cannot create jobs ; they need to be created in the economy itself .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that you have recognised that the transition to a green economic development must begin now , because climate change will put the EU 's economic successes at risk .
However , what is missing in the Europe 2020 strategy is a link between environmental change in the economy and a green employment strategy .
There are studies which have shown that 8 million new jobs can be created through the energy transition alone .
In the Europe 2020 strategy , we therefore need an initiative for green jobs .
This initiative must be reflected in specific measures and integrated guidelines .
Therefore , we need stable legal and political frameworks , so that investors really do invest in green jobs .
That equally includes establishing links between research and development and the economy , the promotion of innovation clusters and also the opportunity to promote such clusters in disadvantaged regions .
That is what the van Nistelrooij report states and I endorse it .
Although I do not endorse those who would seek to impose demands on regions from above as regards the earmarking programme , the impetus stemming from this report and from the proposals made are nevertheless heading in the right direction and will contribute to the creation of green jobs .
However , in the employment strategy , we must focus equally on shaping the course of transformation towards a green economy , on carrying the workers with us and preparing them for the transition .
I address those words to Commissioner Andor .
Fundamentally , the structure of the employment policy guidelines presented is right and balanced .
Of particular importance is the fact that education has been emphasised as an independent area of focus .
This area offers great opportunities for breaking the cycle of poverty .
It forms a cornerstone for a green employment strategy and is thereby key to the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , we also to need to improve the guidelines .
The employment guidelines have a key role to play and that is to enable us to really exploit the potential of green jobs .
( PL ) Very different conclusions can be drawn from Europe 's slow economic growth and the collapse caused by the crisis .
One can certainly agree with those in this House who are calling for a reduction of the concession , administrative and information burdens which are generated not only by the Member States , but also by the European Union and by this Parliament .
However , there is the risk of applying a treatment which is much worse than the disease .
One such measure which would be harmful for European growth would be increasing the role of the European Union in the area of tax cooperation and coordination , and the tax harmonisation which would follow .
Tax competition , like every kind of competition , is good for the citizens and the markets .
It creates the chance for a better result , and is an important factor in our competitiveness at global level .
Therefore , common freedoms and a common market , and not extending Union competences , should be the central principle of the Union 's economic policy .
( PT ) Mr President , we would like to say in this debate that it is time to stop playing word games and talk about the real problems that the majority of women and men are experiencing in our countries ; about suffering ; about the more than 85 million people living in poverty in a European Union which is one of the richest parts of the world and in which scandalous profits continue to be made without any measures being taken to check them .
We want to talk about the lack of job security and poor pay faced by workers ; about the young people and women who cannot find work ; about the 23 million unemployed .
We want to talk about the elderly people who are being denied a decent retirement and the children whose futures are being mortgaged .
Let us be clear : what is being proposed in the Europe 2020 strategy is the same path as was there at the start of the crisis .
The European Commission did not want to analyse the causes of the current situation or make anything of the consequences of the cornerstones of the policies that it followed in applying the Lisbon Strategy : the liberalisation of economic sectors , including financial services , and the labour flexibility that it called flexicurity .
What they are now aiming for is to open the way for greater concentration of wealth using various directives that will facilitate the privatisation of strategic sectors of the economy , and attacks on public services that interest economic groups in areas of health , social security , and education ; anything that could turn a profit .
They prefer to hide the fact that only a break from these policies will allow a change of course and that only this can bring social progress .
Nevertheless , we insist on this break and say that it is time to drop the Stability Pact and replace it with a programme of social development and progress .
This programme must prioritise production , quality public services , the creation of jobs with rights , salaries , decent pensions and retirement conditions , social inclusion , and fair wealth division and distribution .
These priorities will require true economic and social cohesion , with the clear reinforcement of the Union budget , solidarity , public policies , and the control of the essential sectors of the economy by the state .
We are certain that the workers and the people will continue to fight for this , for example , in Greece tomorrow or on 29 May in Portugal ; we here salute their struggle .
Mr President , doubtless the 2020 strategy says lots of interesting things , but , under enlargement , by 2020 , five new countries will have joined the EU and more likely eight .
Already in the EU of 2010 , 12 countries are net contributors to the EU .
The other 15 Member States are subsidised .
None of the new countries are likely to be contributors .
In 2020 , therefore , there are likely to be no less than 23 countries being subsidised .
By 2020 , therefore , the EU will have become , in practice , a transfer union , which transfers money from 12 contributing countries to 23 subsidised countries .
Unfortunately and unfairly , the UK taxpayer is caught up in this .
The comparatively impoverished UK is the second largest contributor to the EU budget .
At the last provincial elections in Germany , the voters of North Rhine-Westphalia said ' no ' to their coalition and were also saying ' no ' to the transfer union .
Voters in other contributing countries will also say ' no ' in the next 10 years .
By 2020 , the gap will be unbridgeable .
It is not in the UK 's national interest for there to be economic chaos across the channel but , unless enlargement stops forthwith , economic chaos is what there will be .
The 2020 strategy , therefore , misses the point .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I respectfully wish to ask whether you do not think that there is something incredibly bizarre in what is going on here .
For an extremely important debate on the financial and economic crisis that is the cause of tragedy among many millions of Europeans , only some 40 people are present .
We urge European economic operators and citizens to save energy while , for the past three days , but this is also true at every plenary sitting , we can see , if the cameras show it , the waste of energy in lighting a chamber the size of a stadium where no more than 40 people are present except at voting time .
In the 27 interpreters ' booths , there are 27x3 , which makes 81 highly qualified simultaneous interpreters , translating for us .
For 40 MEPs , that makes two interpreters per person .
Do we not think that it is time to look in the mirror and stop urging pensioners , fire-fighters , nurses and teachers to keep tightening their belts ?
( PL ) In times of crisis , when the integrity of the European Union is under threat , we should , in supporting economic growth , pay particular attention to the cohesion of the Union .
We still do not know if the crisis will act to deepen the differences between different regions of Europe .
Historical differences in the level of development of regions may grow , and we may also witness the appearance of new differentiating factors .
In this situation , what is particularly needed are mechanisms which reduce differences between regions , and continuation of strong regional policy is the way to achieve this objective .
It would be unwise , in this situation , to give up this policy and reduce significantly the financing available to local and regional authorities , for this would pose a serious threat to the stimulation of economic growth , but would also be a threat to European unity as such .
Both the Europe 2020 strategy and Cohesion policy aim to achieve the same goal .
They have a crucial effect on economic revival and huge significance for European solidarity policy .
However , what is needed is better coordination between them .
Creating new and separate thematic funds to respond to new challenges would be a waste of time and money , and would also delay realisation of the 2020 strategy and condemn it to the fate of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must ensure the financing of key infrastructure projects and reject the renationalisation of regional policy .
At the moment , we often hear of strong pressure from governments of certain Member States and also from the European Commission to cut or reduce expenditure on regional policy .
However , the message of the European Parliament in the report , of which I was shadow rapporteur , is clear .
We need stronger , not weaker , Cohesion policy .
We need true European solidarity .

( EN ) Mr President , Mr Grech , I would like to congratulate you on the truly excellent report which you have tabled before us here and which provides us with a basis from which to move forward .
Thank you also for using a phrase which I myself use all the time , namely that the economy is there for the people and not the other way around .
That is precisely what the policy of the European Union should be based on .
In your report , you also quite rightly point out that an adequate assessment of the social , consumer-related , environmental and economic impacts of the internal market , and the decisions we make in the internal market , are of particular importance .
That is precisely what has been missing so far or what has not been made sufficiently visible to our citizens .
It is a very important approach to point out the actual humanist and holistic elements of our policy , even when it comes to the internal market .
In your report , you also state one thing which is particularly important for us Social Democrats , and that is that social policy should be considered as a core of internal market policy and that protecting services of a general economic interest is of particular importance .
In addition , you call for the development of a strategy for improved communication of the social advantages of the internal market .
If we consider just these few points , we realise that we could achieve a great deal if only the European Commission gave us its backing .
I also very much hope that the Commission will genuinely take the opportunity presented by the Grech report to put the progress of EU citizens centre stage .
I make that plea very strongly and , as we know , Mr Barnier has already agreed to do so .
If we approach the internal market from that angle , the policy of the European Union will meet with greater acceptance and we will be able to look towards a better future .

( FR ) Mr President , in this debate on the 2020 strategy , I should also like to take advantage of Mr Grech 's very interesting report to tell you that I am convinced that consumers must not be left out of this future strategy .
When I look at the Commission 's text on the 2020 strategy , I note that virtually no mention is made of consumers .
In the current crisis , you must remember that , while investment is , of course , the key variable , consumption in our various countries represents between 60 and 70 % of our GDP .
I would therefore like us to move further in this direction in the 2020 strategy .
I would love to see Europe pioneer a different type of consumption , one that is based on the knowledge triangle , on sustainable development , a Europe that is capable of developing production conditions and products which are of interest to consumers , which are created with them , a Europe which is focused on quality and no longer on quantity for quantity 's sake .
I would love to see a kind of enhanced competition which does not encourage ' discounting for discounting 's sake ' but which serves to ensure greater consumer satisfaction .
Commissioner , my question is therefore very simple .
Are you going to suggest to President Barroso and within the College of Commissioners that a group be formed to work in this field , so that consumers are no longer considered as adjustment variables , as passive individuals , but rather as active participants who are on your side , on our side , so that we can build this future society that we so desperately need ?
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to take some time to talk about the social and employment aspects of EU 2020 and the Commission 's efforts in this connection .
I am sure it is no secret that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would have liked to have seen a much more ambitious 2020 plan than is currently on the table , with a genuine desire to define how Europe is to support itself in future and with a desire to set high social and employment targets .
However , right now we have a situation in which the Member States had no intention of developing the plan that the Commission put forward . Instead they are moving backwards .
Firstly , with regard to combating poverty : many Member States have questioned whether the EU actually has the competence to combat poverty and to set specific poverty targets .
To this , I would simply say that there is a legal basis for this in numerous places in the new Treaty of Lisbon , for example , in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union and Articles 9 and 153 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
It is therefore simply a matter of getting started .
Secondly , other Member States , including my own , Denmark , have criticised the definition of poverty .
Of course we need to come up with a good definition .
However , these arguments cannot hide the fact that this is about one thing : whether we actually want to combat poverty in Europe .
That is what the real debate is about .
Do we want to reduce the number of poor people in Europe , which currently stands at 84 million ?
Do we want to reduce the number of poor workers , of which there are nearly 17 million ?
Do we not only want everyone to have jobs , but to also have good and proper jobs ?
Do we want young people to have access to the labour market ?
Yes , of course we do , and that is precisely why we need specific objectives with regard to social matters and in the area of employment .
Europe is currently in the midst of an economic crisis , but we must not allow it to give us a mental block and make us afraid to set ambitious targets in these areas .
If we do not have the courage to do this now , it will undermine the economic situation in Europe , as well as our social cohesion .
Therefore , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would say to you that it is the political will that will be crucial .
I hope that Parliament and the Commission will take the lead and urge those Member States that are hesitating to instead commit to a social Europe in 2020 .
I hope that , as Commissioners , you are prepared to do this .
( CS ) We have spent the entire day discussing a desirable strategic focus for the European Union .
In my opinion , however , we should first have put the question of desirable future development to our citizens and to those it concerns most closely , in other words , mayors and local councillors .
In this regard , it is a great disappointment to me that the role of local authorities is not sufficiently reflected in the EU 2020 strategy .
The strategy correctly mentions the need for greater links to regional and local partners , but it is not clear how the principle of partnership should be applied in practice .
Moreover , the consultation process is voluntary , so it is not in any way binding on the decision making of the Member States .
I can confirm this with one concrete example .
When the Federation of Municipalities of the Czech Republic raised comments on the position of our government towards the EU 2020 strategy , not only were these comments not incorporated , but the Federation did not even receive a proper response on how the comments were handled .
If we want to avoid repeating the failure of the Lisbon Strategy , we must not continue to ignore the voice of local authorities , who form part of public administration in all of the Member States and whose role is key to the fulfilment of any European policy .
On the contrary , mandatory consultation with the actors ' below ' would contribute vital findings on the correct , efficient and effective implementation of adopted measures .
I would therefore like to call on the Commission to monitor thoroughly the method of linking local authorities in to the whole process .
( EL ) Mr President , the current Lisbon Strategy has simply been renamed Europe 2020 strategy .
In essence , the Commission 's proposals as a whole do not overturn the current objectives , and not only were these objectives not attained , but progress over the last ten years has shown that the standard of living of the citizens of the European Union has slipped .
Despite this , the proposals tabled by the Commission do not include sufficiently social criteria .
We therefore ask : what measure does the Commission propose in order to prevent unaccountability of the market , redundancies at will and the extension of insecurity to labour ?
Does the involvement of the International Monetary Fund not mean more onerous terms for the Member States and people ?
In our opinion , if the Stability Pact is not replaced by a pact to achieve social objectives , the noose around the people 's neck will tighten still more and greater sacrifices will be needed .
( FI ) Mr President , when I was studying at the University of Helsinki in the 1980s , the Soviet Union was still going strong .
When there were problems there , they called for more socialism .
Now I am the middleaged father of a family here in the European Union , and when there are problems here , we call for greater integration .
This philosophy is astonishingly similar and the outcome , too , will be the same : it will not work .
Let us build on a foundation of nation states .
For that , we have to bake our bread before we distribute it , as we say in Finland .
Let us create jobs and the right conditions .
That will be the source of our strength .
That is how we will make progress .
We have a shortage of employers - not a shortage of employees , but of employers , who can provide people with work .
Small enterprises are crucial .
We should postpone the debate on the owner drivers ' working time directive until the next partsession .
That is a typical example of a situation where we should be speaking up for independent entrepreneurs , who create jobs , who do good and who employ people .
There is a danger now , however , that we will lose jobs on account of administrative decisions .
I really love Europe , even if I do not love the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , in the year of the World Cup , the ladies and gentlemen of the Council could learn a lesson from football and that is that it is not possible to have a good game of football if you have got a referee overseeing each player .
However , conducting a game without rules , without a referee and without penalising fouls , now that would end in chaos .
That is precisely the state of affairs right now !
It is high time that the Europe 2020 strategy put a stop to hedge fund speculators .
Those who have made a nice living from speculation and exorbitant interest rates for years should now make a contribution .
Not small savers , but companies with their high speculative profits should be asked to foot the bill .
Nor should the Cohesion policy ignore the euro crisis .
Apart from the current rescue package , Greece has benefited disproportionately in the past from agricultural and regional funding .
Without the necessary structural changes , this money has clearly seeped away and , despite years of funding , the country has been brought to the brink of ruin .
I do not see why we should leave the money tap on in such a situation .
Why do we not listen to Commissioner Rehn who has made the rather reasonable proposal that we cut funding ?
Finally , we cannot allow the EU to degenerate into a union of transfers .
A centrally planned economy , which is what some of you would like to see , has not proved its worth yet , even if it comes from Brussels .
What is needed then ?
A self-responsible budgetary policy , and if it does not work , courageous and effective sanction mechanisms .
All of that should be included in the Europe 2020 strategy .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the economic and financial situation in Europe fully justifies the drastic measures which have been taken , in particular , to stabilise the euro area and to avoid the undermining of our single currency .
The urgency of the situation justifies the practical approach adopted .
However , when it comes to implementing the adopted measures , it should be ensured that Parliament is involved , within the scope of its powers , and can exert its democratic control in appropriate conditions .
Indeed , we must ensure that our fellow citizens do not lose confidence , and can regain confidence , in the political institutions .
Without such confidence , no structural reform or acceptance of the necessary austerity measures will be possible .
Faced with the financial crisis , Europe has not been inactive .
We do not say this often enough .
In 2009 , we drew up and adopted regulations on the credit rating agencies , the implementing provisions of which will be published very shortly by the Commission .
Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted a few days ago for the package on the supervision of financial activities .
Last Monday , the same committee adopted the report on regulation of hedge fund managers by a large majority .
Trialogues have been initiated to seek an agreement with the Council .
This agreement must be obtained rapidly , so that our institutions retain their credibility .
Our fellow citizens often ask us : ' What is Europe doing ? '
We must meet their expectations .
In this regard , I should like to congratulate you , Commissioner , on your determination , and to encourage you to continue with the work programme which you have set out , in accordance with the undertakings made at your hearing .
Your ambitious but essential timetable has our support .
We will stand shoulder to shoulder with you so that the necessary regulation of financial services takes place .
This is not a question of bullying the finance sector , but of establishing the rules to ensure that an activity which should be regulated is regulated , and of making transactions more secure and transparent .
( HU ) Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , two great tasks face Europe today : designing a new strategy , which we are currently debating and which I feel is taking shape nicely .
However , Europe is at a turning point if it does not find a new modus operandi .
The events of the past weeks with regard to the Greek crisis - and here I would disagree with Mr Gauzès , since unfortunately , the European Union and the Member States , and especially Mrs Merkel , have been late in responding to this situation - mean that Europe is at a turning point .
This is an extraordinarily dangerous turning point , one that will determine whether we will move in the direction of renationalisation , national withdrawal and egoism , or in the direction of communitarianism .
If we do not move towards communitarianism , the programme outlined by Mr Barnier will not be implemented and is worthless .
It is very important that we do not forget , when setting out new objectives , about our previous policy , the Cohesion policy , the common agricultural policy or , if I look at Commissioner Andor , about renewing the European social model .
We are at a turning point , fellow Members .
The past few weeks have proven this to be the case : the previous model does not work and the current model does not work properly .
I am in favour of the Commission monitoring national budgets before they are submitted to the Member States ' parliaments .

( SV ) Mr President , my contribution concerns Mr Hoang Ngoc 's report on sustainable finances within the public sector .
It has been a very interesting report to work on .
The situation was - and the rapporteur 's speech made this clear , too - that , from an ideological point of view , we had quite differing views on this question .
In this connection , it is important to remember what has happened in Europe in recent weeks , where we have an economic crisis , the like of which we have seldom seen before .
The crisis is largely due to a failure on the part of Member States to look after their own finances and to keep their own house in order .
It was therefore perhaps a little surprising that we had such major ideological differences about whether it was actually judicious to borrow and spend as much money as many countries have done in recent years .
As I say , there were quite major differences on these issues , something that we have also seen in the Chamber .
Fortunately , a very broad majority in the committee was also of the opinion that there was a need for tougher measures to remedy the situation we find ourselves in .
The Commission has brought forward very good proposals in recent weeks .
A start has finally now been made on taking decisions that will actually lead to us getting order back into Europe 's economy .
That is exactly what we need .
That is why the discussions in the committee were exciting , to say the least .
It is important to remember that we are not only dealing with our current borrowing , but also with future challenges such as Europe 's demographics , its ageing population and so on .
This was an important report , and I think we made positive amendments to it .
I am convinced that the decision this House reaches will be a sound one .
( NL ) The present discussion on this crisis has mainly covered budgetary discipline ; and rightly so , as it is important .
It is not the whole story , though .
Let us also keep this crisis in the right perspective , which is that we are actually still talking about a banking crisis .
For many years , the banks made money out of thin air using opaque structures and , in 2008 , this bubble burst .
Countries then transformed that private debt into public debt , and this is the problem Greece is having to contend with now : an unbearable level of public debt .
In the light of this , when we discuss a 2020 strategy , we must also look at the role of the banks .
The Commission has a total lack of ambition in this regard .
Hardly a word has been said about the banks .
What this crisis has shown is that a clear distinction must be made between savings banks and investment banks .
Where is the Commission 's ambition when it comes to plans for tackling this ?
That was my first point .
However , we must also look at the economy of the future .
The economy of the future will make efficient use of its natural resources .
Here , too , the Commission has too little ambition .
Either its objectives are too vague or its targets too low ; for example , a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , which is woefully inadequate to promote green innovation .
How are companies to get the message that they should invest in green technology ?
We feel the Commission 's plans should cover this , too .
Finally , with regard to our own budget , this , too , must be in line with our own strategy .
This means that the Structural Funds must ultimately be used to promote new green technology .
At the moment , we are mainly subsidising more greenhouse gas emissions .
Where is the money for innovation , and where are the appropriations for sustainable agriculture in the agricultural budget ?
We need the Commission to be specific and ambitious rather than producing vague plans ; these are not the way to solve this crisis .
Mr President , the central component of EU 2020 should not be stabilisation funds and bailouts .
It should be a new strategy that all of our countries should want to follow to re-launch and re-energise the internal market of the EU .
We need to be looking at how to change our economies so that they are fit for those challenges .
The only way forward is to look at new industries via research , development and innovation .
The EU should be encouraging a new economic dynamism in the European research area , creating networks for excellence , research clusters for integrated projects based on innovation in new products and services , looking at new processes and technologies and new business concepts .
We should be looking at existing successful projects and using EU links to find best practice .
In my own constituency , I visited Glyndŵr University , which has fostered direct links with hi-tech firms in North Wales , achieving a 90 % graduate placement , even last year .
It has not just improved the job prospects of the young people who attend , but it has revitalised an entire region of North Wales .
Instead of looking at the billion-dollar projects and silver-bullet solutions , we need to get back to the nuts and bolts of what makes a successful economy .
South Wales has five significant pharmaceutical development companies with world-class technology .
With a little EU assistance , this hi-tech company cluster could be elevated to being a world-class centre , lifting an entire economy that currently qualifies for cohesion funds into a brighter future .
We need solutions to work effectively for our citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you will not admit it , but the reality is blatantly obvious : the idea or , at least , the myth of a liberal Europe has run out of steam .
How can anyone continue to believe in a deepening of its federal dimension when it is getting ready to fleece the most indebted countries to help out the financial markets ?
Yet liberal Europe 's project and activities have also run out of steam , and spectacularly so .
With the successive crises , the last of which was the deepest of all , public debt has exploded .
Worse still , however , the credibility of the euro area has gone up in smoke .
The situation calls for real solidarity .
However , the Treaty of Maastricht rules out any solidarity between countries in the euro area .
This is the ultimate European paradox .
The end of the line for Europe is also apparent in the negotiations at the WTO and in the story regularly sold to us claiming that the EU will protect us from globalisation .
Far from being our shield and protection , EU directives have frequently stolen a march on the WTO .
In fact , we are now hugely vulnerable as a result of the EU , and we are now paying the price with the deindustrialisation process and the various forms of relocation .
For the sake of the peoples , EU policy must be urgently refocused .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , EUR 308 billion is the total amount of the funds earmarked for implementing Cohesion policy for the period 2007-2013 .
To date , Europe has spent , and judging by the results , wasted , some of these priority funds established by Lisbon .
For EU 2020 to be a success and for the mountains of cash that remain to be spent to be used to stimulate economic growth and support competition , two types of intervention are needed : simplification and review .
Simplification will be a key to disentangling access to these resources from paralysing red tape : regions , citizens and businesses want to be able to act more freely to unlock their potential .
As for review , this is urgently needed in order to change the criteria defining how the funds are allocated , by rethinking the general spirit underlying Cohesion policy .
Now as never before , our Cohesion policy needs to be able to prove its strength as a multilevel governance tool , by giving a genuine voice to the problems that affect our territory and , in Brussels , formulating its long-awaited response regarding the future of our social and economic model .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is the duty of anybody that , like the European Union , is responsible for handling these kinds of sums , to impose stringent supervision of the projects that are supported and to vigorously combat waste .
This is the only way in which the EU 2020 strategy will succeed in not being a bad copy of a bad original .
( PT ) Mr President , we are facing accelerating global change that has devastating consequences for our economic , political and social systems and , therefore , for all our citizens .
We are currently witnessing an unprecedented weakening of the capacity of states to respond .
The European Union must , therefore , identify common causes and allies , and act in a clear and united way on the world stage .
Extraordinary situations require clear joint action .
If we do not take the necessary strong measures and collective responsibility , Europe will be consigned to marginalisation and impoverishment .
Only a strong Europe that respects collective rules will be able to give an adequate response to the new era .
Weakened and indebted states do not have the capacity to protect their citizens .
We therefore need to be able to win back the public trust , win the battles on stability , budgetary rigour , job creation , the stability of the monetary union , globalisation , strategic choices .
We must do this or risk compromising our future .
The future is won by committing to social cohesion , ensuring peace , constructing a new model based on the values of liberty , social justice and responsibility .
So , the 2020 strategy and the integrated Europe 2020 guidelines constitute essential elements of a new cycle of growth and employment in Europe .
In order to correctly implement this and carry it out , clear quantifiable objectives must be set out for employment , education and poverty reduction .
It is also essential that everything be done to facilitate the Member States ' transposition of their national objectives if the strategy is to be successful and correctly implemented .
( DE ) Mr President , the current Cohesion policy started life with the title of the Lisbon Strategy .
However , I firmly believe that the Cohesion policy can , and will , make an enormous contribution to the Europe 2020 strategy , not just because we command a considerable budget in comparison with other European policies but , above all , because the Cohesion policy allows us to have sustainable development in our regions and ensures good monitoring of the restructuring processes and challenges in our regions .
However , there is one core issue here that I would like to clarify once again , and that goes for our group as well : our Cohesion policy can only work if economic development is considered to be equally as important as social development and providing training for workers .
In principle , we need to take joint responsibility for the funds that are available to us .
It is a bit like hardware and software - one cannot work without the other .

( RO ) I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Cortés Lastra for his efforts in drafting his report .
This report emphasises yet again the important contribution made by the Cohesion policy in achieving the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
We must therefore ensure that the Cohesion policy 's regional focus is recognised as part of this strategy .
We are all aware that the strategy 's effective implementation will depend hugely on the way it is devised .
As a result , I believe that local and regional authorities must be involved even in the drafting phase in order to guarantee that really effective results will be achieved later on .
At the same time , better governance at a number of levels guarantees the effective implementation of the Cohesion policy at national , regional and local level .
As beneficiaries of these policies , I believe that Member States must maintain the key role which they have in the decision-making process regarding the Cohesion policy within the Council .
Finally , I wish to welcome the acknowledgement given to the role of the Structural Funds in achieving the strategy 's objectives .
However , I want to draw your attention to the fact , once again , that we must avoid the pitfall of using these funds in future as a means for punishing Member States .
I believe that such a measure would run completely contrary to the Cohesion policy 's real objectives .
( FR ) Mr President , the key word in this 2020 strategy is growth .
It does not matter whether we choose to call it intelligent , sustainable or inclusive , we are now in the grip of a crisis in Europe that will not come to an end tomorrow .
The quantified targets for this 2020 strategy - increasing the employment rate , reducing the poverty rate , and so on - are just pious hopes , because they use the same model as the Lisbon Strategy , which failed .
Europe is faced with a crisis which requires a much more visionary and political project , one with new ideas , which are completely lacking in this 2020 strategy .
I should like to highlight one such idea .
Should we not , at long last , set a target for enhancing Europe 's cultural diversity , a founding value of the EU , which could provide the raw material , unequalled on any other continent , for the economic development of our Europe , through the use of intangible assets , such as the economy of culture , and of tangible assets , such as our regional specialities ?
What is more , a strategic vision is being developed that is almost entirely focused on the Member States .
Yet these States , with their borders , traditional ways of thinking and centralised administrations , continue to preserve Europe in aspic .
A greater regional dimension is required in the EU 's future strategy .
Macro-regional strategies which reorganise land use policies around the continent 's life-sustaining natural basins , which are also its cultural and historic centres - the Baltic Sea , the Western Mediterranean , the Danube , the Alps , the Atlantic Arc , and so on - must also be encouraged .
This approach is gradually being adopted , for example , in the Baltic Sea , but it has not been taken up in the 2020 strategy , and therefore could very well be nipped in the bud when the funds for its implementation need to be released .
The 2020 strategy being presented to us is therefore , in our view , characterised by a highly conventional and technocratic approach ; it lacks political vision .
( PL ) The EU 2020 strategy is a document intended to establish the direction of the Union 's development over the next decade .
However , if this document is not to share the fate of the Lisbon Strategy , it has to be more realistic and closer to the ambitions of Member States .
With this in mind , we should appreciate the amendments adopted by Parliament to the Commission 's proposal which , in particular , concern strengthening the common market , reducing protectionism , continuing Cohesion policy and supporting agriculture .
However , and this still needs to be stressed , there is a need to conduct climate policy more fairly , in other words , in a way which does not , by its excessive burdens , mean the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will always be the poor relatives of the European Union .
Finally , I would like to point out that the central concept of European Union strategy is innovation , but we should remember to continue Cohesion policy and support for agriculture , because it is this which makes it possible for the poorer regions to bridge the gap in development .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , an industrial policy that focuses exclusively on companies operating internationally and using advanced technologies is not the best route to success .
We must not forget the whole small and medium enterprise sector , including both small-scale manufacturers and retailers .
Innovation policy should be aimed at them also .
In particular , this strategy should guarantee conditions that place small and medium-sized enterprises on an equal footing with their competitors outside the EU by adopting safeguard clauses and strong , effective measures to combat the extremely serious problem of counterfeiting , including through effective trade defence instruments .
It is important that governance of the Europe 2020 strategy should not rest in the hands of the Commission alone , but should be carried out at different levels , including the national and macro-regional levels .
We need to start formulating a policy and strategy that focus on the local level and the reality of manufacturing on the ground , and I would like to stress here the need for attention to be paid to the manufacturing situation in Padania .
In other words , we are asking for more attention to be paid to the actual manufacturing situation on the ground , focusing , in particular , on the SME structure , as I said , which is the backbone of manufacturing in every country in Europe and is therefore where the real hope for the future of manufacturing and development of the European Union lies .
( DA ) Mr President , well , our aim was to become ' the most competitive and knowledge-based economy in the world ' , but that did not happen .
The challenges facing Europe over the next few years are enormous .
The problems that we are currently seeing in Greece , and will perhaps also see in a number of other countries before too long , are the result of two things : the lack of competitiveness in Europe and the fact that Europeans have been living beyond our means , in other words , we have spent more money than we have earned and we have spent more money than is supported by our productivity .
Many economists like to make economics more complicated than it is , but the explanation is quite simple : the markets have simply lost their belief that Europe 's debt-ridden countries can compete and live up to their own responsibilities - that is the reason for all this .
Europe 's major problem , as I said , is a lack of competitiveness , and this is the problem that the 2020 strategy is intended to tackle .
We must increase our competitiveness in relation to other countries and the Member States must put their economies in order while , at the same time , investing in the future .
Indeed , it may be necessary to make cuts in what we call welfare services in order to use the money for education and research .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of Europe 's economy .
We therefore need to take them seriously in this strategy .
They lack capital and they are finding it difficult to borrow money .
We need to do something about this .
Many small and medium-sized enterprises are excluded from public invitations to tender , both in the Member States and , in particular , when it comes to EU tenders , where large undertakings are given priority .
Finally , I would like to say that administrative burdens are also something that we have to struggle with all the time .
The administrative rules that we lay down are , of course , a greater burden for small enterprises , which have very few employees .
Finally , we must help small and medium-sized enterprises to enter the export markets .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are all running a serious risk of focusing purely on the crisis .
After the action that has been taken in setting up the fund to defend the euro in order to help those countries in difficulties and to stop speculation , discussions in this House have focused heavily on the subjects of renewal and stability , neglecting everything else .
These are subjects for the Member States .
We have focused our attention so narrowly that the issues of the finance and banking system and the related problems of oversight and regulation have been put to one side and almost forgotten .
However , I firmly believe that a sense of perspective is needed in our formulation of policy .
It is not by accident that the pact was called the ' Stability and Growth Pact ' .
An even more accurate title would have been the ' Stability for Growth Pact ' .
We need to start talking about growth and development again .
This is the best way to stop speculation and to give genuine investors confidence instead .
Without proposals relating to growth - I am thinking about the fiscal uniformity that Mr Monti has been talking about ; investment resources ; making eurobonds available and cohesion instruments , as cohesion is a very important factor for competitiveness - it will be hard to create this positive climate , particularly at the moment .
( SV ) Mr President , recent times have shown us the importance of healthy government finances .
It is therefore curious , to say the least , for the rapporteur , Mr Hoang Ngoc , to want to tone down - and even remove - strict requirements for the Stability and Growth Pact to be followed .
The truth is , on the contrary , that it is essential for the EU now to focus on getting its run-away debt under control .
Otherwise , the future could be even more terrifying .
I was a member of the Swedish parliament , the Riksdag , during the 1990s and I was on the Finances Committee when our public finances collapsed .
I am not particularly proud of this , but it is true : for a period , we had interest rates of 500 % !
They were heading towards 2 000 % , which meant we were well on the way to banana republic status , but even the 500 % rates were not enough - our currency crashed and George Soros won .
Hard times lay ahead for the Swedish people , but , Mr Hoang Ngoc , we learnt one thing , and that was to keep our finances in order .
The same applies to Europe - good order provides stability and growth .
( EL ) Europe still faces a multi-dimensional crisis today , which is hitting employment and low incomes particularly hard .
When the European Union started , poverty only existed where there was no work .
Today , 9.6 % of Europeans are unemployed and 8 % of workers are living on incomes below the poverty line .
What are the prospects for 2020 ?
This combination of unemployment and poverty is exacerbated by the pressure created by the ease with which redundancies can be made .
At European level , there is no protection against redundancy and national legislation is being watered down , as in Greece .
All this is happening in the Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
We therefore need a minimum framework of disincentives for redundancy .
Proposals have been made .
The starting point is to recognise mass redundancies by companies which report a profit in the same country as an abusive practice .
The logical consequence is for them to be excluded from European subsidies and to be subject to higher taxes and fines and to have to refund financing .
The question is : is the corporate responsibility of companies included in their obligation to function as part of society or do they consider it acceptable to behave as competitors of the workers ?
Mr President , I welcome many of the aims of the EU 2020 strategy : the focus on growth led by innovative businesses , on sustainable growth and on achieving high employment .
However , to achieve this , the EU must not just talk the talk : we need to walk the walk .
For example , when undertaking the essential reforms of financial services , we must remember that innovative businesses and those employers need access to capital in global markets .
Our Member States also need to access those global capital markets and , whilst all eyes are focused on the European Stabilisation Fund , and whether it has achieved any current reduction in the immediate volatility , fundamentally , long-term confidence will only be achieved if , as well as this ambitious growth , our deficits are brought under control and public finances themselves are seen to be sustainable .
Mr President , I believe that today 's debate has shown and proved that Parliament can and should make a significant contribution to the development of the strategy .
Because of my remit , I would like to thank Mr van Nistelrooij and Mr Cortés Lastra , in particular , for their reports .
I thank also all those who have been intensively involved in this work because they will have a major say in the shaping of regional policy and because both reports have shown how important it is to consider all regions in Europe and that regional policy can and must be a policy for all regions , and that in future , it should be .
Both reports ultimately stress the positive impact of this measure .
I would like to thank Mr Cortés Lastra , in particular , for this significant contribution and for pointing out what the Lisbon Strategy ultimately did deliver , despite all the criticism .
It was , after all , not just the idea , but the subsequent implementation of the concept of earmarking that has made a significant impact here , especially in the fields of innovation and research .
Mrs Schroeder might consider this a bitter pill , but obviously you need to set a target .
However , the regions that have local structures and individual project developers have had , and will have in future , the possibility of carrying out individual projects and achieving objectives under one general umbrella .
Of course , we need points of emphasis and we need to set priorities , and that is the idea behind earmarking .
However , we can achieve a great deal by using a bottom-up and a top-down approach at the same time .
In addition , the strategic report I recently presented on the reports of the 27 Member States concerning the state of implementation hitherto of the current programming period shows how sustainable and sensible earmarking actually has been , because EUR 63 billion of the EUR 93 billion allocated so far has been spent on Lisbon objectives , that is , for research , innovation , investment in training and , finally , on transport and infrastructure , in the broadest sense of those terms , as well .

Regional policy - and this was shown very clearly by the van Nistelrooij report - is a driving force behind innovation which is able to move things forward and to make and keep European society more globally competitive .
It has been demonstrated that out of the more than 450 operational programmes , only 246 are focusing on research and innovation .
This quite clearly shows that points of emphasis , such as research and development , are necessary and that that must remain the case .
For this reason , it was obvious in the current programming period that we should allocate just EUR 86 billion for this area , which is three times more than in the 2000-2006 period .
However , we need to ensure better coordination of course , especially in the areas of research and innovation .
There is no conflict between excellence , on the one hand , and a broad geographic spread , on the other .
It must be our objective to promote brain circulation , not brain drain from some or many regions into a few .
On the contrary , we need to ensure circulation of knowledge and of the people involved , particularly when it comes to research , innovation and development .
One of the major objectives should be , especially if we consider the next programming period , making a transition from a merely performance-based approach , which is to say , proper financial management , to a stronger result-targeted approach and perspective .
That must be one of EU 2020 's major steps forward in comparison with Lisbon , one which really enables us to break down European objectives into national , regional and , ultimately , local objectives and thereby make the strategies tangible , visible and comprehensible .
One final comment : my understanding of regional policy is that it is investment policy , and by that I mean investment in all regions .
Finally , all regions can benefit from successful investments made in individual regions because , we have to keep remembering that two thirds of the European exports of each individual Member State are destined for the European Union , to the 26 other countries .
That means that if these countries are doing well , the 27th Member State will do well too .
That must be one of our objectives .
If today we also talk about how to tackle the crisis , then restructuring the budget cannot be our only concern , because growth constitutes a very important factor as well .
That alone will provide our successful exit from the crisis in the long term and regional policy can make a significant contribution to that .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , there are five plus two questions put forward concerning economic governance and Europe 2020 .
I will do my best to answer in five minutes , and in order to do that , I will use English as opposed to my native language .
Honourable Members , the first question is on how the Commission intends to strengthen the monitoring of the broad economic policy guidelines and how the Commission intends to ensure an active role of the national parliaments and the European Parliament in the multilateral surveillance process .
In reply to this first question , I would like to refer to the Commission communication on Europe 2020 , in which the Commission proposes that the European Parliament should play an important role , not only in its capacity as a colegislator , but also as a driving force for mobilising citizens and the national parliaments .
The Commission also emphasises the importance of establishing a permanent dialogue between various levels of government , including national , regional and local authorities and national parliaments , as well as social partners and representatives of civil society .
The second question concerns the Stability and Growth Pact and the additional instruments the Commission may foresee to complement this pact .
Here , I would like to refer to our communication on reinforcing economic policy coordination , which we adopted last week .
In this communication the Commission set out proposals on reinforcing compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact and deeper fiscal policy coordination .
Specifically , the Commission intends to make budgetary surveillance and policy coordination more forward-looking .
In the euro area in particular , a more far-reaching approach to the assessment of budgetary policies seems justified , including a more pervasive review of the weaknesses of national budgetary plans ahead of their adoption .
Furthermore , in order to provide the right incentives for Member States to tackle fiscal imbalances , the functioning of the excessive deficit procedure could be improved by speeding up the individual procedures , in particular , with regard to Member States in repeated breach of the pact .
The Commission also proposes to reinforce the macro-economic prevention framework for euro area Member States by establishing a permanent crisis resolution framework .
Under the proposed mechanism , the EU would be able to issue debt to finance emergency loans to a euro area member in distress .
The third question concerns the differences between two Commission papers : on the one hand , the communication on public finances in the EMU 2006 of June 2006 and , on the other hand , the 2008 EMU 10 report .
The policy recommendations that we made in 2006 focused on the changes brought about by the reform of the Pact in 2005 .
The 2008 EMU 10 report is consistent with what was written at the time , for instance , on the relevance of long-term sustainability , on the need to set incentives in good times and on the positive role of national fiscal frameworks .
At the same time , the lessons of more than 10 years of EMU and the recent impact of the crisis call for an updated but still consistent assessment .
Last week 's communication on reinforcing economic policy coordination focuses on making the pact more rigorous with regard to both its preventive and corrective arm .
It also makes detailed proposals against the background of the new opportunities provided by the Lisbon Treaty .
We propose reinforcing the Stability and Growth Pact framework , both in its preventive and corrective dimensions ; broadening the surveillance of macro-economic imbalances and competitiveness trends within the euro area ; introducing a ' European semester ' to strengthen ex ante integrated economic policy coordination ; and , finally , working towards a robust and permanent crisis resolution mechanism for euro area Member States in fiscal distress .
The fourth question refers to the task force established by the European Council in March 2010 in order to improve economic governance in the Union .
The Commission will cooperate constructively in the interest of the Union and in full respect of its right of initiative .
Last week 's communication already constitutes a significant contribution to the task force .
The European Parliament , in this context , is obviously a very important stakeholder in the EU economic governance reform .
Through its work and reports in the relevant committees - economic crisis committees in particular - Parliament is already providing valuable contributions to the deliberations of the task force .
The fifth and final question is about the trust that needs to be rebuilt in European banks and financial markets and in the European project in general .
I will just sum this up very quickly , because it is a broad subject .
I think there are three important issues to be underlined here : first , the importance of financial regulation to create a much safer financial system ; second , to make the fiscal stability rules very clear , transparent and understandable for all ; and , third , to restore the growth potential of Europe .
That is why Europe 2020 plays an important role in this context as well .
So these elements , in my view , are equally important in restoring trust in the European project .
This leads me to the two questions on the Europe 2020 strategy .
In line with the conclusions of the Spring European Council , in particular , as regards the headline targets for the Europe 2020 strategy , the Commission has started working with the Member States on setting national targets to underpin the headline targets .
To facilitate this work , the Employment Committee Indicators Group has produced two alternative technical approaches that show what each Member State would need to do to ensure the EU meets the 75 % target in terms of employment levels .
During the last week of April and the first week of May , the Commission and the Presidency held a round of bilateral discussions to exchange initial ideas on potential national targets for the strategy .
These discussions were very fruitful and allowed us to gain a first idea of where Member States stand and to understand the very peculiar economic circumstances that are a feature of each Member State .
The bilateral meetings showed that most Member States strongly supported the headline targets and were ready to set ambitious national targets to meet the headline targets set by the Spring Council .
Basing itself on the overall outcome of these meetings , the Commission will compile the results , which will then serve as an input for the various Council configurations in May and June .
If there are discrepancies between the EU target and the sum of the national targets , we intend to continue the discussion with the Member States to see how national or EU-level action could bring the EU closer to the targets .
The European Council has said that it will review the headline target in June on the basis of further work .
There is particular interest in an explanation on the poverty target , if you will allow me .
The Spring Council asked the Commission to help the Member States to identify suitable indicators underpinning the EU headline target for social inclusion , in particular , through poverty reduction .
After hearing the concerns of the various Member States , the Commission has presented a possible compromise proposal .
The proposal is based on three main EU poverty indicators , namely : at risk of poverty ; material deprivation ; and the number of jobless households .
Together , they reflect the multifaceted nature of poverty and the range of situations in the Member States .
While a number of delegations have expressed support for the Commission proposal within the Social Protection Committee , some insist on including a labour market dimension in the EU target set .
The Commission is actively exploring the possible solutions .
On governance , I wish to reassure you that we set great store by your role in the new strategy and by your input .
President Barroso has made it clear that involving Parliament more closely in Europe 2020 is one of his main concerns for his second term .
We are doing our best to make sure that Parliament has enough time to come to an opinion this year .
I am personally fully committed to helping you in the process in every possible way .
We need to have all the main EU institutions on board if the political ownership needed is to be there and the strategy is to succeed .
Concerning education and training , which is the subject of the second question on Europe 2020 , I would just like to say the following .
As early as the crisis recovery plan of November 2008 , the Commission called on Member States to retain investment in education and training , and we will maintain this focus .
In general , Member States have responded positively to the call to target the recovery measures at smart investment in resources of future growth .
Many governments have neither reduced student support nor scaled back enrolment .
On the contrary , many recovery packages have included measures to support wider participation in education , particularly in higher education .
In spite of the crisis , education budgets announced for 2010 have remained constant or increased in many Member States .
However , we do see signs of planned decreases in the education budgets of other countries .
We should bear in mind that some governments had already planned - and in some cases executed - general cuts in public budgets before the onset of the crisis .
Many such cuts would affect education .
Other Member States are exploring ways to diversify the sources of funding .
The Commission will continue to watch this issue carefully .
In some countries , financial constraints will only appear now .
We will monitor general state budgets as well as the efficiency of investment .
At European level and within the existing multiannual financial framework , the Commission intends to prioritise action supporting the Europe 2020 objectives .
Boosting economic recovery , investing in Europe 's youth and building tomorrow 's infrastructure are the priorities of the 2011 draft budget that the Commission recently adopted .
Support for the ' Youth on the Move ' flagship initiative means strengthening the ' lifelong learning ' and ' youth in action ' programmes as well as the ' Marie Curie ' and ' Erasmus for Entrepreneurs ' actions .
Let us not forget that we also intervene in this area through the Structural Funds .
The European Social Fund , with a budget of EUR 76 billion over the 2007-2013 period , helps young people move from education to the world of work .
It also helps people to return to education to renew and expand their skills .
Around one third of the beneficiaries of the European Social Fund are young people .
The Fund also allocates EUR 8.3 billion , which represents roughly 11 % of its overall budget , to the reform of Member States ' education and training systems .
All of this demonstrates that the Europe 2020 strategy reinforces the concept of the knowledge-based economy and that education and training are at the heart of this .
We will make sure that we have the resources to reach our targets .
( MT ) It is worrying that the economic crisis is going to give rise to long-term repercussions .
As the population age increases , so will the Member States ' challenge in guaranteeing sustainability in the area of social welfare .
While I can understand that public spending needs to be diversified in order for Europe to fulfil its 2020 vision , I also believe that this spending needs to form part of national fiscal policy .
The drop in birth rates and an ever-increasing ageing population call for a change in policy if we are to guarantee fiscal sustainability .
In addition , the rise in pension demands and medical assistance must be kept in mind .
With regard to demographic change patterns , the European Union needs a motivational strategy for senior citizens in order to keep them in employment for a longer period of time .
It is essential that we consider such strategies in light of the specific requirements among the various Member States .
We cannot employ a one-size-fits-all policy .
Each case merits individual attention .
Consequently , it is fundamental that there are more employed persons on the labour market , and that we increase opportunities for high level employment .
This will not only reduce the dependency on social services but will also ensure a higher number of contributors to these schemes .
On the subject of jobs and training , it is essential that the European Union focuses on active and inclusive employment , that is to say , exploiting the full potential of all those who can work , especially women , to promote the integration of those most alienated by the world of work and to supply them with all the necessary tools to help them succeed .
Mr Commissioner , after having been in our respective posts for some weeks now , it is time to roll up our sleeves and get to work so that these objectives are reached , which will increase employment within the European Union .
( DA ) Mr President , every day , thousands of jobs are lost in Europe , and the Europe 2020 strategy is intended to be the EU 's answer to future challenges in this regard and to how we can maintain and strengthen our competitiveness so that we can create growth and more jobs .
We need to choose the route we are going to take : whether we will compete on the basis of low wages and poor working conditions or whether we will compete on the basis of knowledge and skills , quality green jobs and decent conditions in the labour market .
In this regard , it is a little worrying to see the Commission 's unbalanced focus on flexibility in the flexicurity model .
That will not achieve anything .
People need to be safe and secure in order to be flexible .
There needs to be some form of support that people can live on if they lose their jobs .
Further training needs to be provided so that people can move around the labour market to the best job opportunities .
Investments are needed in the Member States , but they must be investments that pay off in the long term .
The Commission must do more to address social dumping .
Anyone moving from one country to another for a job should work under the conditions applicable in their new country .
The Commission must ensure that everyone is covered by the rules on migrant workers - by the rules applying at EU level - and the rules of the internal market must not take precedence over the rules governing workers ' rights .
Mr President , I would just like to say that the debate this afternoon reflects Parliament 's willingness , indeed insistence , on being fully engaged in this process .
Given my limited time , I would just like to make three brief points .
I support Commissioner Rehn 's statement - and indeed Commissioner Andor 's statement today - in regard to the scrutiny of Member State 's budgets .
At one point , it looked like the eurozone and the EU might not make it to 2020 as an entity .
So to ensure that not only do we survive but thrive , it is crucial that Member States deliver on commitments and promises already made .
Closing the stable door after the horse has bolted has always been a useless exercise .
Secondly , for the past 18 months , Member States and the EU have focused almost exclusively on the stabilisation of financial institutions .
In fact , we have been consumed by it .
While this is important , very many citizens have lost trust and are now feeling abandoned .
They are looking for support from Member States and they are looking to the EU to put in place a framework that is conducive to job creation , to entrepreneurship and to the support of SMEs , but crucially , that framework must link growth in the economy with the creation of decent jobs and an improvement in the well-being of all citizens , especially those below the poverty line .
Finally , there is a major crisis in youth unemployment .
A Commission document issued yesterday confirmed that youth unemployment in the EU stands at 20 % , which is twice that forecast for overall unemployment .
This crisis is every bit as real and as immediate as the economic crisis and , while I heard the Commissioner 's comments on youth initiatives and I welcome them , there must be real coordination between , and strong influence on , Member States to translate those initiatives into concrete jobs .
( PL ) The 2020 strategy contains ambitious objectives with which it is difficult to argue , but the objectives are defined as if the European Union were already wealthy , free from worries and thinking only about building a successful future .
Meanwhile , we know there are many things to worry about and , above all , there are many differences between the level of development of the rich and poor countries and regions of Europe .
I note with astonishment that among the priorities of the strategy , there is no place for the development of agriculture , while we know , after all , that by 2050 , the world has to increase its production of food by 70 % , because there are more and more people in the world , and less and less land is being used for agricultural production .
It is difficult to understand why the development of agriculture is not being treated as a priority in the strategy .
Agriculture means food security , agriculture means ecological security , and these things are so important for us and for future generations .
I cannot imagine a responsible development strategy for the European Union which does not include concern for the development of European agriculture .
( EL ) Mr President , before speaking about the 2020 strategy , an answer is needed , I believe , to certain points made earlier by one or two members about the position of the Greek centre-right party on the support mechanism for the Greek economy .
We need to clarify certain points .
Our party has never opposed the European support mechanism for Greece .
Our party simply had a perception of the measures that should have been applied .
The measures which are now being applied will certainly cause a deep recession and stagflation and the government decided on these measures itself , without any prior information or agreement with the other political parties in Greece and Greek society .
The majority in government refused any prior agreement which might have resulted in broad and necessary political and social assent .
I repeat , the New Democracy party did not oppose the European support mechanism of the European Union and the International Monetary Fund .
We respect our partners ' every last euro and we thank them for their support .
That is why we responsibly supported a different , more effective policy mix .
We support the need for strict financial discipline and a growth policy , so that Greece can break out of the vicious circle of deep recession and galloping inflation , with disastrous consequences for Greek society and the economy and , ultimately , a negative impact on Europe .
As regards our debate on the economic crisis and the 2020 strategy , I believe that the time has come for specific acts and tangible results .
Enough talk .
That is the point of my speech .
Keep it simple .
The euro is an historic success of European integration and we should defend and rescue it .
That is why we need strong financial and economic governance because , without this 2020 strategy , it is at risk of failure and of following the precedent set by the Lisbon Strategy .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( FR ) Mr Koumoutsakos , you do have some cheek !
I have just heard you talk about the Greek Government and how it did not bother to consult you , the various parties or civil society before implementing the measures .
Although , I must say that the current Greek Government is not in any way responsible for the situation .
It is a victim of speculators , who I will be criticising in a few moments , when I speak .
Yet it is also my duty to highlight the responsibility of the previous government , which massaged the figures over many years , and the fact that your party was in power for at least two parliamentary terms .
I therefore think that responsibility rests more with Greece and that political responsibility rests with your party .
Do you have a reply to this question , Mr Koumoutsakos ?
( EL ) Sir , your speech is the result of poor information .
The previous Greek Government took over an economy deeply in debt , very deeply in debt , an economy on rotten foundations , and these problems , chronic problems , deeply rooted over 30 years , were highlighted and dramatised by the huge international economic crisis .
Of course , mistakes were made by the previous government , but much bigger mistakes have been made , either due to weakness or due to a lack of courage , by the present government , which was at least five months late taking the measures needed to contain the situation , and thus the deficit crisis , which exists in every country , as you know full well , became a borrowing crisis .
That is how we arrived at today 's drastic situation .
This is the answer which I am giving you with a view to our engaging in self-criticism ; but this is where the ancient saying ' let he who is without sin cast the first stone ' applies .
( MT ) Mr President , never more than today has the importance of long-term sustainability of public finances been pushed to the forefront in such a dramatic manner .
It is easy and natural to say ' we warned you not to let your deficits and debts spiral out of control ' and we have every reason to .
However , now that many Member States of the European Union , including those in the euro area , have come to this unsustainable situation , we cannot simply reverse the situation and try to do so in as short a time as possible while ignoring the serious economic environment we find ourselves in .
This is not an appeal to postpone our actions in the field of public finances .
I am not implying anything of the sort .
However , to demand the implementation of austerity programmes unscrupulously within European Union countries would mean condemning the entire European region to a long period of slow economic growth , if not worse .
We cannot afford to curb demand , even in countries which boast surpluses , both on an internal and external level , and which have the means to spend more and not less .
We must help the weaker European Union countries to stimulate their economies through exports and therefore help to stimulate job growth prospects .
Let us not be dogmatic .
This situation requires that we act intelligently .
It also necessitates an element of flexibility in many sectors , not least in economic policy .
Mr President , we have quite rightly heard a lot about economic recovery in the Commission 's proposal for the EU 2020 strategy but not enough , in my opinion , about poverty , and that is why I was delighted that you mentioned poverty reduction in your speech .
We have to remember that the most vulnerable in society suffer in any economic recession more than anyone else , and that is why we have to put in place mechanisms to protect them .
For instance , I would like to see a target of a 25 % reduction of EU citizens living in poverty , as well as ensuring that those who are currently excluded from the labour market can gain access to good-quality work , and that , at the same time , we have targets to eradicate undeclared work .
We must also make sure that Member States invest in social security and social protection systems as well as guaranteeing access to rights , resources and universal services .
I would also like to see an EU-wide target to end street homelessness by 2015 by Member States , and to develop integrated homelessness strategies .
In all these areas , not only should Parliament be consulted more - and I was pleased that you did mention that - but NGOs working in the field as well .
As far as the open method of coordination is concerned in the social field , it needs to be strengthened .
We all know it has not worked as well as it could have done , but I believe it can work well in the future if the right mechanisms are put into place - but only if those mechanisms are put into place .
( PL ) The strategy is being adopted at the worst possible moment , when industrial production in Europe has fallen to the level of the 1990s and the gross domestic product of the European Union fell last year by 4 % .
However , it is not the timing which is worst here .
The worst thing is that as many as four of the five priorities which have been presented to us as the main draught horses of European development are hard to treat as European measures , specifically employment , research and development , education and combating poverty .
Basically , there is nothing supranational about these issues .
They are matters for which individual countries are responsible .
It can be said that only climate policy is an area in which we can take a certain amount of action at European level .
The others , quite frankly , are matters for individual Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , the 2020 strategy ought to incorporate opinions on the economic crisis and propose a new form of governance rather than try to mend the current failing system .
First of all , let us get rid of some false ideas , particularly those concerning Greece .
This is not a Greek crisis .
Greece and its population are the victims today of a predatory economic and financial system , a system which has seen the G20 countries fork out , all in all , several thousands of billions of dollars in a few days in order to save the banks , but which leaves Greece in agony for several months .
International summits are now ignored ; what will be , will be .
Finally , finance was going to be regulated and Europe had its endless discussions , but the vultures have not gone away .
So now what is everybody saying ?
That the market must be reassured .
Who is the market , though ?
Speculators , whom we must appease as if they were demigods and to whom we must make offerings so that we can beg them for mercy .
How much longer do people have to endure this cynical approach ?
How much longer do we have to live under the illusion of a market which gives financiers more than they deserve but which impoverishes the people ?
We cannot allow the terrorism of financial markets to bring whole countries to their knees .
A counterfeiter runs a huge risk because he is attacking an element of a State 's sovereignty : its currency .
However , when a trader speculates on a country 's debt , he does not risk a thing .
When will the white-collar criminals of high finance be properly punished ?
Speculators who greedily feed off the public should be outlawed ; the casino banks that gamble with the lives and futures of citizens should be abolished ; and the EU should be required to properly supervise financial markets , rather than attack public services .
Ladies and gentlemen , to finish , I think that they have been playing this joke on us long enough .
We can hold an extraordinary summit every Friday and release billions , but if we do not tackle the roots of the wrongdoing , one of these Fridays , we will end up announcing that the EU is bankrupt .
( BG ) Mr President , the European Cohesion policy has demonstrated its vital role over the years and has become a key policy for the Community .
It provides European citizens with a visible , quantifiable indicator of solidarity .
Its role is also recognised through its inclusion among the objectives of the Treaty of Lisbon .
All of this earns its rightful place in the Europe 2020 strategy .
In the draft strategy , this policy was not given its necessary place .
This is why I highly rate the report on including the Cohesion policy among the objectives to be achieved by the Treaty of Lisbon and the 2020 strategy , which provides invaluable guidelines .
We also need a strong Cohesion policy at the moment when the economic crisis is reducing the number of jobs and weakening our competitiveness and in the future too , so that we can confirm the European Union as being a strong global player .
Reliable benchmarks are needed for indicating the effectiveness and efficiency of the resources invested in this policy .
As it states in the report , an assessment is required of the impact of the Cohesion policy 's expenditure on regional development , based on specific indicators .
In order to determine evaluation indicators , the Commission should consider and propose a clear definition of the concept of ' territorial cohesion ' because this is precisely what appears in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Objective , precise evaluation criteria can only be established after considering the definition of the actual concept .
This will provide a concrete basis for the policy , as well as for institutions and citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my appreciation to the rapporteurs for their outstanding work and to thank the Commissioners for their significant , valuable reflections .
A few years ago , a good friend and mentor told me that throughout life , you will always come up against situations where you are either part of the problem or part of the solution .
In my view , the EU 2020 strategy is , at the moment , still much more a part of the problem than of the solution .
I believe that it is our shared responsibility to make this strategy much more a part of the solution .
Allow me to stop for a moment and ask you kindly to consider that the strategy 's very name is problematic .
In the vast majority of the European Union 's languages , the name EU 2020 strategy has no meaning whatsoever .
It is hard to imagine that a community of more than 500 million citizens could identify with a strategy , based on a notion providing a recipe for resolving the problems in their personal lives whose name is so intangible and distant from the realities of their personal lives .
This name may be very meaningful when discussed by marketing specialists .
However , we are not talking about marketing specialists here , but about ordinary Europeans .
There is another wise Hungarian saying : he who grabs a lot takes little .
In my judgment , the strategy - which is still part of the problem - grabs a lot and takes little .
The best thing would perhaps be for it to deal with the most important question .
In this regard , let me point out that , in my view , what we need to do is to strengthen regional development .
Strengthening regional development involves investment , growth and job creation , and I think that the most serious problem facing people today is that they need jobs and more jobs .
These are the points I wish to offer for your consideration .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the launch of the European Union 2020 strategy effectively marks the end of the previous Lisbon Strategy phase and it will have to tackle the negative structural effects that the financial , economic and social crisis has produced and is continuing to produce .
I believe that if the 2020 strategy is to be effective , it must focus on two key aspects , the first being a system for evaluating progress which factors in the use of the carrot and stick mechanism ; the second being a vigorous policy of investing in infrastructure , in addition , of course , to tools for regulating the financial system and policies aimed at restoring social dialogue and cohesion .
Infrastructures are the cornerstone of the relaunch of innovation policy in industry , SMEs , manufacturing consortiums or research institutes and in the relationship between these and universities and local institutions .
The van Nistelrooij report should therefore be warmly welcomed since , in addition to providing an in-depth picture of the work that has been done to date in the Member States , it starts to deal with the question of criteria for harmonisation of financial instruments and operational plans aimed at innovation .
The harmonisation of rules , procedures and administrative practices for the management of EU projects and the simplification and streamlining of procedures are the solutions that the stakeholders on the ground and citizens have been asking us for for a long time .
I believe that on this point , Europe can and must do much to promote growth , development and employment .
Mr President , as we seek to solve the financial and economic crisis , I would like to point out an essential deficit : that of knowledge .
I regret to say that Europe is becoming a more stupid continent every day , even though knowledge is our most fruitful and rich resource .
Investing in it bears no risk .
The young generation of Europeans pays the price of the crisis , however , as youth unemployment grows and education and innovation budgets are frozen or cut .
We have to cut budgets , but let us do so with a 21st century attitude , because where is half of the EU budget going now ?
To agriculture !
It should go to the young generation , and their development .
Not just a traditional education but one that focuses on e-skills and entrepreneurship for example .
We know that the higher one 's education is , the lower the chances of losing a job .
Yet Member States are not meeting the necessary commitment in fostering an ambitious knowledge economy .
Europe thus punishes the next generation of Europeans by not allowing them to develop their talents and ambitions to their full capacity , and it allows China , India and the United States to become more attractive places for talent , research , creativity and innovation .
Short-term measures will have a high long-term cost .
Entrepreneurship , excellence and a sustainable future of the European economy can only be fostered if we are willing to invest in knowledge , because whoever thinks knowledge is expensive does not know what stupidity costs .
Today , Commissioner Kroes presented her vision for Europe 's digital agenda , one of the EU 2020 flagship programmes .
It is an ambitious yet concrete strategy which seeks to make Europe 's digital market stronger in a global economy as well as connecting many Europeans to an open Internet .
I believe we need to take more smart decisions now and make sure the current crisis does not become a mortgage to the youth and the young generation charging an interest that they can never pay back .
Does the Commission support a coordinated approach , moving away from the intergovernmental procedure in decision making and giving a stronger role to the Commission and Parliament to ensure that Member States fulfil their commitments ?
( DE ) Mr President , the Lisbon Strategy did not have any sustainable success .
Why not ?
Member States , social partners and large parts of civil society were too little involved and so they had no sense of shared responsibility .
The EU 2020 strategy can be different .
It could be a success , Commissioner , if it also deals with those who are excluded , who are losing out and who often do not have a lobby .
In the EU , not even two thirds of those who are capable of work are in work .
Only just under a half of all older workers have a job .
Eighty million Europeans are insufficiently qualified and have increasingly fewer opportunities in the labour market .
This is a situation we cannot accept .
However , a genuine future strategy needs a social orientation .
Qualitative growth in the economy and employment on the one hand must be reconciled with social equality and with sustainability .
Commissioner Andor , we are both working on that .
What does this mean in concrete terms ?
The social security systems of Member States must be adapted to democratic change .
Through exchange of best practice throughout Europe , we could make our contribution to that and we could learn from and with each other .
The European Social Fund - one of your hobby horses - must be adapted to the new challenges , so that we can be even more efficient on the ground .
The European Globalisation Fund is so constructed that those at risk of unemployment are able to find their feet .
Our society must be integrative and integrate young people , for example , through appropriate education and training , so that they can develop professionally and personally .
Despite all the necessary consolidation of national budgets - which is exactly what we are going through and debated this morning - there is one thing we must not seek to save money on : investment in our citizens - in economic , sustainable and social terms .
The EU 2020 strategy will rise and fall with these three pillars .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Mann , I hope you are in regular contact with your Chancellor , if you see things in the same way that I do .
The EU 2020 strategy is a real opportunity to make Europe more social and we need that opportunity at this very moment when many hostile words are directed at Europe and when it has distanced itself from the people .
We absolutely need to offer something positive to our citizens that will offset that situation .
When it comes to growth and employment , we should stop putting people 's interests behind those of business .
Indeed , that must be the key objective of the EU 2020 strategy because Europe needs social progress .
I already pointed that out last Monday at the committee debate on employment policy guidelines : we must not lose sight of the goal of full employment , but we cannot have full employment at all costs because we need good jobs .
We always say we need jobs , but what matters to me is that these jobs are good , that there is social security , that people do not have to receive subsidies and that they can actually make a living from these jobs .
The ever more precarious nature of working life , the increasing income inequality and also growing poverty - which many speakers have talked about today - must finally be brought to an end with the EU 2020 strategy .
We need a more active labour market policy and one which covers many areas .
Finally , people expect more specific answers , very specific answers , in fact , and not an umpteenth strategy !
( PL ) The economic crisis which has hit our continent has focused our attention - and rightly so - on rescuing the economies of Member States and building a common European mechanism to give protection against economic collapse .
It is understandable that , today , the attention of Europeans is focused on increasing the speed of development and on job creation , but we cannot , when building a strategy for the European Union , restrict ourselves for many years just to economic debate .
The European Union must not behave as if it were only an efficient businessman who is building the economic success of his firm .
The Europe 2020 strategy should contain significant reference to the role of culture in achieving the social and economic objectives which have been set .
After all , these priorities are going to influence distribution of the future budget , so we should maintain the possibility of financing such areas as development of cultural infrastructure and protection of cultural heritage as part of the European Regional Development Fund .
In the European Union 's 2020 strategy , we should emphasise the significant influence of culture on social and economic development in the Union , for after all , it is intellectual capital and the creative industries which have brought Europe renown .
It is this sector in which we can build competitiveness in relation to other parts of the world .
Creativity requires stimulation and development from the earliest years of life .
Only then will we be able to count on its turning to a significant degree into innovation , including in fields of modern technology , in the European Union .
Culture must not be neglected in European policy .
We must not dismiss all proposals to increase its role in European Union policy simply by saying that it is a competence of the Member States .
Europe , today , is proud of projects such as the European Capital of Culture , but this is a project which was created by European cities , and it is these cities which bear the main burden of this spectacular programme .
I expect , therefore , greater determination from the European Commission to ensure that the final version of the 2020 strategy includes culture .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 10 years since the introduction of the Lisbon Strategy and on the eve of the Europe 2020 strategy , in the middle of a full economic , social and employment crisis , we know that we cannot come out of this crisis , nor lay the foundations for new and sustainable growth and a new social cohesion , as you have said , unless we strengthen the mechanisms and instruments that the European Union has at its disposal to sustain investment in the knowledge triangle : education , training and research .
Just now , Commissioner , you confirmed that as regards this objective , some European governments are performing well , others a little less so .
In order not to fall within the limits revealed by the Lisbon Strategy , I believe that in this area , the Commission has to strengthen the open method of coordination with Member States , provide incentives and penalties in the European Social Fund and monitor the results .
I do not consider it to be consistent for governments , as the Italian Government has done , to cut EUR 8 billion in three years from education and the universities , without reinvesting the savings in these areas , especially as we have a 19 % early school leaving rate and 25 % youth unemployment .
In conclusion , do you not consider it opportune to strengthen the legal powers in Directive 2005 / 36 / EC to facilitate the mutual recognition of professional qualifications among Member States ?
According to Professor Monti 's report , currently , less than 3 % of European workers in fact work in another Member State , and one of the reasons seems to be precisely this difficult issue of mutual recognition of qualifications .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too have an observation to make on what happened in the last decade , 2000-2010 , as far as Lisbon is concerned .
It is true that many of us , given also what happened until 2008-2009 , viewed the results obtained with less than complete satisfaction .
Nevertheless , it is undoubtedly the case that that decade gave rise to hopes and aspirations , and that much was done to achieve the objectives that had been set , particularly in the area of employment .
Today , we find ourselves at the beginning of a new , more problematic , more difficult decade , and as regards the proposals that have been presented to us so far , I partly agree with them , although when reading them thoroughly , I still see too many shortcomings .
I would dwell at length on what are the guiding principles of this proposal , but I shall limit myself to considering growth and employment .
More jobs , more economic growth : this is the target that we must set ourselves , taking into account that we do so in a situation of excessive levels of public debt , of low structural growth , and of high rates of unemployment .
Hence , the targets that we set ourselves are too ambitious and , at times , too inflexible .
So , perhaps with a little less ambition and a little more flexibility , the growth and employment targets will be achievable .

Mr President , while Commissioner Reding confirmed , and President Barroso reconfirmed in his letter today , that the Women 's Charter commits the Commission to promoting and ensuring gender equality and women 's rights in all policy fields , I am disappointed that this has not been put into practice for the EU 2020 strategy .
Should we not be more ambitious than we were for the Lisbon Strategy ?
Ignoring 52 % of the available skills , knowledge and workforce of Europe for any sector or any level would be a serious loss .
If Europe wants to exploit all its potential and get out of the crisis , we need to ensure that the women 's employment rate is raised to at least 70 % - to be shown through specific gender statistics .
We also need specific targets so that we can measure the commitment of each Member State to gender equality , and make improvements thereto .
How ?
We need to decrease the gender pay gap by 10 % in each Member State .
We need to revalue the predominantly female health sector by increasing wages and improving conditions , as well as the availability of the services , as it is an increasingly important sector for our ageing society .
We need to increase the numbers of women in decision-making bodies such as managerial and executive board positions based on a Norwegian 40 % quota model .
We need to increase the possibilities available for women in research and development and innovation , and train them in new green jobs .
Member States cannot neglect to expand , improve and implement the Barcelona targets in all Member States .
We need the true commitment of the European Union and all Member States by involving all people when working towards a smart , green progressive society .
I am convinced that our Commissioner , Mr Andor , is going to do it .
( PL ) Discussion about the Europe 2020 strategy must take account of the experience of the previous strategy .
We all know the failures of that strategy were caused , firstly , by basing the strategy on the responsibility of individual Member States in the open method of coordination , and the successes came , among other things , from ' Lisbonisation ' or the inclusion of certain of the Lisbon objectives in Cohesion policy .
In relation to this , we have to ask how to approach the new strategy .
It now seems absolutely crucial , firstly , to show clearly that we are dealing with ' treaty ' policies , which are not policies prepared for the purposes of a strategy , but operate over a longer time scale , such as Cohesion policy .
This means we need to use individual policies to put the strategy into effect , but the strategy , as previous experience shows , will only be successful if individual policies are integrated with each other .
All measures which separate individual policies , split up funds and divide roles will end in the same failure as the last strategy .
Therefore , we need to combine , integrate and produce actions associated with synergy .
( FI ) Mr President , the indebtedness of national economies and an ageing population together constitute a real time bomb for Europe .
We know that , for example , the incidence of agerelated illnesses , such as Alzheimer 's disease , will double over the next ten years .
That will mean a huge burden on national economies .
We should not , however , make a mystery out of debt .
As I recall , Ceaucşescu 's Romania was a country without debt , as is North Korea .
There is also ' smart productive debt ' - intelligent debt if that debt is invested in people .
In this respect , the elimination of poverty , for example , is a very lucrative investment for society , as is reducing youth unemployment .
What I am quite rightly afraid of at present , while the Member States start to reduce their deficits , is where the cuts are to be made .
Will they be in education , the employment of older people , the employment of the disabled , or what ?
That will not be smart or intelligent .
That is why this EU 2020 strategy is a very important document , and I am one of those who say more Europe and not less Europe .
More Europe means something like root canal treatment : Member States will be obliged to accomplish the targets that are set out in this EU 2020 strategy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Europe 2020 strategy - to be honest , I do not feel like discussing the Europe 2020 strategy at all .
Ten years ago , we adopted a strategy , the Lisbon Strategy .
When you now look back at this past decade , the results are limited , if I may put it in those modest terms .
I think that we should currently be focusing on what really matters to people at home in our Member States , rather than making the same mistake again .
They are wondering whether we will be able to ensure the stability of our currency .
Will there be inflation ?
What lessons do we need to learn from the developments over the last two years , from the financial and economic crisis , and now from the currency crisis ?
Are we really taking to task the players in the financial markets who have contributed to the crisis ?
I would emphatically call on the Commission , first and foremost , to take steps to ensure rapid financial market regulation and progress in Europe in order to prevent , as has been the case in recent years , money being sent around the globe five times in the same day and many people making a profit on this while losses are being nationalised .
I would ask the Commission to demand that Member States exercise strict budgetary discipline and implement appropriate rules .
I would also ask for the earliest possible tightening of the Stability and Growth Pact .
This is where we should be focusing our efforts .
I urge the Commission to take requisite measures , but not as before , off its own bat or by discussing them thoroughly with Member States .
Instead , it should finally take Parliament seriously as an equal legislator alongside the 27 Members States .
( EL ) I agree with the previous speaker ; the Stability Pact needs to be applied .
However , a number of other things need to be applied before the Stability Pact .
The decision makers in the European Union need to have quick reflexes , to act when needed , because if Mrs Merkel had decided in time and if the European Union had taken the measures it needed to take , we would have saved a lot of money for the citizens of Europe .
In order for the European Union to be strong economically and to count globally , it needs its citizens .
The citizens must be healthy and educated and must have work .
The European Union needs to bear this in mind when planning for 2020 , when planning for the single market .
The single market must be centred on the citizen and must be a single market with a human face .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I have a dog at home .
Recently , my dog took a sausage from the table and ate it .
The question is - who is to blame for the fact that the dog ate the sausage ?
Is the dog to blame , for doing what is natural to it ?
Or rather , am I to blame for not clearing away the sausage and putting it back in the refrigerator after I had finished my meal ?
On the global financial markets , the value of the euro keeps falling every day .
Who is to blame for this ?
Many fellow Members say that the speculators are to blame , that the market is to blame , for attacking the euro and depreciating its value .
Ladies and gentlemen , I offer you the suggestion that , perhaps , the market is not to blame .
Rather , it is the market that has pinpointed the underlying fault , the underlying cause .
The underlying cause for our difficulties today is quite simple - European countries have been living beyond their means far too long , spending vastly more than they are able to earn .
The markets react to this in the same way that my dog reacted to the smell of the sausage that I had left on the table .
A year and a half ago , Latvia experienced a crisis similar to the crisis that we are now experiencing in the rest of Europe ; namely , the financial markets attacked our currency and had lost all confidence in it .
Instead of complaining about this situation , we corrected our fundamental indicators , we repaired and collected our public finances .
In my view , if we wish the Europe 2020 strategy to be meaningful , we must have as our first and most important priority the necessity for European countries to control their public spending , for their income to match their outgoings .
This would restore confidence , ease the crisis and restore calm to the financial markets . Thank you .
Mr President , today we are discussing , among others , two excellent reports by Ricardo Cortés Lastra and Lambert van Nistelrooij .
These both demonstrate in a clear fashion the important contribution of Cohesion policy in achieving the goals of competitiveness and employment and the significant role in promoting innovation and growth that the knowledge economy plays .
The EU 2020 strategy is , on several counts , similar to the Lisbon Strategy , but tries to improve on focusing on and narrowing down the objectives .
There is , however , one area - a quite significant one - that still remains unclear , namely the delivery mechanism .
It is left to the Member States and peer review supported by monitoring by the Commission .
It seems to me that we have not learned our lesson from the experience of the weak delivery of the Lisbon Strategy .
I urge the Commission to come up with proposals which will ensure a stronger delivery mechanism for the EU 2020 strategy to make sure that all its targets will be met with action and not just words .
( EL ) The Lisbon Strategy set high targets , but Europe did not manage to implement them .
We are moving towards a new strategy for the next decade , to be true , and in an exceptionally difficult and unfortunate environment .
We all agree that the priority and the emphasis on the development triangle ' education , research , innovation ' is the best investment if we are to get out of the crisis and it allows us to be optimistic about the future of Europe .
It is important to emphasise that this strategy must be implemented in an environment of solidarity , in an environment of close cooperation between the Member States .
At this point , I would clarify , for the avoidance of all misunderstanding , that the support mechanism for Greece , despite any delays , demonstrates this solidarity and you should be in no doubt as to the fact that we recognise it .
In the New Democracy , in our centre-right party in Greece , we made it clear that we respect the money of the other European peoples being put into the support mechanism .
However , together with the sacrifices required , and which must be divided fairly , and on this point we were critical of certain measures , together with the spending cuts required in order to reduce the debt and to reduce the deficit , growth initiatives which will take the country out of recession are also needed , initiatives which we have not seen to date .
That is the only way we , too , in Greece shall be able to approach the ambitious targets of the 2020 strategy , which is the only way we shall come out of the crisis stronger .
( The speaker agreed to reply IN DUE COURSE to a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I have seen for myself how important Cohesion policy is for Wales and I , therefore , welcome the Lastra report on Cohesion policy and Europe 2020 .
There are many projects right across Wales that are benefiting individuals and communities .
So , I have no doubt that structural funds can help deliver the 2020 goals .
However , I would like to make the following points .
The 2020 strategy , the fifth cohesion report and the budget must all be aligned .
In future , structural funds should be properly financed , the structural funds should not be renationalised and the transitional status should be made available to those regions that fall out of convergent status .
If we can achieve all these things , I certainly believe that the Cohesion policy can help us deliver 2020 .
It would also make the EU 2020 strategy relevant to individuals and citizens right across Europe .

( EL ) I should like to take this opportunity , following the position taken by my close fellow Greek member , Mr Papanikolaou , from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to make the following clarification , which I consider extremely important in these times of crisis , especially for Greece :
Greece is not taking money from other nations .
The Member States of the European Union borrow at a lower rate of interest and lend , give money to the mechanism and , via it to Greece , at a higher rate of interest .
We are not taking money from other nations .
( EL ) You are absolutely right Mrs Rapti .
Of course , Greece 's borrowing requirements would be smaller and Greece would be able to raise money more easily on the markets , had there not been such a delay , six months now , on the part of the present Greek Government .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Niebler has already said a great deal that very much concerns me too .
I am greatly concerned about our future together in the EU .
I cannot just move on to the agenda without mentioning the crisis .
One of our major objectives , the euro and its high monetary stability , is at risk of total collapse .
Prosperity and jobs are not feasible without a secure monetary value .
We are talking about Europe 2020 , but we do not even know what Europe will look like in 2011 .
We are debating meat glued together with thrombin and we are debating driving times for self-employed drivers , as if the major problems of the Union will solve themselves .
We need to send out strong and rapid signals about regulating , organising and improving the deficits in both state budgets and in the banking sector .
Let me give you a couple of examples : we need clear definitions and harsh penalties for deficit offenders , such as withdrawing funding .
We need clear rules for banks , such as banning credit default swaps or requirements for insurance and depositing these against corresponding nominal values .
Let me also add a sentence from a famous German mayor who was chair of the German Association of Cities and Towns for many years : He who does not spend money he does not have is a long way from being a saver !
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to come back to the report by Mr Cortés Lastra , which I think is a very good report .
Indeed , the Cohesion policy is actually the best instrument for mobilising investment in growth and employment .
However , I would like to highlight again the importance of towns and cities here , because they will play a key role in achieving the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy .
Four out of five Europeans live in urban areas .
Towns and cities are the driving force of economic growth in Europe .
At the same time , they are experiencing many problems particularly acutely .
Key words here are social integration , the environment and transport , for example , but also demographic change .
Therefore , towns and cities have a particular role when it comes to actually improving the living conditions of citizens .
In addition , Europe 's towns and cities are key players in the fields of innovation , research and education , and therefore play a fundamental role in the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy and the EU 2020 strategy .
All of this should be taken into account during the implementation of these strategies and during the shaping of the future course of the Cohesion policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the last two years have left millions of unemployed people in their wake , have been the cause of further national debt that will remain for many years still , and have put renewed pressure on and new tears in our social cohesion .
We must react in a timely and incisive manner , and , in order to avoid making the errors of judgment that the Lisbon Strategy succumbed to , Europe 2020 must be extremely realistic in its objectives and balanced in the goals it sets itself .
Three of these seem to me , Commissioner , to be priorities .
The first is certainly a stable currency and stable national budgets , which , however , must not be divorced from development and economic growth .
We need investment in research and innovation to make our industries ever more competitive and our products of the highest quality .
We must support SMEs and new industries , such as IT and sustainable energy and , of course , our infrastructure .
Let us raise the overall level of education , yes , but chiefly we must mould training to the needs of the labour market and production .
It is a paradox that businesses are still demanding specialisms that the market is in no position to offer .
It is clear that every target should be related to the national context , but within the framework of a broader European strategy .
I shall conclude by saying that the Greek crisis and the economic and employment crisis in the whole of Europe testify to the fact that in order to safeguard social cohesion , development and stable national budgets , we need strong and solid economic governance at the European level , to enable European institutions , including Parliament , to take effective and preventive action .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are all agreed on the major objectives of the EU 2020 strategy and , if we are all agreed on its objectives , we should now provide ourselves with the means to implement them .
These means include , for example , the establishment of an EU economic government .
In order for these fine words and major objectives to become realities and this time avoid what I would call a kind of collective disenchantment with the Lisbon Strategy , it is essential that we provide ourselves with the resources necessary to take action .
This is also why I fully support the Commission 's proposal to have the national budgets inspected in advance by the EU , with the proviso , however , that the national parliaments and the European Parliament are involved in these inspection arrangements .
However , I should like to speak in more detail about the crisis and young people .
I think that young people have been the main victims of this crisis , and that we must take advantage of the opportunity provided to us to put young people back at the heart of this Europe 2020 strategy .
Firstly , the EU 2020 strategy must be an inclusive strategy .
Mobility , which is the concrete expression of the concept of free movement within the EU , must become a real possibility for all young people , not only for young students .
That is why I hope the Commission will support my proposal for an extension to the European mobility programmes for young apprentices .
Furthermore , I also believe that this strategy must promote the upskilling of young people so as to eliminate the curse of unemployment among the young , because we all know that the transition from a learning environment to a first job is one of the major challenges faced by young people .
The way to make progress in this area is to enhance their skills , for example , by channelling EU funds more effectively towards policies for young people .
Finally , all young Europeans need to be given mobility opportunities and upskilled because what we need , above all else , is an innovative young generation .
It is young people who , today , will create the growth and innovation of tomorrow .
This is why I do not want young people to be left out of this Europe 2020 strategy .
( ES ) Mr President , we approved the Lisbon Agenda with its very ambitious objectives in 2000 .
Some of these have been met , but a lot of them have not .
There is no doubt that the regional funds contributed to the Lisbon Strategy .
Ten years on , we find ourselves shaken by the worst economic crisis we can remember .
I believe that this crisis has served to enable us to identify , in this new Europe 2020 strategy , where we went wrong , as well as enable us to improve so as to achieve better results .
Firstly , we have learned that coordination between all governance levels is essential , as is clearly stated in Mr Cortés Lastra 's report .
We have also learned that the contribution of regional funds is essential to meeting the objectives we are proposing .
We believe that the combination of specific actions at all levels - European Union , national , regional and local authorities - is an absolute necessity .
If we work together , we will be much stronger .
It is also important that a Cohesion policy covering economic , social and territorial aspects be incorporated into the Europe 2020 strategy .
I would also like to make an observation as regards the Cohesion policy issue here , namely that the bureaucratic procedures should be much more flexible and efficient .
Furthermore , in the disability sector , that difference will have to be taken into account in some way .
Finally , I would like to underline the important role to be played by European regions and towns and cities , and especially , the need to pay more attention to those areas with special needs , such as mountain areas , coastal areas and islands .
In short , if we want to be successful , we have to be able to count on the European regions , the towns and the cities and on a reformed Cohesion policy in line with the new situation .
( RO ) Europe 2020 must be a Europe for its citizens and meet their needs .
This is the approach which I consider must form the basis of this strategy .
It is important that , within the new European framework , we continue with the course of action promoting development and the objectives already set , which must be monitored for tangible results so as to achieve a positive impact .
I am referring here specifically to investments in any kind of infrastructure , enabling us to become much more competitive from an economic perspective .
We need to continue to pursue economic , social and territorial cohesion policies in order to narrow the disparities between regions and establish a platform for balanced economic development , as is also stipulated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Europe 2020 must be a Europe of global action which can be achieved if the European Union has a common level of development which enhances the ability of local and regional players to respond to the global challenges .
Europe 2020 is a Europe where regions develop according to their specific potential and use the regional aspect of research , development and innovation for promoting economic development and increasing employment .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to pick up on what Mr Seeber has already said .
If we really want to successfully carry off the objectives of the 2020 agenda , we first need to attend to the job in hand .
We need strong financial market regulation , regulation that really will be better at supervising and regulating future conduct in these areas .
However , we must also put our own houses in order , and that means ensuring that we have better controls in place for how effectively money from relevant structural funds is spent and in what ways we should support further development .
We also need to involve local and regional authorities more in our structures and planning because , ultimately , they are the ones who have to implement tasks on the ground , and make it clear which tasks need to be fulfilled if we are to achieve the objectives we have quite rightly set for ourselves .
However , setting objectives without robustly and consistently addressing the status quo and the tasks to be completed and without analysing what needs to be done now makes little sense in my view .
As Mr Ulmer said earlier on , we have moved on to the agenda and we are debating the day-to-day business of this House , food safety and so on , without really being aware of what priority issues we need to resolve .
That has to be our starting point .
We first need to focus on bringing our financial situation under control and ensuring that everyone adheres to these rules .
We must also ensure that Parliament and , in particular , the Commission apply the control mechanisms that have been available to them in the past more stringently in the future and we must have a greater say in what is happening in some Member States .
( GA ) Mr President , I am proud to say a few words in relation to this debate about the 2020 strategy and here are the points I would like to make .
I must say it is disappointing and sometimes depressing to hear speaker after speaker here in Strasbourg and in Brussels talk about the failure of the Lisbon Strategy .
It was not all a failure and if it were , I do not think 67 % of the Irish people would have voted in favour of the Treaty of Lisbon last October .
There have been many benefits for all to see , in particular at regional level , as the Commissioner pointed out .
However , there are a number of areas which I would be concerned about .
Firstly , where does the six-month rotating presidency fit into this ?
I see each country coming in here outlining their priorities for the six months rather than where they fit into the overall targets set down annually for the 10 years .
I think that is a very important point ; no football team changes its manager every six months for him to come in with a different set of priorities which you cannot achieve in a short period of time .
Secondly , I welcome the instruments which have been brought in to make Member States stand up to their responsibilities , and pay for their failures if they do not do so .
' Softly , softly ' will not do anymore .
If you are part of a team , and you play badly , you are either dropped or told to up your game .
We have to up our game .
Finally , I want to say that I also welcome the suggestion to empower the regions and the cities as part of this process .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 9 May , the EU , at the behest of the Ministers for the Economy and Finance , gave a firm response to the financial markets .
Although the European Parliament is subject to longer parliamentary procedures , it must not be condemned to inaction .
I think that this House , and we , its Members , have three essential roles to play .
First of all , we must throw all our weight behind governments and the Commission in the initiatives they have taken recently .
Secondly , we must immediately set to work to find the solutions that will enable us , in the medium and long terms , to emerge from the crisis and encourage a growth model that is truly dynamic and supports the real economy .
That is the entire challenge of the EU 2020 strategy and of the priority objectives which we will earmark for the EU Structural Funds for the period 2014-2020 .
Mrs Bowles , I should like to say to you that , if the Lisbon Strategy is , to some degree , a failure , it is because it was designed several years ago when the economic situation was different from what it is today .
Therefore , those who condemn this strategy do so because it is inflexible and inappropriate for the current situation .
This is the problem with strategies .
Therefore , this 2020 strategy will be all the stronger if it can be adapted to prevailing circumstances .
Finally - and this is the most important issue to my mind - we must explain at a local level what is happening at EU level and obtain the public 's approval .
European citizens woke up on Monday , 10 May to a new Europe .
They had not caused this metamorphosis .
No one can assess its long-term consequences at this stage .
This metamorphosis will not bear fruit if it is not rooted in democracy .
We were united in diversity ; now we must be united in adversity .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened a great deal today and it has been quite useful , but I also have to draw your attention to a matter that I consider to be important .
We shall not succeed , in my opinion , by locating all this strategy in the context of a market that is today out of joint , subject to continuous speculation , and in deep crisis .
As we discuss Europe 2020 , we need to bear a situation of this type in mind .
I would divide the discussion into two parts : first , the market must serve the real economy , and not vice versa ; second , I believe that Europe must be the locomotive for this economy .
As far as the first part is concerned , it has been much discussed , and it is high time that we set up a hedge against this market , so that we do not have to depend on anyone at all , but what is important is the locomotive , and for the locomotive to pull , we also need the means .
Let us have the courage to change this budget , let us have the courage to take responsibility for setting up a significant fund to serve as a financial hedge , but especially one that can get the TEN-T , TEN-E and E-TEN networks going .
This is the locomotive that we must bring into play , and to pull the real economy , we also need the private sector , through the PPP mechanism .
That is the task , Commissioner , which we must tackle immediately , because the crisis is not over , the crisis is with us , and we must make this strong push right now .
( PT ) Mr President , a debate on the Europe 2020 strategy naturally leads to acceptance of better coordination of the various national policies , more Europe , and acceptance of the path of structural reforms to attain growth for our economy .
However , in order for us to reach 2020 , we will have to get through 2010 and , on that subject , I would like to call attention to the balance needed between budgetary consolidation policies and the need to avoid falling back into recession .
I am a Portuguese national and at this very moment , the proposal that is being made is to increase taxes .
Fundamentally , the path that the Member States should choose is that of seriously reducing public spending : having tax systems that are competitive and making structural reforms so that we can achieve the necessary growth .
As well as the long and medium terms , we must think about the short term and start encouraging the existence of creative companies right now .
We must make a commitment to universities and to research and development , because that is very clear now .
In order for use to reach 2020 , we will have to make it through 2010 in one piece .
I would like to leave this worry behind now .
It is clear that we have a Stability Pact , but there is also a Growth Pact , and the key word for our economies in the near future is growth .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the future 2020 strategy must enable the European Union to correct the shortcomings detected in the Lisbon Strategy if we really want to create a competitive economic space , and one that is economically , socially and territorially cohesive .
In spite of the fact that the postulates of the by now outdated Lisbon Strategy are still valid , I would like to point out that one of the reasons why it lost force was because of its highly complex structure , particularly its lack of clarity in defining the responsibilities and tasks incumbent upon the European Union and other levels of government , particularly those of a regional and local nature .
Regions and local authorities must be included in the design and implementation of policies if we want the 2020 strategy to bear any fruit in the medium term .
Our regions and cities are key agents in the development and implementation of a great deal of EU public investment related to growth and employment .
The allocation of regional policy resources thus becomes a key factor in terms of meeting the European objectives that we are defining .
I would like to point out that the resources invested from 2000 to 2006 by way of the European Regional Development Fund have enabled the creation of 1 400 000 jobs in the European Union , as well as the building of over 2 000 km of motorways .
I would like to finish by pointing out once more the value of the European regional policy with respect to strategic goals such as growth and employment .
Economic , social and territorial cohesion represents a basic objective guaranteed by the treaties .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to extend a special greeting to the visitors to our Parliament who have followed this debate about one of the key issues for the European Union over the next ten years more attentively and in greater numbers than many of our Members .
We are conducting this debate in much too technocratic a way .
I grew up in a country where society was organised according to multiannual plans .
This country , the German Democratic Republic , no longer exists .
That is why I still have a certain scepticism for programmes which jumble together strategies , desired objectives and planned economy codes , which stretch over a lengthy period of time and which pass on the implementation to others .
No matter what decisions we make for the European Union in the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy , it is Member States , national governments and parliaments and regional and local authorities that will have to shoulder the implementation .
The disquiet with such procedures is very much in evidence .
A top-down Europe cannot work .
The united Europe can only work if we continue to build it jointly with national and regional institutions and with citizens .
The Commission has abandoned the Lisbon Strategy too fast , without carrying out a thorough analysis of why the objectives of this strategy were not achieved .
Therefore , it is probably no coincidence that , today in Parliament , the reports and questions were lumped together under the title of ' EU 2020 ' , although every one of them deserves a separate debate .
They contain at least two points on which European policy has been successful so far : creation of the internal market and the cohesion and structural policies .
However , the EU 2020 strategy indicates that the Cohesion policy will only have a supporting role in the attainment of its objectives .
Now , that is a contradiction .
We do not need more planned economy in the European Union ; others have failed on that front before .
Before we then confront Member States with a list of planned economy codes , which nobody at present knows how they are supposed to be achieved , and bearing in mind the uncertainties and turbulence in the economic and financial markets now and in the past few years and their impact on jobs and the social situation in Member States , what we need is an in-depth debate about where the European Union has been successful , where we can achieve common goals , for example , a pact with the EU 's regions , and how we can create more community without infringing the subsidiarity principle .
If we did so , this debate could and would culminate in an overall strategy .
However , this debate - as we have seen from the example today - has only just begun , and we in the European Union should be the ones to lead it .
( HU ) Commissioner , I think that the guiding principle of any plan or strategy for European development must be to build a Europe that acts as a truly unified region in the service of European citizens .
We have said a great deal about the economic and social dimensions of the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , the European Union today is much more than that .
The EU is not just a community of interests but one of values ; that is what gives it its economic strength and political clout .
If , by the end of the decade , we truly wish to create a more successful and competitive Europe , we need to pay serious attention to ensuring that our common values receive due respect , are strengthened and implemented .
We also need to focus on closer harmonisation of Member States ' education policies , the reduction of regional inequalities and the continuation of the enlargement process , as well as on the protection of fundamental rights and minority rights , to mention but a few policies that are based on European values .
Economic growth and the improvement of citizens ' living conditions are unthinkable without such values-based policies .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the 2020 strategy is comprehensive and covers many issues , as demonstrated by this afternoon 's debate .
I should just like to emphasise two particular aspects .
Firstly , with regard to the social dimension of this strategy , I fully support Mrs Berès in her questioning of the Commission , in particular , concerning the setting of quantified poverty reduction targets in this strategy , which , for me , is a sine qua non .
Also , the principle of an EU-wide minimum income to meet these objectives seems to me to be an obvious need , and must be implemented in practice .
Secondly , the coherence between the EU budget and this strategy .
Neither the Council nor the Commission has given any indication so far as to whether it wishes to review our multiannual financial framework for the current period , even though it has revealed its limitations .
However , if we do not adapt it in accordance with the new challenges in the strategy , we are collectively running a great risk .
Neither the EU budget , which is too restricted , nor the national public budgets , will be able to start making the investments needed to support the various flagship initiatives in the 2020 strategy .
Madam President , on page 7 of the Europe 2020 document , it says : ' Europe has many strengths : we can count on the talent and creativity of our people ' .
It does not , of course , say that other people are less talented or creative - that would be terribly unkind and almost certainly unfair - but it certainly singles out the population of Europe for special praise .
Elsewhere , it bemoans the fact that Europe has an ageing population .
This , of course , is attributable mainly to sharply falling birth rates , though the document does not say so .
Perhaps nation states should encourage , as far as states can , a rise in the birth rates of their populations .
This would certainly redress the population balance .
Furthermore it might even produce at least a proportionate increase in those talented and creative people who are so necessary for economic and cultural development .
I do hope I am not tainting the Commission document by linking its parts with reasoned argument , but I have kept within my time limit !
( PL ) The Europe 2020 strategy cannot do as much as we are saying , here , today .
It is not possible to do so much for just under 1 % of GDP , because that is the value of the European Union budget .
Let us show what we can do , by creating appropriate and modern legislation , and let us show the purposes to which funds will be assigned from the European Union budget .
Let us say clearly : there is not enough realism in our expectations of the Europe 2020 strategy , there are too many things to be done and too much hope being created , and the role of Member States has not been defined .
A rise in employment , reduction in poverty , education and , above all , economic growth are the big tasks and the main priorities which should be put into effect in the present situation , when we are in a crisis and should take action to revive the economy - because this is the number one problem in the Europe 2020 strategy : resuscitating the economy today .
( RO ) The EU 's Cohesion policy has helped , and still helps , generate synergy with the research and innovation policies .
It has also placed the focus on the role of territorial cohesion .
I believe that the regions should specialise in smart and green developments and define for themselves a set of innovation priorities based on the EU 's objectives and their needs , and channel Community resources into these priorities which have been identified .
At the same time , they must promote models of success as part of the triangle of knowledge and the relations between businesses , research centres , universities and public authorities , especially those established via public-private partnerships .
I also believe that the exchange of knowledge within regional groups can be facilitated by the Structural Funds as well because European policies are consistently targeted at sustainable development , offering tangible results at regional level .
All these elements form the concrete bond for achieving territorial cohesion within the European Union .
( RO ) I wish to congratulate today 's rapporteurs , especially Mr van Nistelrooij , for the excellent report that was presented .
Research and development will provide us with the solutions to be taken into account in future in tackling successfully the major challenges we are facing , whether it involves the severe economic crisis or achieving the 2020 strategy 's long-term objectives .
With the impetus provided by the Cohesion policy , whose aim is to encourage innovation and entrepreneurship and develop a knowledge-based economy , research and development must be approached from two directions .
Based on a top-down approach , research and innovation will be the main areas for identifying solutions aimed at overcoming the problems which we are facing and for boosting economic growth and sustainable development .
It is just as important for innovation to come out of the laboratories and research centres and be pitched at a level which suits European citizens ' needs as appropriately as possible .
We must encourage local and regional economies to improve their ability to innovate and to identify themselves the most effective solutions as part of a bottom-up approach , thereby utilising regional and local potential .
( RO ) The European Union is facing an economic , financial and social crisis at present .
The policy of deindustrialisation pursued in recent years has resulted in the loss of millions of jobs , the relocation of European industry to third countries and to a 10 % unemployment rate , which is even 20 % among young people , thereby jeopardising the EU 's competitiveness .
I believe that the European Union needs to make huge investments in the transport and energy infrastructure , in agriculture , health , education and research but , above all , in sustainable economic development .
The development of industrial production and , by extension , the creation of jobs in the EU requires investment in modernising European companies so that these developments can lead to greener production .
In the next 10 years , energy efficiency must be our top priority .
On top of this , the EU population is ageing and the birth rate is falling , while the high unemployment rate is affecting the sustainability of the pension systems .
I believe that the time has come for the European Union to defend its fundamental principles and assets , and the biggest asset which the EU has is its 500 million European citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about the Europe 2020 strategy and its key priorities .
There is a lesson to be learned from the Greek crisis : we need to act instead of reacting .
A coordinated and monitored budgetary policy and supervision and regulation of the financial market are indispensable .
For the sake of our citizens , we need to pay attention to investment in growth and employment , in order to reduce unemployment and to create and secure jobs .
That also means strengthening the education sector and investing in education , research and innovation as cornerstones of a sustainable social market economy , and of a sustainable and more environmentally conscious economy .
( SK ) The 2020 strategy and the Lisbon Strategy have something in common : a belief that the economy must be managed .
The Commission 's recipe of ' competition or crisis ' unfortunately remains unchanged .
The 2020 strategy states that easy access to credit and short-term thinking resulted in the behaviour which led to unsupported growth and major imbalances .
However , further on in the text of the strategy , it states that the Commission will seek to improve access to capital and to make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to access finance .
This has again sanctioned greater access to credit , which will again lead to speculation and unsupported growth .
In 1991 , the Malaysian premier of the time announced the Vision 2020 project , or Vavasan 2020 in Malaysian .
According to this , Malaysia was to catch up with Great Britain , France , Germany and Japan by 2020 .
Ladies and gentlemen , planned economies do not work , as all of our colleagues from the new Member States , including the Commissioner , can confirm .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this discussion today on the Europe 2020 strategy has been extremely interesting and useful for us , the Commission , as was this morning 's discussion on economic governance .
I would like to thank you for this opportunity and for all the messages you sent on this strategy .
On behalf of the European Commission , I am particularly grateful to Mr van Nistelrooij , Mr Grech , Mr Cortés Lastra and Mr Hoang Ngoc for their reports .
I am prepared to continue a discussion on various details and even nuances concerning the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , at this time , let me concentrate my answers on some of the key aspects of the discussion with a few concluding remarks .
First of all , I would like to stress once again the importance of the strong involvement of the European Parliament in the various upcoming steps linked to the Europe 2020 strategy : first of all , the opinion of the European Parliament on the integrated guidelines ; secondly , at a later stage , the role of the EP as colegislator on various proposals to be made under the flagship initiatives ; and not forgetting , thirdly , the next multiannual financial framework to make sure the future EU budgets better reflect the priorities set for the European Union through the Europe 2020 strategy .
Let me also be very clear about the objectives of the strategy .
It has a dual objective .
First and foremost , it is an essential pillar of the response of the Union to the current crisis .
It is an essential tool for strengthening coordination of economic policy inside the EU-27 and , of course , within the euro area .
But besides this short-term objective , this new strategy is about equipping Europe with a strategy - actually , as Michel Barnier outlined in his opening statement , a programme for action - to enable the European Union to exit the economic crisis by restoring economic growth and making sure this growth translates into more and better jobs .
But we must aim for a different kind of job creation than in the past - a more sustainable one , not only in ecological terms but also economically , socially and financially sustainable .
It is about restoring a competitive European Union capable of ensuring the sustainability of its unique social model - a competitive EU that is a global leader in terms of tackling climate change , an EU that invests more in its people through more and better education and , finally , an EU that strengthens social cohesion by combating poverty .
Of course , as outlined in the Commission 's conclusions during this morning 's debate , this return to strong growth is only possible if we make sure that in the coming years , our Member States undertake the necessary fiscal consolidation , taking account of their respective starting points , not undermining a fragile recovery , and looking at the expenditure side at the same time as the revenue side .
These are all very important elements .
I would like to stress once again the importance and the complexity of the fiscal problems that are currently on the agenda , but I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that this financial and economic crisis is much more complex than just speaking about budget deficits .
At the root of the crisis , you will find a fundamental malfunctioning of the financial sector , starting with the banking sector , the correction of which is also essential if we want to start a sustainable recovery from this situation .
We also have to address other causes of the recent recession - like the lack of an industrial policy and , to some extent , the lack of a complete success of our previous strategies - to achieve a knowledge-based economic growth and spread this growth to every region , every corner of the European Union .
That is why we have to reinforce our efforts in terms of economic governance , reinforce our efforts for financial regulation , and also achieve better economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Altogether , I strongly believe that there is no alternative for Europe but to launch this strategy and to launch it very quickly .
If Europe does not restore its growth path , it will decline economically and will therefore also decline politically .
While we are discussing this new strategy , most of our main trading partners have not only already put in place 10-year long-term social economic development strategies but they are already implementing them .
But , if there is one lesson to be learned from the current economic crisis and from its predecessor , the Lisbon Strategy - and I agree with Mr Kelly that often this Lisbon Strategy is exposed to too harsh a criticism - it is that delivery of reforms is key for success .
It is therefore urgent to launch Europe 2020 at the June European Council and make sure that both the EU and its Member States start the implementation immediately thereafter .
At this point , I would also like to thank the Spanish Presidency for the efforts it made in bringing together the Member States and for supporting this strategy in recent months and , no doubt , in the coming weeks .
There can be no delay , considering the current economic situation and the crisis we are currently going through .
We owe it to the citizens to provide them with solutions to exit the current crisis and enhance the coordination of economic policies , while , at the same time , preparing a return to smart , sustainable and inclusive economic growth .
By acting together in a coordinated way , we will have the necessary weight to be successful on the global stage as well .
The Commission counts on Parliament 's support in making sure the Europe 2020 strategy can be launched rapidly and successfully .
Following the debate , I should like to express my thanks for your support for my report .
I wish to make a couple more comments ; to raise a few points about social and economic governance in the short term .
The financial side has attracted sufficient attention and has been made a major priority .
We have also been able to discuss the medium term this afternoon and make several comments on this .
We shall be including everything in a Parliament resolution that we shall be discussing in this Chamber before the June summit .
I wish to make two more comments : one about governance .
It has been asked whose strategy this actually is .
One of Lisbon 's faults was that the decentralised parties - the municipalities , the regions , our partners - were not sufficiently involved in the process .
Therefore , I propose a territorial pact with the regions , towns and cities , in addition to the agreement in the Council with the Member States and the Commission .
Otherwise , this will happen again , and we shall be talking about , rather than to , the regions , our partners .
If these things do not reach citizens this time , I know one thing for sure , and that is that one can deck out large flagships , but they will soon be more flag than ship .
Participation in the Lisbon Strategy and the EU 2020 strategy should be made more exciting .
Indeed , this is possible , by saying when it comes to providing subsidies , providing encouragement , that those who stick their necks out , who also provide financing , can participate .
The whole thing is far too flat .
Therefore , I invite the Commission to enter into a territorial pact with the regions , towns and cities .
Finally , integrated policy , particularly across sectors , is crucial ; the fragmentation of all kinds of new financing structures does no good and will not help us achieve this agenda .
My report concerns synergy between research , development , innovation , production and employment in Europe .
We must fight against fragmentation , and so I urge Commissioner Andor to keep the European Social Fund intact in the regulations , and not to split it up as is sometimes suggested in this House .
In the little time I have available , I would like to reply to a few of my fellow Members ' comments on my report .
I agree with Malcolm Harbour in that there does not seem to be much willingness to consider the Single Market as being the fundamental tool in the 2020 strategy - which is still not properly defined and developed .
This is a real shame , considering that a Single Market that embraces a wider and more holistic perspective can be among the top - if not the top - initiatives to provide European citizens with a better quality of life within the Union 's strategy .
Evelyne Gebhardt is also right in saying that today , it is clear that the Single Market , within the scope of the 2020 strategy , requires new momentum that calls for strong leadership on the part of all the Union 's institutions , especially from the Commission 's side , so that the Single Market can once again restore confidence and trust in our citizens .
To conclude , Madam President , we need to ensure that the new 2020 agenda does not become over-ambitious and over-burdened , since this will lead to an agenda full of priorities where nothing gets implemented , as happened the last time round .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , two taboos have been broken in recent weeks .
Firstly , the ECB can now monetise sovereign debts .
Secondly , EU expenditure can now be financed by borrowing and , in particular , when the stabilisation and support funds are created .
There is a third taboo , which unfortunately has not been broken , and it is the Stability and Growth Pact , which some Members of this House are dogmatically demanding be strengthened .
Commissioners , we socialists are in favour of federalism .
We are in favour of the coordination of budget policies .
However , if the coordination of budget policies means overriding national parliaments so as to put their citizens on a starvation diet , then I fear that that might be a fine EU idea which will itself end up starving to death .
This is the real threat which we are all facing at the moment .
Commissioners , the austerity plans in Greece , Spain , Portugal and France do not have any chance of succeeding .
I ask you to acknowledge this .
Madam President , I would like to thank all my fellow Members for their contributions and the climate of constructive criticism that has prevailed during the course of this important debate .
This report on the contribution of the Cohesion policy to Lisbon and Europe 2020 strategy objectives represents one of the key contributions of the European Parliament to the future Europe 2020 strategy for growth and employment , one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
The report highlights job creation , the fostering of a sustainable economy , education and training to promote development , employment and competitiveness , as well as the key role of investment in research and development , bearing in mind the need to adopt specific measures for regions with natural handicaps .
However , it will not be possible to implement the Europe 2020 strategy successfully without the participation and full approval of regional and local authorities , as well as that of civil society .
Regions not only contribute to project cofinancing , but are also capable of gauging the needs of citizens and small and medium-sized enterprises better due to their proximity , as well as being in a position to establish a direct link with universities and innovation centres , thus promoting the knowledge triangle .
In this context , Cohesion policy is not merely a source of stable financial allocations , but also represents a powerful tool in the economic development of all European regions .
Its objectives of eliminating existing inequalities between regions and of introducing economic , social and territorial cohesion , along with its basic principles of an integrated focus , multi-level governance and genuine collaboration , are all essential elements to the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday , 20 May 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The EU 2020 strategy 's principles are vital for boosting the European economy 's competitiveness .
Structural reforms are the key to exiting the crisis we are in .
The solutions deployed so far for exiting the crisis have not been targeting the causes which have put us in this situation .
The causes of the crisis can only be eliminated through structural reforms .
We must focus more attention on our economies ' innovative ability because this is where the key to EU competitiveness will lie in the coming period .
We need to adopt a coordinated approach for using funds earmarked for innovation and regional development .
Innovation must feature as part of regional development .
Innovation was an objective in the Lisbon Strategy but , unfortunately , it only remained a principle on paper .
There were very wide variations in the progress made by Member States and the overall objective was not achieved .
This is the reason why I am urging all Member States to show some responsibility and abide by the commitments which they also take on .
The Commission should also play a more active role in coordinating the implementation of this strategy in order to prevent it from failing as disastrously as the Lisbon Strategy .
The EU 2020 strategy proposed by the European Commission to stimulate growth and employment in the EU emphasises research and innovation .
Various instruments are already providing a great deal of support to projects being carried out in these fields : the Structural Funds , the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development and the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme .
These various programmes provide finance to the tune of EUR 86 billion for the period 2007-2013 .
The EU 2020 strategy also emphasises the interdependence of the various EU policies .
For efficiency purposes , it is therefore essential to establish synergies between the various instruments .
This being the case , I welcome the importance given by the rapporteur to the role which a strong , properly financed regional policy can play in the achievement of the EU 2020 strategy objectives .
I also agree with the rapporteur that potential beneficiaries are not always fully aware of the possibilities that exist for establishing synergies in the area of funding .
I therefore think it crucial to improve communication , for example , on the model of the Practical Guide to EU Funding Opportunities for Research and Development .
In the context of discussions on the effective use of all funds earmarked by the European Union for research and innovation , we have to raise the problem of appropriate promotion for innovative solutions which arise in individual Member States .
It often happens that as a result of the poor flow of information , investment is made in research projects which have already been carried out by scientists in one of the Member States .
This is a waste of EU money , which we cannot allow in a time of economic crisis .
Greater emphasis needs to be placed on improving communication and supporting the purchase by the European Union of existing new technologies , which will also allow additional financial support for innovative businesses .
It is also important to finance soft projects such as training and the dissemination of knowledge about the significance of innovation for economic growth , better informing of local entities about the programmes which are available , and also flexibility in defining the conditions for granting support , so that countries which currently have a low level of innovation can , by development of the sector concerned , contribute to creation of the competitive advantage of the European Union on a global scale .
It is also essential to create incentives to investment in local research centres .
Small and medium-sized enterprises cannot afford to do this , while large , international firms do not want to use them , which deepens the disproportions in the level of innovation between the Member States of the European Union .
University Business Dialogue ( debate )
The next item is the report by Pál Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on university-business dialogue : a new partnership for the modernisation of Europe 's universities - .


Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking in place of our rapporteur , Mr Schmitt , who - as announced by President Buzek at the beginning of the session - has tendered his resignation from the European Parliament in order to take up duties in his own country , and to whom I send my regards and my best wishes , because he has done a great job .
This report is the result of his intentions , and it was carried in our Committee on Culture and Education by an overwhelming majority , with just a single vote against , for which I should like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs who have contributed to this report , both on my behalf and on behalf of Mr Schmitt .
Before leaving for Strasbourg , on Monday I went to Rome to visit a private training centre that is achieving superb results , because it has succeeded in placing the vast majority of young people that it trains over the course of time .
When I spoke to the director of this centre , he said to me : ' Please help us , you in Europe too , to follow this course , to add weight to training that moves in this direction , which enables so many young people to find work ; help us also to modernise the relationship between universities and business . '
The thrust of this report lies precisely here : today , 20 % of young Europeans are out of work , of whom about 30 % are graduates ; a percentage that is so high that we are forced to ask ourselves very seriously about how we should approach the issue of training young people for entry into the world of work in these times , in this Europe , in this globalised world .
We have then , in this report , wished to address directly the issue of how to improve the link between universities and business , highlighting certain key points : first , by giving priority to one of the strong points available to the European Union , namely the ability of its citizens to adapt to the constantly changing circumstances of the labour market ; the fact that there is no longer any such thing as a ' job for life ' , and that these days , training and retraining is essential .
The first point then is lifelong learning ; the second , which , in our view , is of fundamental importance , is that of mobility .
These days it is important , as we highlight in this report , to emphasise that mobility between countries and between universities and business is a key to achieving greater cooperation between the two worlds , and we encourage not only the extension and expansion of individual mobility schemes such as Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs and Erasmus for Apprentices , but also the organisation of postgraduate European Masters of Excellence programmes , in cooperation with different universities and with the active participation of businesses .
Furthermore , more entrepreneurial universities should be encouraged .
Such a result can be achieved , for example , through the introduction of a system of knowledge vouchers such as that currently in use in a number of Member States , enabling SMEs , in particular , to improve their research capacity without compromising the independence , autonomy and public character of universities .
The third key point is that of research , namely , we see greater researcher mobility - in both the short and long term , across nations and between academia and business - as imperative in enhancing knowledge transfer .
Finally , the possibility of extending the good practices in this area that exist in so many countries .
I shall conclude , Madam President , by illustrating , in relation to this report and the outstanding work done by the committee , how convinced we are that Europe will not win the battle against China or other developing nations by means of low wages , but by having highly qualified professionals and highly competitive businesses , and in this process , it is of maximum importance that universities and businesses realise how they are interdependent , and that the authorities at all levels contribute to developing more efficient methods of cooperation .
Madam President , honourable Members , this report is the answer to our communication on the dialogue between universities and business .
I wish to thank all those who have contributed to it , in particular , members of the Committee on Culture and Education and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
I would especially like to thank Mr Schmitt , the outgoing Member , who was rapporteur .
Cooperation between universities and business is one option - no , it is more than that , it is indispensable .
The only question is what form it should take so that it is appropriate for both sides .
Better , more intensive cooperation encourages the exchange and dissemination of knowledge , both in business and in academia .
Contact with real problems and solutions through adapted curricula and internships enriches students ' learning experience and prepares them for their future careers .
Regular and long-term cooperation creates confidence and it can lead to ambitious partnerships and cooperation projects , which bring benefits for business and universities alike in terms of research , development and practice .
New trends in the labour market and new technologies are changing the demands on graduates and will continue to do so in the decades ahead .
In order that the quality of life in Europe can be maintained and improved , workers must be able continuously to update their knowledge and skills , and this is going to be all the more necessary if we take into account Europe 's demographic development in these years ahead .
We need an open , flexible and dynamic dialogue between everyone involved .
For this reason , the European Commission has launched the EU Forum for University Business Dialogue .
The forum offers all of its participants a platform for discussion and exchange of best practice and mutual learning .
The European Commission has a moderating role here , helping to remove barriers between these two worlds .
So far , the EU Forum for University Business Dialogue has met three times in Brussels and held a number of thematic forums on topics such as curriculum development , entrepreneurship , lifelong learning , knowledge transfer , university management , mobility , new skills for new jobs and cooperation between universities and business in the current crisis .
In collaboration with the European Training Foundation ( ETF ) , a thematic forum devoted to third countries was held in the premises of the European Parliament in December 2009 .
This was followed up in March 2010 by a thematic forum which explored the possibility of expanding the forum 's sphere of action to cooperation between schools and business .
Very recently , on 4 and 5 May , the most recent EU Forum for University Business Dialogue was held in Brussels with the following priorities : cooperation between universities and small and medium-sized enterprises , cooperation between universities and business on innovation , cooperation between universities and business on the quality of education .
These issues were also addressed in your report .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mrs Pack for her participation in the opening meeting of this event .
We very much appreciate the positive response to our communication which is reflected in your report today .
We need more cooperation between stakeholders , based on mutual trust , respect and transparency .
We are therefore not just promoting economic growth , but also generating social benefits in the widest sense of the word , by helping people to make their way successfully through a rapidly changing world of society and work .

Madam President , I should like to start by wishing Mr Schmitt , who has left the European Parliament , every success in his new position .
It was a pleasure to work with him , at least for the period that I have been in Parliament .
The development triptych of education , research and innovation , as we stressed earlier for the 2020 strategy , is crucial to the future of Europe .
However , if we are to achieve these objectives , it is true that we also need to recognise the difficulties which our young people are encountering nowadays in the process of transition from study to professional life , which is also being prolonged by the crisis .
We also all recognise that , in numerous Member States , the education system has weak points , both in terms of standards and in training pupils and students .
Training , let us be in no doubt , cannot be examined separately from the contemporary requirements of the labour market and , on this point , we need to make use of every means at our disposal to help young people .
Mr Scurria referred earlier to mobility .
I would add new technologies and , of course , apart from lifelong learning and formal education , by which I mean universities , we also have non-formal education and informal education , which also give young people skills .
Education and work are interwoven concepts .
Consequently , we need to pursue and strengthen dialogue between education systems and work providers .
We all say that our young people need to be equipped with qualifications and skills and we also all know full well that , today , young people with no skills have fewer opportunities .
What sort of skills ?
Skills which the labour market needs , skills which will encourage innovative ideas and initiatives .
There is no time to lose , unemployment is rising and we all have a duty to engage in this dialogue and to integrate this cooperation as quickly as possible .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too congratulate Mr Schmitt on his appointment as Speaker of the Hungarian Parliament .
Clearly , European universities must be developed continuously for us to be able to respond to new social challenges and ever-increasing international competition .
We simply cannot afford to remain where we are .
High levels of skills and expertise and the knowledgebased economy are , and must be , the foundation of European society now and in the future .
In this sense , it is important that more attention is paid to the dialogue between our universities and business , and that we try to eliminate the bottlenecks that hamper cooperation . These include the problems connected with intellectual property rights and innovation .
In Finland , we have an excellent example of cooperation between business and universities , the Aalto University , named after the famous Finnish architect , Alvar Aalto .
It is a multidisciplinary university which represents a merger of three highly respected universities : the Helsinki School of Economics , the University of Art and Design Helsinki , and the Helsinki University of Technology .
Economics , aesthetics and technology are in symbiosis with one another .
The interdisciplinary approach , especially the new platforms - design , media and surface factor - allow academic teams to carry out research and students to work closely with companies and organisations .
First-rate , new research data is transferred directly to education , meaning that the students can avail themselves directly of the latest information needed in the employment market .
We must , however , carefully consider how and on what terms we want to improve cooperation between companies and universities .
It is crucially important that we adhere to the principle of the independence of universities and the tradition of free research in all circumstances .
Ultimately , the danger is the privatisation of the university sector , but is this the direction we in Europe want to go in ?
The basis of an independent university system is adequate public funding .
Making universities dependent on private funding is worrying , because it allows the transfer of power from the university community to those providing the finance .
That is why special attention needs to be paid to the administration systems of universities .
Madam President , I would like to thank the various rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
As shadow rapporteur on this matter for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I am very pleased with the report .
We have managed to agree on a report containing recommendations for improving cooperation between universities and business - a report that , above all , contains very specific initiatives for modernising universities .
Europe 's universities , as we all know , limp behind the world 's elite , a fact which also has major consequences for Europe 's competitiveness .
It is therefore not surprising that education , research and innovation have been given high priority in both the Commission 's work programme and the Europe 2020 strategy .
Of course , I hope that the majority will be in favour of following this upgrading of the priority status of this policy with an increase in funding , too .
We are currently in a situation where we need to think outside the conventional framework of our education systems and we can start by breaking down the walls between universities and the area that benefits from the universities ' output , namely business .
We are focusing on two things , in particular , and I will say a few words about these .
Firstly , I would like to mention the modernisation of the curriculum .
It is important for there to be greater focus on interdisciplinarity and development of the skills that are actually demanded by the business world .
University courses must reflect , to a greater extent , the requirements of the labour market and they must be set up with that in mind , for example , in the form of more business-relevant curricula , which , in turn , the business community should actively help to keep up-to-date .
The second thing I would like to mention is mobility .
It is important to reduce the gap between universities and business and for there to be people who bridge this gap .
Work placements are a good example of how university students can gain practical experience and then subsequently bring that experience into their studies .
At the same time , these students are better prepared to enter the labour market after their courses .
Practical placements should definitely be supported and promoted in Europe .
Research can also build bridges between universities and business .
I have talked before about a personal hobbyhorse of mine , namely the Danish business PhD scheme , whereby an employee in an undertaking in Denmark can gain a PhD at a Danish university with the help of a public grant .
In fact , I held an evening of debate in Brussels on 3 February 2010 in Parliament with broad participation from both the business world and universities , and the view that evening was pretty clear : an EU business PhD scheme would be a most useful tool for promoting specialised business-relevant research , as well as competitiveness , in European business , thereby creating more jobs and economic growth .
It thus received absolutely unequivocal support from both parties .
Moreover , it is a most effective method of bringing business experience and practical knowledge into universities and thereby making the teaching more focused on skills and knowledge that are relevant to the demands of the labour market .
The scheme could be integrated into the existing Marie Curie programme , possibly within the Industrial Academic Partnership programme , and would help to strengthen the pursuit of the goals of the Bologna process .
I am pleased that , tomorrow , we will be able to adopt a report that contains a recommendation to establish just such a scheme .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to highlight the value of this report in opening up the debate , within our Parliament , on the position and role of universities in Europe .
These universities must , in fact , be encouraged to participate in European integration from the inside rather than to contemplate it from the outside .
Over the course of European history , universities have always been places where meetings are held , knowledge is exchanged , thought is developed and training is delivered in the various disciplines .
Today , the effects of the crisis and of unemployment must not result in universities restricting their role as providers of professionals who are immediately ready to work because , in our changing societies , the ability to change jobs is becoming vital .
On the contrary , universities , as places of higher education and training , must also enable learners to become critical , analytical thinkers , because this will enable them to understand the world in which we live and to use their professional skills wisely .
European universities must create the conditions for lifelong learning , contribute to the enrichment of intellectual life and play a central role in the knowledge-based society of today 's digital age .
Education is definitely our priority objective , but what sort of education ?
In one issue of The Economist magazine , a study was published according to which 80 % of the skills and expertise considered key by managers of large enterprises are not taught at all at universities .
The result of this is terrible unemployment figures for university graduates .
We can perhaps all agree that the solution is to develop links between businesses and universities .
This has been pointed out repeatedly in various documents , including the Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities .
The key issue , however , is how to achieve these links .
In my view , the correct way would be to incorporate work experience stints lasting several months , not only for students but also for professors , as integral components of the lifelong learning process .
There is a need not only for students but also for teachers to maintain regular contact with the real world .
The cofinancing of such work experience stints should become an integral component of university budgets .
For businesses , this process means investing considerable effort and often considerable costs as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , please forgive me , but I am going to have to destroy the wonderful unanimity which is prevailing in this Chamber .
The resolution which is being put to us today relates to the challenges in the relations between universities and business in connection with the implementation of the notorious Bologna process .
An enormous amount of work has been done in the two committees that examined this text , and numerous improvements have been made to the original text to take account of the real challenges in this area .
We are all trying to understand the aspirations of our young people .
We are all concerned to provide young people with the best tools to help them find a job .
The unemployment rate among young people is , in fact , unacceptable .
Yet does this mean that , as certain paragraphs in the resolution indicate , we should consider universities merely as machines capable of meeting the needs of companies and the world of business , to the exclusion of all else ?
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left Group do not think so .
No , the wealth of our universities also lies in producing an increasing number of students with rich and diversified intellectual knowledge , not in simply ensuring that they acquire work-related skills .
That is the real key to lifelong mobility .
In many EU countries , there is a growing lack of understanding among those in the university world .
We in the GUE / NGL Group think that we should listen to them .
We are asking for a comprehensive report on the Bologna process to be drafted .
We will not be voting for this resolution , which invites universities to merely meet the needs of business , ignoring the other stakeholders in economic and social life , which is not limited solely to businesses .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , why does this report seek more international cooperation at university level ?
Universities have shared information with each other for centuries , before the EU existed .
The Renaissance , spanning the 14th to 17th centuries , was a surge in intellectual development spreading from Florence right across Europe through the universities .
The arts , music , literature and the sciences became vibrant and spawned countless works which enrich us still today .
So what of modernisation ?
Do you look for the technological developments of the future ?
If so , the scene today is just as promising .
Universities elsewhere may be overtaking us , but they owe their beginnings to European universities .
This tide of higher education often returns home .
The universities of Britain take postgraduate students from across the world , pursuing their studies further and sharing their information , not least with commerce and industry .
But we do not need to politicise higher education through programmes such as the Bologna and the Erasmus processes .
We do not need programmes on multiculturalism or multilingualism or any other ' -ism ' , that will happen anyway as students from around the world meet and mix on campus .
If you wish to serve the modern and future worlds , see that universities are funded properly , encourage those students who wish to study abroad , then simply leave them all alone to get on with it .
( DE ) Madam President , as we know , the interlinking of business and universities has been a reality for some time .
This situation has led to the current mindless ' one solution fits all ' approach whereby partly privatised universities are acting as controlling enterprises with the supposed aim of planning educational output .
Believing that such a partnership will contribute to modernisation all of a sudden only serves to show how lazy and uncreative our education policy debate is .
We are living in a time of technical revolution .
Digital systems are changing us , they are changing the way we act and think , our cognitive skills and , ultimately , our brains .
What we need therefore is a revolution in research and teaching that will adapt to this situation .
In such a time of change , continuing to preach the dependence of universities on this subsystem of our society as a step towards modernisation , despite the fact that such an interlinking has not led to any significant improvements in the past ten years , also ignores the importance of teaching and research for society as a whole .
What we really need in this time of change are scientific curiosity and creativity , but these arise from the possibility of free thinking and from not yielding to pressure , and that includes to the demands of the business world .
A young mind , a young brain with potential must be able to move freely .
What you have presented here in your report is the exact opposite .
This report reflects outdated and failed thinking .
The entire report is uncreative and I would even dare to say useless .
It is clumsy phrases chained together across many pages to hide the fact that it lacks substance .
In the Austrian education system , you would be given a straight fail for this report .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to say to Mr Ehrenhauser that he should pay a visit to our universities and see for himself how creative they are and also that no student is in a position of dependence just because he or she might have been granted a bursary from business .
That also applies to Mr Repo and Mrs Vergiat .
We should focus on making sure that cooperation between education and business takes into account small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular .
We also need to ensure that SMEs are given better , faster and less bureaucratic treatment in the context of research programmes .
That is important and has also been stated in this report , Mr Ehrenhauser .
If you had read that , you would have realised this is something totally new .
Therefore , what we need in this area is enhanced cooperation when it comes to universities and SMEs .
We need this cooperation at local , national and international level .
If business and universities cooperate , we cannot assume that one will necessarily learn from the other , because one is training those whom the other might someday employ in their company .
In this respect , we should ensure that money can flow from business to universities , because public authorities have less and less money and cannot afford to make additional resources available in these areas .
I am grateful to every business entrepreneur and to small , medium-sized and large businesses that provide money for education because what they are doing , ultimately , is educating the next generation which will further promote economic growth .
We must support universities .
We need to ensure closer cooperation between public institutions and the private sector and provide scope for private innovation funds .
This report therefore strikes precisely the right chord .
Obviously , we also need people to be trained by those who know what it means to have an entrepreneurial spirit and who know what it means to be a manager .
We must ensure that teachers and students are equipped with the right box of tools and that we encourage business to participate in actively developing teaching materials for entrepreneurship .
The comments made by Mr Repo and Mr Ehrenhauser are not in line with the facts and I would like to object to the report being called stupid and dull .
No , it is good .
I wish to thank Mr Pál Schmitt , who is presently speaker of the Hungarian Parliament .
Madam President , most of us here are agreed that we should be supporting our universities and supporting our young people .
Although I believe - as I think most of us do - that universities are , and should be , autonomous , of course , they also live in the real world and need to take account of what happens in the real world , not least because their students will be leaving them to get jobs in the real world .
I think that is really what we are talking about .
We are talking about how the universities can maintain their academic excellence , yet prepare their students for work .
That is why this dialogue - the contact between universities and the business sector - is so very important , why we have spent such a long time working it through and why Mr Schmitt spent such a long time writing this report .
What we need is a real dialogue between employers , and employers at all levels , I think .
I agree that SMEs are important but I think we are also looking at talking to large corporations and also to the public sector , to government employers at national , regional and at local level , the health sector and really all those who employ people , because it is in that way that we will make sure that we get the level of graduate unemployment down and we give our young people a chance .
Within this , it is very important that we maintain adequate levels of state funding for universities - something which I know in some Member States is becoming more and more of an issue .
Unless we get that money and unless universities are properly and adequately funded , we will not have balanced courses , we will not have balanced discipline and we will not be able to give our students the chances that they need .
So , I urge everyone to support this important report and to vote for it so that we can go forward and have a bright future for universities , for students and for employers .
( PL ) Firstly , I would like to express my thanks for the recognition given to my amendment , which invites countries from outside the European Union to the forum for dialogue to which Mr Oettinger referred .
This will allow us to benefit from the experience of American universities , which , in my opinion , are the best universities in the world , and it would be good if our universities could benefit from them and , at the same time , share our experience with other countries , such as the countries of the Former Soviet Union .
However , what seems to me , here , to be the most important aspect is to emphasise that in this dialogue between the worlds of business and universities , we should not forget that the university - a school of higher education - is an independent , autonomous institution whose objective is the search for truth - a disinterested search for truth .
This is how universities arose in Italy , Germany , France and Poland , and I think we should not forget that this goal should also guide universities today , while cooperation with business should not hinder or restrict that noble work of searching for truth - the disinterested search for truth .
( PT ) Madam President , universities are the backbone of Europe ; they are probably our best creation .
There was Europe in the 12th century universities of Bologna , Coimbra , Oxford and the Sorbonne long before there was political Europe .
However , the world of business and business management that we know today is 30 or 40 years old : it dates from since the War .
This is one of the few times that a left-leaning Member will ask you a conservative question , so make the most of it .
Do we really want to dedicate ourselves to a centuries-old European creation or to a business ideology that is a few decades old ?
Dedicating ourselves to the world of business , as we have been doing in recent decades , is dedicating ourselves inevitably to the short term , and that is what this is about .
Training plastics engineers now to be unemployed in three years time , to then train a type of financial manager who will be unemployed after four years ; I want to ask the European countries of Portugal and Estonia a question .
What would you prefer ?
Would you prefer your children to have an education that follows the short-term dictates of the market , or would you prefer that they have the most solid and broadest education possible as has always been the case in European universities ?
Would you prefer their education to enable them to be in the labour market now , or for the next few decades and the rest of their lives ?
I leave you with that question .
( SK ) First , I would like to congratulate our fellow Member , the author of this report , on his election to the new and important role of speaker of the Hungarian Parliament .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express the hope that Pál Schmitt , through his wisdom , broad political outlook , and calm and prudent speeches in this role , will help to make a lasting improvement in Hungary 's coexistence with her neighbours .
I would now like to turn to the new partnership for modernising universities .
In my opinion , the key statement in the entire text is expressed in the introduction to item 2 of the draft opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , where it is written , and I quote , ' that the challenges mentioned in the Commission 's notification are not new and so far , there has not been a successful response to them . '
To put it more simply , the Commission has produced a vision , repeating and issuing challenges , possibly in the hope that this will achieve something , but there has unfortunately been no significant improvement in this area so far .
Perhaps it would therefore be wiser , Commissioner , to conduct a thorough analysis as soon as possible into the reasons why the previous challenges did not produce the desired result , and then to come up with a pragmatic definition of new and genuinely effective measures for achieving real cooperation of a high standard between universities and manufacturing companies .
( GA ) Madam President , Pádraig Ó Conaire once wrote a book entitled ' M 'Asal Beag Dubh ' [ My Small Black Donkey ] in which he said that the donkey was standing ' with his back to the wind , ignoring life while life ignored him ' .
That description could apply , with respect , to university professors in the past as well , as they lived in their ivory towers immune from the world and the world immune from them , but , thankfully , that now has all changed , and changed utterly .
In recent times , I have seen three great examples of that .
Firstly , in my own town of Tralee , the Institute was awarded the European Entrepreneurial Region of the Year Award for their work in business and in entrepreneurial establishment .
Secondly , in my conversations and meetings with the new professor and President of University College Cork , I have learned that they are really getting engaged with the business community and vice versa .
Most encouraging of all is that we were in Santiago a few weeks ago and the university there had developed a fantastic model of involvement with the business community and had even created its own bank to encourage start-up companies who often cannot get funding to get the companies going .
We at European Union level can do a lot in encouraging them , creating the opportunities for development , and also establishing the coordination of research that can be eventually turned into the knowledge economy and the smart jobs we are talking about .
Madam President , academics are , by nature , an argumentative group , so as a former university lecturer and course director , it has been with great interest that I followed a very public debate in Ireland between academics over the future direction of Irish universities .
Where these academics converge is in the agreement that universities remain one of Europe 's great innovations and that their continued success is essential to the future social , political and economic success of the European Union .
However , economic success must not be confused with social development , in society as in university ; and so this crossroads we have come to in third-level education , with traditional student-based learning in one direction , and the demands of modern business-driven economies in the other , must be navigated with the greatest of care .
Profit growth and modern development are integral elements of today 's universities , but , with many faculties unrelated to business and profit-driven professions - and I am thinking of arts and the humanities in particular - it is important that , in order to retain a balance between both economic and intellectual success , modern universities retain some essential academic links with their more financially naive past .
( RO ) Unfortunately , education curricula place too much emphasis on theory , which means that students encounter problems when they enter the labour market .
Their education must be provided more on the basis of a practical perspective and dealing with real problems encountered in the economic environment .
This is why I believe that relations between the academic and business worlds need to be strengthened .
In addition , universities need to be more receptive to the business world so that they can better adapt their education offering to the labour market 's demands .
This will enable students to acquire the qualifications and develop the skills required by employers .
A number of Member States , such as France , Germany , Italy , the UK or Spain , have been developing partnerships between universities and the business world for a number of years .
In Romania last year , a project was launched with European Union funding , which involved 20 faculties receiving new curricula adapted to the labour market 's current requirements .
One of the project 's major benefits is that it cuts unemployment by improving the quality of the educational offering and reduces the number of graduates with degrees which cannot be adapted to the labour market .
These partnerships must not be confined just to within individual Member States .
In the current situation , I support the promotion and extension of the Erasmus programmes for young entrepreneurs and for trainees .
( RO ) I wish to begin by congratulating Pál Schmitt for the coherent and relevant report on the current situation in higher education .
We have a major problem , which is that , at the moment , we are turning out unemployed people in every one of the European Union 's 27 Member States rather than young people who are completely geared up for the labour market .
There is a huge chasm between what young people are learning at school and what employers require on the labour market .
This problem is exacerbated even further as we are currently in an economic and financial crisis , where there is also an obvious jobs crisis .
The European Union has been a player on the global market for very many years , with an economy based , in particular , on knowledge and innovation .
If we actually want to have an economy based on knowledge and innovation , we must progress beyond the discussion stage and support more investment and public-private partnerships and encourage partnerships between universities and the business world so that discoveries which are made and the results of scientific research in universities can be utilised in the real economy .
I , too , was in Santiago de Compostela with Seán Kelly where we visited the local university .
I can tell you that we saw a very clear model for funding start-ups and small firms launched by students where the university provides credit to students without any guarantees .
The products successfully developed by the students at the university have an immediate practical use in the local economy .
This is a model which we need to promote and replicate across the EU .
( PL ) This report is related to the important objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I will remind you all that over a 10-year period , the number of people with higher education is to rise by 10 % - from 30 % to 40 % - and spending by Member States on research and development is to rise to 3 % .
It is mainly the universities which will benefit from this money and carry out the research .
We should , therefore , thoroughly investigate the systems which have been the most successful in other parts of the world .
I am talking about American methods related to partnership between business and university , and how to adapt all the results of scientific research to the market , so that what are often wonderful scientific achievements are not left on the shelf but are put to practical use , which means in business .
Another matter is the need for the effective introduction of a system of education grants and attracting businesses into the system .
Doctoral programmes should be strongly supported , using the European Social Fund and programmes which are already in existence , such as the Marie Curie programme .
How can clear schemes of public partnership be created , mainly as part of technology parks and enterprise incubators ?
How can we get involved with small and medium-sized enterprises , and also get students involved with SMEs ?
All these things are very important .
I think it is important not to invest exclusively in the area of technology , either , which is an important area .
We should also invest in a system for arts and humanities , which should also have an area of cooperation with public bodies and with business .
A final remark : today , China has as many students as there are in the whole of the European Union .
Therefore , talking about achieving common objectives is our common task , and I think the participation of business in the dialogue will be an effective way of beating competition from around the world .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy would like to express our support for the work of the EU Forum for University Business Dialogue .
We believe it to be a good instrument with which to strengthen such important relations as those between the public and private sectors .
We are convinced that in times of economic crisis , when young people have greater problems in finding a job and companies are facing greater competitive pressure , this collaboration represents an added economic and social value that affords it even greater priority .
It is a dialogue and cooperation that must flow in both directions , from supply and from demand , and must extend to national and regional levels in order to identify the best practices , the best policies and the best instruments .
We agree that fostering personnel mobility between research centres and companies , promoting private sector investment in R & D , and ensuring that universities provide the job market with well prepared personnel , are all essential actions .
The European Union is already taking important steps in this direction , such as support for technological platforms , for joint technological initiatives and any public-private partnership formula , as well as for the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , given that these are extremely interesting initiatives on the right track , and ones that we must continue to encourage .
Lastly , Madam President , those of us on the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work and on his appointment .
( PL ) The Forum for University Business Dialogue which has been opened by the Commission strengthens cooperation between universities and businesses so that universities can be helped to initiate partnerships by making use of their scientific and technological knowledge .
This is a good idea if we want to make the European economy dynamic and truly competitive .
I would like , however , to point out several flaws in the Commission 's proposal .
Some of the recommendations are too general and leave too much open to interpretation , such as the term ' university ' in relation to all institutions of tertiary education , irrespective of their status .
There are no research instruments for determining shortages of qualifications in the labour market .
Neither is there mention of any kind of system for education and training which would allow those shortages to be reduced .
With regard to the lifelong learning programme , it does not take account of the particular situation of people who do not possess a university education .
In summary , the chosen course of strengthening cooperation between universities and businesses does appear to answer the current needs of the market .
The most important roles , however , fall to the Member States , which have to ensure effective implementation of the proposals if we want to achieve the intended plans .
( Applause )
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following the first review of the Lisbon Strategy , the European Union is already looking towards the next 10 years .
Among the priorities of Europe 2020 , that of smart growth based on both the knowledge economy and on innovation stands out .
The key for proceeding in this direction is integrating the systems of secondary and tertiary education with the labour market .
The course to follow entails renewed attention to the world of work together with the learning of personal skills , or rather the so-called ' knowledge triangle ' .
Europe can therefore secure its relevance in the international arena if , in science and innovation , it acts in a more unified manner and involves everyone in a position to determine both growth and development .
In this context , systems of appraising universities in order to establish and measure efficiency and quality standards are more than opportune .
It is therefore time to move towards that new dimension of European unity known as the ' fifth freedom ' , or the free movement of knowledge and talent .
To this end , there must be a European proposal to simplify the work of young researchers via organic links with business in order to meet their development needs .
In order to attain these objectives , there must be greater investment in programmes such as Erasmus .
By so doing , study beyond national borders with guaranteed academic recognition for students will be encouraged .
( RO ) At a time when we need new instruments to kick-start economic growth , I believe that it is important for us to provide small and medium-sized enterprises with easier access to research and development .
Many of these companies suffer due to their difficulty in accessing funding , which means that they are unable to design and develop new products or redesign existing products , thereby encountering a loss of competitiveness .
What would be desirable is for universities , especially those receiving public funding , to be more receptive to the needs of the SME sector .
Cutting red tape combined with an increase in public funding for research and development programmes which can generate technologies or products that can be transferred to SMEs could facilitate access to funding for these programmes under the Structural Funds .
Universities can also contribute to training the SMEs ' staff as part of the lifelong learning process .
The launch of a single European network of business and innovation centres is encouraging .
I , too , wish to congratulate the rapporteur .
( RO ) We must ask ourselves what direction we want our education and research systems to go in .
There is a huge amount of talk about the knowledge-based society , but I wonder whether this concept has not just become a sound bite which goes down well in the media .
I think that there is too little talk about skills in this context and too much about accumulating knowledge .
If you carry out a survey among students , you will see that writing essays has become a practice involving the use of a few platitudes to fill up the space requested by teachers .
There are some who will need to get involved in an economic environment where the recipes for success are no longer guaranteed .
I think that the business world will not be alone in facing a radical overhaul as a result of the economic and financial crisis .
This will apply to universities too , which will have to undergo certain transformations so that they can adapt to an environment in constant flux , requiring the acquisition of skills and not just knowledge .

( RO ) I wish to congratulate Pál Schmitt on two counts : on his new post and for his well-structured , comprehensive report , which will definitely enhance the effectiveness of relations between the business and academic worlds in Europe .
At a time when all the strategies we have adopted are stipulating the need to have well-educated citizens , with skills which are compatible with the demands of the labour market , I feel that a specific measure aimed at improving the interconnection between both areas is welcome .
I think that a change in attitude is required across the EU , along with a business environment which will help the university curriculum to adapt , just like in North America , through launching and funding specific courses .
This will help familiarise students with the rigorous requirements of entrepreneurship and will also make European higher education more attractive globally .
The practical impact must be to offer society added value and provide knowledge and results from the cooperation between universities and companies , thereby generating economic growth and , by extension , a better living for our citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much for allowing me to speak again briefly .
It would appear that my fellow Member does not know the difference between training and education .
In times when technology is taking away most of our work , it is increasingly important that universities educate citizens into mature and analytical people .
That is just what we need .
We therefore need people who are capable of asking searching questions about social processes .
After all , business does not set itself such an objective .
Business wants to train people and is entitled to do that , that is all well and good .
However , that is only a requirement from one subsystem of our society and it does not represent what we need in a society as a whole .
Let me make another brief comment : we need scientific creativity and scientific curiosity .
I do not accept the view , and I certainly do not believe , that business is able to buy the curiosity and the creativity that we so desperately need through their financial input .
No !
( PL ) Research , scientific progress and educating students are the main roles of universities .
The priorities of the Lisbon Strategy are , put briefly , a knowledge-based economy , innovation and scientific research .
Even if we do not find the results of the strategy satisfying , the objectives set in the strategy are still relevant .
What ways are there to put into effect these principles and objectives ?
Firstly , cooperation between universities , the economy and specific businesses , and the financing of scientific research and work experience by business .
Secondly , exchanges of students and researchers between the universities of different countries , and increasing the funds available for their support .
Thirdly , financing by businesses of student work experience placements and scientific research which they have ordered .
Fourthly : mobility of staff is important in order to be able to make full use of educated people .
Fifthly : development of research and development centres in the area of the economy .
Finally , I would like to say that the best investment is an investment in the education of the young generation , and I mean lifelong education .
( RO ) I partially agree with the rapporteur .
I wish to say that in order to achieve the EU 2020 strategy objectives , we need knowledge and innovation .
We are not talking about purchasing knowledge , but about investing in an education system which is adapted to market requirements .
At the moment , universities in the European Union offer researchers and students less attractive conditions than the colleges in the United States .
One of the main reasons for this is the lack of money .
As was also emphasised by the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Barroso , Europeans are competing against each other to attract the best footballers . However , they are losing their researchers to the Americans .
It is therefore absolutely necessary to revamp Europe 's universities so that they can play a decisive role in society and in an economy based on knowledge and innovation .
One solution to assuage the discontent of employers , who believe that university education does not take into account the requirements of the labour market and does not prepare students to face the current climate , is for university programmes to offer students opportunities to carry out practical work placements in SMEs .
Madam President , honourable Members , thank you for a lively debate and for your many proposals and ideas .
I believe that there is broad agreement in this House that the dialogue between universities and the working world and business can be beneficial for everyone involved , for the universities themselves , researchers , lecturers , students , businesses and for society as a whole .
In my opinion , this is not a case of ' whether ' but ' how ' , that is , how we can develop dialogue and cooperation .
This is about knowledge transfer , about dialogue and information exchange during education and lifelong learning , it is about cooperation in basic research and about fostering a more practical approach alongside the theoretical one in education through insight into business value creation and manufacturing .
Business does not have a supplanting role here , but a complementary one , and the crucial point is that research will remain free just as teaching will .
It will make its own decision in this regard ; it will not be forced into this by politicians .
We need a win-win situation , that is , one in which science and teaching institutions , on the one hand , and research and business , on the other , will say ' yes ' to this partnership .
Freedom of research and teaching does not mean floating in a vacuum , but being involved in society and the world of employment .
For that reason , I believe that this report is a good stock-take and it makes it clear what route we need to take in order to reinforce our universities and strengthen the competitiveness of European business and technology .
With our forum , we want to make a small contribution , offer a platform and consider how our forum 's activities can be supplemented .
The report provides a good basis for that and is a good source of reference , and for that I am very grateful .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish again to thank the Commission for its communication , which we have adopted for the most part .
I should just like to dwell on a perhaps critical aspect that has emerged in this debate , because someone emphasised how fundamental the independence of universities , freedom of research and public financing are .
We are all agreed on this , and that is why I fail to understand these critical remarks , because it is enough to read the report , where , in the very first paragraphs , we have written very clearly and stress that the intellectual and financial independence of higher education institutions vis-à-vis business must be maintained and no relations of dependency on business must arise on the part of higher education .
It also emphasises that universities should , in all circumstances , maintain the autonomy to decide over their curricula and governance structures .
This dispels any problems or doubts whatsoever in this area , which is why I do not understand what these problems could be , unless it is a question of old-fashioned ideological exploitation .
Let us accordingly really give some thought to this , since this report sets out the conditions for effectively improving the lot of our young people and our students , because there is truly no one who wants to leave hundreds of thousands of youngsters in the hands of who knows what business purposes but , on the contrary , only wants hundreds of thousands of students to have the opportunity of studying , training and working in the society that awaits them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 20 May , at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , European graduates must have the experience and the high-quality skills required to take advantage of good career opportunities , to be competitive in the world market and to encourage entrepreneurship in Europe .
When building a knowledge-based economy , dialogue and the relationship it promotes between business , research and education is very important .
Although the Member States are responsible for providing education , there are major advantages in establishing cross-border links and in promoting enhanced cooperation between the European business community and European universities .
I strongly support the rapporteur 's efforts to seek undertakings and commitments between universities and businesses , and I agree that this dialogue should focus not only on scientific and technological matters but on all areas of education .
European graduates must have strong skills that are suitable for employment and they must have easy access to highly important programmes such as Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs and for Apprentices .
Education and training courses must be restructured to recognise the needs of the workforce and of the knowledge-based economy .
In recent months , research has been undertaken in my country of Lithuania on adapting institutions of higher education to the new needs of the labour market and the creation of opportunities for graduates to find employment as soon as they have completed their higher education .
Sadly , the research showed that many universities prepare specialists that the market already has in abundance .
In other words , universities do not always take market needs into account and the ones worst affected by this are the young people who have just finished their studies .
Therefore , I completely agree with the initiative to provide for a specific strategy or system in future into which we would pour a lot of effort and commitment to strengthen the links between universities and business at local , regional , national , and international level .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the shortage of jobs and difficult working conditions have an impact on the life of every individual , and young people in this situation are particularly vulnerable .
I would also like to underline that due to the dynamic market , the fast-changing working environment and the ever-increasing development of new technologies , institutions of higher education also have to adapt to the new changes - they must improve and reform curricula in order to ensure a high level of education and solve the question of graduate employment .
The input of universities alone is not enough ; business and government must also contribute to this process .
The dialogue between the academic community and business , which is intended to modernise universities in Europe , should take account of their present condition , which is adapted to the Bologna process , and should also take account of the economic challenges related to innovation .
The Bologna process enables a significant amount of flexibility in educating specialists who , as technical students at first degree level , prepare for a profession in a practical way .
At masters level , they can approach interdisciplinary knowledge about the economy in a developing world with flexibility , while at doctoral level , they provide innovative solutions .
Universities which educate in a conservative way release into the market specialists who are not useful to an innovative economy .
Therefore , study programmes should be constantly corrected and agreed on with respect to the needs of different branches of the economy .
Bringing the work of universities closer to the needs of industry is helped by lectures on enterprise and the issue of intellectual property .
It is beneficial if undergraduate , postgraduate and doctoral dissertations relate thematically to the requirements of the economy or arise directly in response to its needs .
This is the best pretext for conducting dialogue between the two communities - science and business .
It would be possible to influence the probability of innovative success to an even greater extent if the practical part of these dissertations was carried out directly in the place where they might one day be put to use .
An important element of the cooperation of universities with the economy is student work placements , which currently are not organised very willingly because of the costs .
Furthermore , universities should offer postgraduate courses for people in industry which would cover the latest achievements in science and technology .
We are tired of hearing young Europeans say , ' They would have hired me if I had experience , but no one will give me the chance to gain any . '
The current economic crisis has hit them particularly hard , and they already had trouble entering the labour market and building a sustainable future for themselves prior to the crisis .
Unemployment among the under-25 age group has reached 21.4 % in the EU : double that of the population average .
The data is not encouraging : unemployment rates seem set to rise , and we are concerned that , by the age of 30 , young people with an outstanding education are not yet able to enjoy the economic autonomy necessary to form a family , to be independent , to invest in their future ; namely , to show what they are worth and grow as people .
We want a European Union based on the central role of the individual .
Our young people must be able to rely on a strong , continuing link between the training that they receive at university and a labour market which can offer them employment possibilities consistent with what they learned during their studies .
We are calling for coordination between universities and businesses , a review of European programmes aimed at young people and systems of allowances and incentives for the businesses which hire them , together with greater emphasis on information technology , so that policies for young people can be included in all areas of political decision and debate .
The EU set itself the objective of becoming the world 's most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economic power by 2010 .
The quickly changing employment situation , the knowledge-based economy and ever accelerating technological development are issues which European higher education and scientific activity currently have to deal with .
At the same time , the economic crisis engulfing Europe , which has affected European competitiveness and brought about extensive changes in the financial and economic markets , has caused the bankruptcy of whole branches of manufacturing and the loss of many jobs , among other things .
All of this makes it more difficult to achieve the objectives set out by the EU .
In the present situation , I think it is important to have more dialogue between universities and entrepreneurs , because improved cooperation will provide greater opportunities for mutual benefit , which later would not just stimulate economic growth but would also be beneficial in a wider social sense , supporting the continuous improvement of a society based on action .
I think that the Member States must also concentrate a lot more on encouraging people to adapt constantly to the changing job market - which is of prime importance for the European Union , especially during the present economic slump - by promoting lifelong learning .
Supplementary training and retraining in all stages of life is essential for increasing Europe 's competitiveness , for economic growth and for fostering jobs .
Also taking into account the demographic changes taking place in the EU , I think that in the coming years , the Member States must raise the levels of investment in people , giving priority to the EU 's most important resource - its people .
As Mr Schmitt 's excellent report highlights , university-business partnerships are one of the major components of the success of our educational model .
Even though much progress has already been made as a result of the Bologna process and of programmes such as the Leonardo programme for work experience placements , there is still work to be done .
Too many universities are still worrying about their academic independence and focusing too much on knowledge at the expense of skills .
Too many companies believe universities are impervious to the needs of the workplace .
The fact is , skills and knowledge are closely connected and completely interdependent .
Companies may be of huge assistance to universities when it comes to providing finance , making syllabuses more vocational , and adapting programmes , if , at the same time , universities maintain their autonomy and their quality standards .
The EU must help simplify the legal frameworks that facilitate these partnerships and encourage the mobility of teachers and young entrepreneurs .
However , above all , it is up to the Member States to adapt their legislation , as France did in 2007 with its law on the autonomy of universities .
We are not talking here about ' marketing ' knowledge , as some people are claiming , but about creating a real dialogue which enables the needs of each individual to be identified and adapted .
Community financial assistance with respect to the decommissioning of Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant in Bulgaria - ' Kozloduy Programme ' ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Harms , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on Community financial assistance with respect to the decommissioning of Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant in Bulgaria - ' Kozloduy Programme ' - C7-0289 / 2009 - 2009 / 0172 ( NLE ) ) .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission and my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for exciting and interesting debates on nuclear waste management .
We did not always agree , but one thing on which we did agree is that we should provide joint European support to Bulgaria for meeting the costs of decommissioning the four reactor units in Kozloduy .
At this point , I would like to strongly re-emphasise that in 2006 , Bulgaria received EUR 340 million , in the 2007-2008 period , EUR 253 million , and in 2009 , EUR 89.5 million .


In tomorrow 's vote , we will be deciding on further solidarity contributions amounting to some EUR 300 million .
This contribution is being granted because , when negotiating accession to the European Union , the Bulgarian Government agreed to decommission these reactors as a result of the security deficiencies of the Kozloduy plants .
In my report , I have sought to bring about a change to the final tranche of this payment that we are now deciding ( I assume this is the final tranche ) .
I propose that the money which is no longer directly being spent on decommissioning and waste management , that is , waste strategies for temporary storage , in Kozloduy , and we are talking about some EUR 120 million , at least be partly invested in the planning and preparation of the final disposal solution for highly radioactive waste in Bulgaria .
In other words , I propose that we set up a fund for this task which Bulgaria has not addressed at all to date .
While I have not been successful in rallying the majority in the committees behind this idea , I do think that this is an important matter .
I have submitted amendments again for two things to be retained in the compromise solution that is being negotiated by the committees for tomorrow 's vote .
First of all , as regards decommissioning , waste management and final disposal , which also includes temporary storage , I would ask that the Commission very closely monitor the exact cost of what is happening in Kozloduy and how much money we will actually need to ensure decommissioning , waste management and final disposal are carried out thoroughly and according to high safety standards .
The second thing I would like us to ensure is that the money which is now being sent to Bulgaria is not used for investment in coal or lignite .
That has not been ruled out in the current draft of the report adopted by the committee .
For the rest , I am pleased that this report will usher in a lively political debate , as it were , with Commissioner Oettinger about the final disposal of nuclear waste in general and one that will hopefully move things forward .
The directive has been announced and I eagerly await it .
Mr President , honourable Members , on the third evening of this plenary session there is another energy-related subject on the agenda .
This evening , it concerns extending the financial assistance provided by the EU for decommissioning the reactor units at the Kozloduy power plant in Bulgaria .
This is a sensitive and important subject .
As a result , I very much welcome the constructive working atmosphere and I would like to thank you for that .
The subject has been discussed with Mrs Harms , the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs and the relevant committees in a very businesslike manner .
I am also pleased that the report largely follows the Commission 's views and supports our proposal .
Firstly , I would like to mention your support for providing initial financing of EUR 300 million from the European budget , in line with EU interests , and therefore for maintaining safety levels in the nuclear industry .
Secondly , I would like to add that the additional aid should be directed at decommissioning and that the amount required , which at present is EUR 180 million , is reasonable .
My third point is that , as a result of insufficient financial reserves in the Republic of Bulgaria for historical reasons , the European funding is helping to ensure high levels of safety during the decommissioning work in order to protect people and the environment .
As far as the current amendments are concerned , I would like to emphasise that the majority of the proposed amendments will be accepted by the Commission .
Unfortunately , I cannot go into all of them due to a lack of time .
I would like to explain the Commission 's view on two subjects which are very important to us and which are addressed directly in the report , both in the amendments and in Mrs Harms ' explanatory statement .
I am referring firstly to the continuation of financial support for measures in the energy sector .
In addition to the specific wishes of the Bulgarian Government , several other arguments can be used to justify the necessity of further financial support for measures in the energy sector .
These include , on the one hand , equal treatment with Lithuania and Slovakia , where corresponding measures funded by the EU will be under way until 2013 and , on the other , other measures to create replacement capacity , including further investments in energy efficiency .
There are huge potential energy savings to be made in Bulgaria 's existing coal-fired power stations .
Following the decommissioning of the nuclear reactors , the focus of generating capacity in Bulgaria has changed .
As a result , the Bulgarian power grid is faced with extensive challenges , which can be overcome with additional aid , in order to stabilise and safeguard the electricity network .
The Commission therefore feels that it is appropriate to continue to guarantee support for measures in the energy sector , including measures relating to the network infrastructure .
I would now like to look at the subject of support for the development of a geological final disposal solution for irradiated fuel elements .
The Commission supports the rapporteur 's view with regard to the need to develop a solution for the secure final disposal of irradiated fuel elements . However , the development of a solution of this kind cannot be included in the financial aid provided in the Kozloduy Programme for the following reasons :
It would distort competition , because all the Member States with a nuclear energy programme are required to develop a solution of this kind .
Although the final disposal of irradiated fuel elements is part of nuclear waste management , it is outside the scope of the decommissioning process and is not relevant to it .
What is needed is a secure temporary storage solution for irradiated fuel elements , which will be covered by the current financial support .
The development of a final storage solution , which we believe to be the next logical step , is nevertheless not a consequence of the closure and decommissioning of the four reactor units at Kozloduy .
However , I must emphasise that the Commission , as has already been mentioned , will tackle the subject of final storage and produce a proposal this year for the management of radioactive waste , which will also include the development of secure final storage solutions for irradiated fuel elements .
I am relying on you to make constructive proposals and I am also looking forward to an exciting debate .
Finally , I would like to summarise the situation as follows .
The Commission welcomes the fact that it has Parliament 's agreement to support Bulgaria over the next four years with the sum of EUR 300 million .
We also welcome the fact that we can continue to focus on providing support for safe dismantling measures .
In addition , we are pleased that Parliament believes that projects in the energy sector deserve our support .
I see the agreement on further financing and its implementation as a sign of the European Union 's solidarity with Bulgaria and as an important contribution to nuclear safety in Europe and beyond . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would like to express my support for the European Commission 's approach to this proposal and report , as was voted on in committee .
I am extremely pleased to see that the line which I defended in my draft report has been presented in the final text and that the European Parliament can now give a clear go-ahead to extending financial assistance from the Community for decommissioning Units 1-4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant .
Bulgaria has shown a conscientious attitude in its use of the funds for decommissioning the plant by 2009 .
The EU 's assistance needs to be extended to guarantee safe and timely completion of the decommissioning operations , which have been carried out with the utmost transparency and protection for the environment .
The extension of the financial assistance to fund measures aimed at mitigating the consequences of early decommissioning of the four reactors is especially important , taking into account the impact on and consequences for the environment , consumer energy prices and energy supply security in the region .
Certain attempts were made to exert pressure on this dossier for political and ideological reasons .
However , we must bear in mind the ultimate objectives of this programme , namely , guaranteed safe decommissioning and fair compensation for Bulgaria , support for the efforts made towards devising a more sustainable energy policy and a demonstration of transparency when managing projects and resources .
I would like to say to Mrs Harms that the issue of the final disposal of radioactive waste is very serious .
Particular attention must be focused on this , but it is not an issue which only Bulgaria will face .
It is a general challenge as a result of which we need to have a strategy and programme specifically devised for the whole of Europe .
I would also like to assure you , Mrs Harms , that Bulgaria does not intend to use these funds for further development of heating plants powered by lignite .
You should rest assured that we are intending to meet all our requirements and fall completely into line with European legislation and state-of-the-art technologies in Europe .
Bulgaria is a highly responsible country and will always endeavour to be a good and decent partner .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask you all to try and speak more slowly , because our esteemed interpreters are constantly sending me SOS messages telling me that they are unable to follow us when we speak very fast .
The problem is , therefore , that the only Members listening to you are those who can do so in the original language .
Consequently , I would ask you to make an effort to slow down .
Otherwise , interpretation will be impossible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the negotiations on accession to the European Union , Bulgaria agreed , under pressure from certain political forces , to close four of the units at its Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , and fulfilled this commitment exactly within the envisaged timeframes .
For its part , the European Union granted financial assistance as part of the Accession Treaty , restricted to the 2007-2009 period only , with the aim of supporting decommissioning and dealing with the consequences of closing the units early .
The European Union also gave political guarantees for continuing to provide Community support for the 2010-2013 period .
This would mean giving the same treatment to our country , at least during the periods of financial support , as to Lithuania and Slovakia , which are also committed to dismantling their nuclear capacity early .
This is why , at my country 's specific insistence and in keeping with the principles of solidarity and equality of Member States , the European Commission drafted the current proposal .
The amount of the additional funding cannot compensate in any way for the losses the country has suffered running into billions of euro due to the premature dismantling of the units .
At the same time , this assistance is absolutely necessary for implementing the further process of decommissioning for which the majority of the total is intended to be used .
No less important for the country is the funding earmarked for measures aimed at modernising the energy sector , reducing harmful emissions , and at improving energy efficiency and savings .
This report , which was approved by a huge majority in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , reflects these needs completely .
This is why we find unacceptable new attempts being made through new amendments being tabled during the plenary session to push through texts against coal plants or to present the direct disposal of the spent nuclear fuel as a foregone conclusion .
This issue will be a topic of discussion in the European Union from now on .
On this basis , I suggest that we support the proposal from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and reject the five new amendments from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin by thanking the Commission and Commissioner Oettinger personally for the extremely skilful job they have done in producing the document which he is submitting .
I also wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Harms , for the efforts she has invested in discussing this document to ensure that it contains topics which are very important to Europe 's citizens .
The fundamental purpose of the document is to support Bulgaria 's efforts in decommissioning four of the six units at its nuclear power plant .
I will not comment on how justified this decision was , but once it is incorporated in the Accession Treaty , this obligation must be fulfilled by the Bulgarian authorities .
They are , in fact , taking all the necessary action in this respect .
At the same time , the early closure of such a huge facility , provided for in the economic calculations , entails a huge direct and indirect cost .
Part of this cost is being compensated by the European Union .
This decision being tabled today will enable the European Union to put its approach to Bulgaria on the same footing as the approach adopted for two other countries , new European Union Member States , which have assumed and are fulfilling the same commitments .
It is very important to adhere to the same approach because it is our duty to maintain the coherence of the European Union 's policy .
Sixty per cent of the resources allocated will be used directly for decommissioning the facilities at the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , while the remaining 40 % will be used for improving energy efficiency and cutting carbon dioxide emissions in Bulgaria .
I would like to draw particular attention to some very appropriate points which were raised during the discussion in the committees by the rapporteur , Mrs Harms , and which were discussed very widely .
The first matter concerns the fate of the waste from the spent nuclear fuel and irradiated elements .
This issue was also mentioned today by Commissioner Oettinger .
This is an extremely vital matter on which we are expecting the European Commission to table an individual directive in the autumn .
The European Parliament will then have the opportunity to discuss this matter in depth , which , I am sure , is important to many European citizens .
As a result of this , I do not think that Parliament 's decision on the issue which we are discussing about compensation for Kozloduy needs to prejudge our debate in the autumn .
In addition , I fully agree with the Commission 's argument that if a precedent is created once for funding such a programme , it will then pose a threat to the whole European Union budget .
Naturally , this does not waive or reduce in any way the responsibility of the governments in the countries which have such facilities to find a definitive solution to the issue of spent nuclear fuel .
The second matter concerns the use of the resources .
There is no doubt that the resources received from the European Union must not be used to finance projects which increase carbon dioxide emissions .
Incidentally , based on the experience so far in both Bulgaria and the other two countries receiving such resources , there is no indication of any such abuses .
However , what I think we need to see in this text is a coherent European policy and the adoption of the same approach to all .
It is of paramount importance to European citizens that these resources are used for their intended purpose transparently and effectively .
The resources allocated by the European Union to Bulgaria go into a special fund which also includes sums from other donors .
Based on programmes approved beforehand and under the control of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , the resources from this fund , along with appropriate national funding , are allocated to the relevant projects .
The European Court of Auditors will carry out an audit very soon of these funds , including those in Bulgaria .
I believe that the European Parliament will also monitor closely in future how these resources are used .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as rapporteur on investments in energy infrastructure and shadow rapporteur on security of gas supply , I am very sensitive to issues of energy security .
I think Europe has a key role to play in this field .
As a Romanian MEP , I have even more interest in this particular issue of the Kozloduy nuclear plant .
Being on the border of my country , it has long been a matter of preoccupation in Romania for obvious environmental reasons .
The Kozloduy power plant is situated four kilometres from the River Danube and 150 kilometres from Bucharest .
According to international experts , the plant does not have any protective cover and there are major risks of radioactive leakages into the soil and the water table .
I believe Europe has a responsibility to help and facilitate its decommissioning , and we have to ensure that sufficient funding is made available to this project , as this is crucial to keep safety up to high standards , to ensure the necessary expertise and implement international best practices .
Decommissioning and dismantling should be done according to very strict rules and standards , otherwise it could pose a security threat to the whole region .
This is why I fully support this proposal and our commitment to allocate an additional EUR 300 million to this project .
Let me also remind you that the European Parliament took a strong stance a few months ago on this dossier , allocating the first EUR 75 million in the 2010 budget .
Nevertheless , I think we should be intransigent regarding transparency in the use of European funds .
So far , the Commission has been quite dissatisfied with the information on decommissioning received from Bulgaria .
The monitoring of the funds needs to be strict .
This is why I believe that the European Commission should first perform a specific evaluation to assess the strengths and weaknesses of past projects in order to improve funds programming together with the EBRD for the next funding period 2010-2013 .
We have tabled several amendments requiring the Bulgarian authorities to present a proper national strategy outlining long-term objectives in the energy efficiency and renewable energy sectors as a prerequisite to the EUR 120 million envelope .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( BG ) Mr President , I have a very brief , specific question .
As the lady has raised questions about safety , I would like her to give me an answer to the following : is she aware that , prior to decommissioning of the four small units of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , they were declared as being the safest reactors in the European Union by the European Atomic Energy Community ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , what can I say ?
Are we all nuts ?
Or can anyone else see any reason in it ?
I think a lot of people have decided to do it one way , and we should follow , and we all support the view that it should be done thus .
No further comment .

Mr President , we must bear in mind in today 's debate that , over the last ten years , the European Union gave Bulgaria EUR 550 million to close the four units in the Kozloduy complex .
Today , it is giving it another EUR 300 million , making a total of EUR 850 million , not counting the huge sums given for modifications and safety improvements .
In other words , we have paid more or less in gold for this nuclear complex and , for some people , it was the golden goose .
Nonetheless , the Commission continues to indirectly fund the nuclear lobby .
We are calling for an end to this bartering with the Bulgarian Government .
We are calling for Parliament to safeguard , together with the Commission , the safe and effective management of nuclear waste and not to consider it as part of the withdrawal programme .
As the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we are calling for the remaining 40 % of the EUR 300 million for the nuclear reactor withdrawal programme to be channelled by the Bulgarian Government to the management of radioactive waste and not to the development of environment-killing uranium- and coal-fired power plants .
Of course , I hope that anyone thinking of strengthening the nuclear lobby with new constructions has learned a lesson from the recent agreement between Turkey and Russia to build a nuclear plant in Αkkuyu , an earthquake area where the anti-nuclear movement has prevented its construction ......
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Tremopoulos , your time is up .
However , Mrs Parvanova has raised the blue card to ask you a question .
Will you allow your fellow Member to ask you a question ?
Mrs Parvanova , can you please pose your question as briefly as possible ?
( BG ) Mr President , the word ' blackmail ' was used here , and a short time ago , my colleague , Mrs Vălean , mentioned that Bulgaria had misused the funds and had not used them prudently from the earlier tranche , which was used for the appropriate purpose as compensation .
I have one question to ask , which I would like the Commission 's representative here and the Commission to corroborate : have there been warnings about this or not ?
No , I am sorry , Mrs Parvanova .
This does not comply with the Rules of Procedure .
The procedure involves posing a question to the speaker who is speaking at the time .
That question is therefore rejected as is the possibility of a reply .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I fought hard to prevent the premature closure of Units 3 and 4 of Kozloduy .
Their closure several years ahead of time was not necessary ; it was certainly not on safety grounds .
The effect , as predicted , has been increased use of environmentally unfriendly lignite-fuelled power stations , an increase in electricity prices and a cut in Bulgaria 's electricity exports : in other words , both economic and environmental damage .
We are now paying for mistaken judgments within the European Union institutions .
It is only right , therefore , that Bulgaria should be treated at least as well by the European Union as other countries that have had to close prematurely their ageing nuclear facilities , and I am glad that the Commission recognises this .
A lot of money , of course , is involved in this decommissioning process .
It is vitally important that these funds are properly and efficiently spent and accounted for .
I hope the Commission can give us assurances on this .
It is also important to address the issue of compensating for and replacing lost energy capacity .
Bulgaria will need assistance in creating sustainable new capacity that ensures security of supply and diversification , so that Bulgaria is not reliant on the goodwill of one foreign power .
I would like to say that the ' Kozloduy Programme ' must not only focus on financing the transfer of irradiated materials , increasing energy efficiency in Bulgaria and financing alternative energy sources .
In my opinion , this programme must also be viewed as a contribution to the economic and social stability of the Balkans .
This is because the Balkan states as a whole - including Bulgaria - are a vulnerable part of the European Union , as the current economic crisis has shown us .
I take the view that Article 30 of the Accession Treaty is a framework which must not be breached , as legal consultations with the people from the European Commission have demonstrated .
Even if this Accession Treaty or arrangement was used up in 2009 , a new arrangement must carry on in the spirit of continuity which is set out in Article 30 .
( BG ) Mr President , we are discussing here this evening the compensation which Bulgaria should receive for closing the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant .
This compensation is right , fair and timely because experts reckoned that the losses suffered by Bulgaria as a result of the closure of units 1-4 were much higher than all the compensation paid to it so far .
However , the following question remains to be answered here : why did we need to get to this point at all and why , as I mentioned a short time ago , did the safest units in Europe , declared as such not by anyone , but by the most prestigious agency , the International Atomic Energy Agency , need to be closed ?
I am also amazed here at the madness of how this report on compensation has ended up in the hands of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who started and ended their speeches with how Kozloduy must be destroyed , much like Cato the Elder used to say the same about Carthage .
At this point , I would like to address Mr Tremopoulos , who , if I may say , is hardly in a position to speak like this , because it is precisely his country which has just recently received a much bigger amount than Bulgaria is claiming at the moment , due to its blackmail .
He should therefore not be so insistent in stating what Bulgaria should and should not receive .
We can now see some amendments tabled by the Greens , which have one aim only .
This is why the Greens have a problem at the moment .
Indeed , the problem they have is that they have contributed to the rise in carbon dioxide emissions with the closure of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant .
Now with these changes , which they want even more blatantly to use to take money from Bulgaria and reallocate it to another area , they actually want to cover up their own guilt .
This is why they cannot explain to their voters why they , as European Union citizens , have to pay to have more carbon dioxide emissions in the EU .
In this case , the Greens are adopting positions which are diametrically opposed to their views .
There is also an amendment which states that Kozloduy should serve as an example .
However , the only thing which Kozloduy was an example of is how old reactors can be safe and operate perfectly well .
The only thing it can serve as an example of from now on is as a warning : a warning of how , thanks to political folly , a wonderful , efficient and successful industrial sector in a country can be destroyed .
The truth is , Mr Stoyanov , that you are hovering on the edge of the improper , the inappropriate , in terms of parliamentary language .
I have not cut you off because I wish to show our generosity , particularly that of our colleagues from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , who I understand to have been attacked in your speech .
I wanted to demonstrate the fact that we are capable of listening .
I must say to you , however , that your speech seemed entirely improper to me .
Should this happen again , I will cut you off because that is a road down which we do not want to go .
( RO ) I would like to thank the Commission because , while we are all preoccupied at the moment by the crisis , the Commission is still concerned about the other existing problems as well .
I think that Bulgaria is fully entitled to receive the money it was promised for dismantling this nuclear power plant .
I am an advocate of electricity generated by nuclear power plants and I do not believe that Europe will be able to achieve the specified targets for clean energy without building nuclear power plants .
However , I firmly believe that every country is entitled to build nuclear power plants , except that I think that we in the European Union have a collective responsibility and a sense of solidarity with regard to the technologies chosen in the construction of these nuclear power plants .
I think that , in this instance , the European Commission will have to adopt a completely stringent approach in evaluating these projects for new nuclear power plants .
( LT ) I would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Rebecca Harms , for her excellent work .
I agree with the document under discussion and the proposal that EUR 300 million in aid should be granted to Bulgaria for the decommissioning of Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant over a period of 3 years , while of course strengthening monitoring of how the funds received are spent .
It could be said that this is a show of equal solidarity , as other new Member States - Lithuania and Slovakia - are in a similar situation and have received such financial support .
Units 1 to 4 of the nuclear power plant have been out of operation for some time and it is logical that they should be decommissioned .
That will reduce the risk to the environment and will help us take better advantage of workers ' knowledge and professional experience .
When shutting down part of the power plant , its staff will face new challenges .
From our experience in Lithuania , I can say that unforeseen problems arise that are difficult to incorporate into the time schedules .
True , the biggest portion of the funds should be allocated to the decommissioning of the units , and there is the unavoidable question of storage equipment .
However , it is just as important to consider people .
I hope that when using the aid provided by the European Union , the Bulgarian Government will help workers and the community revolving around the power plant to adapt to the changed conditions , and it is very important to help them retrain and use their expertise in other spheres , to promote the creation of new sustainable jobs and switch to the new energy saving environment .
( PL ) The shutdown of four units of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant has no doubt caused a very large deficit in Bulgaria 's energy system .
It has a significant effect on security of supply in the region and must lead to an increase in CO2 emissions , which should be important , at least to some Members in this Chamber .
In spite of this , it is being proposed , in particular in the amendments , that we turn our backs on the energy problems of one of the Member States .
This goes against the principle of solidarity , which should govern energy policy .
It also creates the impression of discrimination against nuclear energy by Parliament , which goes against the principle giving Member States complete freedom in their choice of sources of energy .
( RO ) The way in which the issue of closing down and then decommissioning the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant will be resolved is not relevant , except in terms of the way Bulgaria itself resolves this issue .
However , as has already been said in this Chamber , the decommissioning process also affects neighbouring countries and may provide a precedent for other countries with similar units approaching the end of their maximum operational life .
I am not going to hide the fact either , as has already been said , that the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant has been a permanent source of concern for Romanian citizens , especially following the Chernobyl accident .
This is why it would be important for the decommissioning process to be accompanied by a public information campaign targeted at all the stakeholders who are entitled to know about the stages involved in this process , the timetable , the potential risks of each stage , the way in which fissile material and hazardous waste are protected , as well as about the ecological reconstruction of the Kozloduy area .
I wish to stress the importance we need to attach to the processing of radioactive waste .
This is why the funds allocated to Bulgaria for this purpose must be provided at regular intervals without any interruptions .
I am mentioning this point because , although the costs seem large enough , they are only estimates as there has been no precedent on the scale of decommissioning a nuclear power plant in Bulgaria .
I wish to end by saying , on a hopeful note , that , with sufficient funding and meticulous planning and subject to the supervision of all the bodies with the necessary powers in this area , the decommissioning process will provide an example of a good use of European funds .
( LT ) When they joined the European Union , some Central and Eastern European countries made commitments in the accession treaties , commitments which were difficult both politically and economically , to decommission nuclear power plants and ensure the safe handling of nuclear waste .
They are countries dependent on nuclear energy and they inherited nuclear power plants that do not comply with the EU safety standards and requirements in force today and , of course , would be unable to raise the funds required to decommission the plants themselves .
There are strict requirements in force in the European Union regulating decommissioning and the carrying out of safety works , and the financial and economic crisis is making it difficult for those Member States decommissioning nuclear power plants to carry out decommissioning and fuel disposal work appropriately and on time .
The Community 's concern over the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel in non-EU Member States is perfectly understandable , as it may also threaten our future generations .
Therefore , I welcome the Commission 's decision to allocate additional support to Bulgaria from the European Union budget , since it is clear that without the Community 's support , just like Lithuania , it would be impossible to ensure the implementation of decommissioning measures to the requisite extent , the Community 's common security policy or measures needed to keep European citizens safe and protect the environment .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to thank you for the open debate on this sensitive subject .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise that the Commission very much welcomes the overall positive approach of the report and the fact that Parliament agrees with the Commission that Bulgaria should receive further support amounting to EUR 300 million up until 2013 .
The Commission is also pleased that we can continue to focus on providing support for safe dismantling measures and that Parliament believes that projects in the energy sector deserve our support .
We can confirm , as we have done in the past , that the funds will be used for the intended purpose and we plan to put reliable controls in place .
We take note of your proposals and amendments .
I am sure that the Council will take into account Parliament 's opinions wherever they can help to improve the clarity of the regulation 's objectives .
Your agreement on further financing for the dismantling work is a sign of the European Union 's solidarity with Bulgaria .
Safety is the highest priority during the process of dismantling nuclear power stations and this is emphasised in the statement .
I would like to thank you once again for your work and also Mrs Harms for this report .
Mr President , at the end of this debate , I would once again like to say that the decommissioning of the nuclear power plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria has been based on international expertise .
The International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) inspected these reactors , which have the same design as those in Chernobyl , and saw no possibility of converting them to meet the safety standards which applied in the old European Union .
It was an intelligent decision which justifies the fact that we have shown our solidarity with Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria and , following tomorrow 's decision , have treated them equally with regard to the costs of decommissioning .
Secondly , I would like to point out once again that none of these countries and no other countries in Western Europe or elsewhere in the world have yet found a reliable solution to the problem of the final storage of highly radioactive waste .
This is a task which still faces us , although many countries have now invested billions in this area and have been looking for a reliable solution for 30 years .
This is a debate with which those people in particular who are in favour of the high-risk technology of nuclear power need to concern themselves , because , as things stand today , the storage of nuclear waste , in my opinion and in the opinion of the majority of Europe 's citizens , represents such a large and unresolved risk that it is a strong argument against continuing to make use of nuclear power .
We will be discussing this with Mr Oettinger in future . Thank you for your attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 20 May , at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In 1999 , the European Commission , acting on behalf of the European Union , obliged Bulgaria to close four of its six nuclear power plants as a precondition for its accession negotiations .
The Commission had been saying for some time that the units in question were eligible for financial improvements .
Under the agreement , two units were closed in 2002 , and the other two in 2006 .
After considerable sums of investment and a number of independent surveys , the units were found to meet all the safety criteria and , according to the Council 's Atomic Questions Group , no additional monitoring was needed .
Bulgaria had become a net exporter of electricity to all its neighbouring countries and sometimes accounted for 100 % of the region 's electricity deficit .
The remaining units , however , were closed under the agreement , the region suffered power cuts and the substitute plants resulted in an increase in greenhouse gases .
I myself put a question to the Commission and the Council , basing it on Mr Van Orden 's report on the application by the Republic of Bulgaria to become a member of the European Union , and its paragraph 33 . In it , the European Parliament asked the Council to view the closure dates more flexibly until new generation could be built that would not increase emissions , which would not be before 2011 .
The answer was no , however , and instead , the EU showed its solidarity with Bulgaria in the form of considerable sums in financial assistance .
That is why it is only right to continue providing finance for longer than was planned , because the loss of electricity generation capacity , not to speak of the other strains on the region , have been economically and socially serious for Bulgaria .
In all honesty , though , we have to ask whether this massive financial investment could have been avoided if the Commission and the Council had reconsidered its inflexible and questionable conditions .
During the accession negotiations in 2005 , Bulgaria agreed to shut down reactor units 1-4 at the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant and then to decommission them .
Originally , the EU intended to provide financial support for the decommissioning process until 2009 .
Now the financial aid has been extended until the end of 2013 and a total of EUR 300 million will be made available .
Of course , it is necessary to give Bulgaria support during the decommissioning of Kozloduy and to help with the accompanying financial and environmental problems , such as safely disposing of radioactive waste , promoting renewable energy resources and retraining employees .
However , the financial aid must involve a detailed breakdown of the different plans , strict financial controls and regular monitoring of the use of the funding .
The money must not be used through the back door to provide financial support for the second Bulgarian nuclear power plant in Belene .
Bulgaria is currently looking for European investors for Belene and the option of using the decommissioning money for this purpose is a very timely one .
We must prevent this from happening .
Careful reporting and thorough on-site investigations by the Commission , the European Parliament and the European Court of Auditors are therefore essential .
The EU is dependent on energy imports for 53 % of its requirements .
To reduce their energy dependency , some Member States have adopted ambitious strategies for using nuclear power and energy from renewable sources .
Nuclear power accounts for 28 % of the total energy consumed in the EU , while it is the largest source of energy in Belgium , France , Lithuania , Slovakia and Sweden .
Nuclear power production does not generate carbon dioxide emissions , not to mention that monthly household energy bills are lower in Member States where nuclear power is used .
However , the EU imposes extremely rigorous requirements governing the safe operation of nuclear power plants and the handling of nuclear waste .
Stringent measures and high standards with regard to the safety of nuclear power plants and close cooperation between local , regional , national and European authorities provide the conditions for the safe use of nuclear power in the EU .
The regulation proposed by the Commission guarantees fair treatment for Bulgaria by granting it financial assistance until 2013 for decommissioning its nuclear power plants , which were measures stipulated by the accession treaties .
Nuclear decommissioning requires long-term financial planning , which continues until the site has been completely reclaimed and all the radioactive waste and spent fuel have been dealt with safely .
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 )
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 21.20 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 )
Europe 2020 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Union for the Mediterranean ( debate )
The first item on the agenda today is the report by Vincent Peillon , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Union for the Mediterranean .
I will give our rapporteur the floor for four minutes .

Mr President , I should like to start by expressing my warmest thanks to all my colleagues who were involved in this report ; this truly is a collective piece of work .
We reached 28 compromises ; compromises which enriched rather than watered down the strategic vision that we wanted to impart to this report , to our commitment to the Mediterranean .
I should therefore like to extend my warmest thanks to Marietta Giannakou for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Ivo Vajgl for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Hélène Flautre , and the rapporteurs for the opinions of the Committee on International Trade , Mrs De Sarnez , and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Mrs Tzavela .
What was important , for us , was to make it understood that there are strategic issues at stake here for Europe .
In fact , it is not just a question of thinking that the South needs us ; we also need the South , especially in these times of crisis .
If we want to have a long-term vision , if we want sustainable growth in a multipolar world , then we also need the South .
In light of this , Europe needs to undertake to make the Union for the Mediterranean an area of peace , security and prosperity for its 800 million habitants and to look at this work as a long-term priority .
It is this common will that allowed us to come together , because we know that the economic stakes , the demographic stakes , the geopolitical stakes that we are facing , like the social and cultural stakes , presuppose that we are capable of working with the other side of the Mediterranean .
For us , it is also cultural and civilisation issues that are at stake .
We know this ; Parliament has worked in knowledge of the difficulties of setting up the Union for the Mediterranean for two years .
We have not avoided tackling the question of conflicts taking place in the South , but we wanted to affirm very forcefully that it was precisely the approach of the Union for the Mediterranean , with specific projects , parity between North and South in decision-making bodies and the possibility , for example , of bringing Israelis and Palestinians to the same table , that was the right method for helping to resolve these conflicts and that , moreover , the Union for the Mediterranean should not be asked to pursue all the objectives at the same time and that it needed to focus on these specific activities .
In this project - and I do hope that the second summit of Heads of State or Government will be held in Barcelona on 7 June - we , the European Parliament , wanted to send a strong message to the Heads of State or Government to tell them they must make a commitment because this summit must be a success .
In light of this , we have pointed out the approaches that we think are necessary today .
First of all , we need to remove certain obstacles , which , of course , include the financial and economic conditions .
That is why the European Parliament hopes that the European Union will make a financial commitment commensurate with what is at stake , firstly in terms of what is left of the financial perspective 2007-2013 , and that , in the financial perspective 2014-2020 , the Union 's undertaking will be much greater , so that the six major projects on the table can be completed .
We need to improve the economic and legal environment .
We need to improve South-South regional integration .
We also need , in addition to economic conditions , new political conditions , which is why we placed an emphasis on cultural integration , education , cultural projects and on the rights of men and women .
To conclude : Europe , in this crisis , needs to look far and wide .
We must not sacrifice the long term to the short term .
We must assume our responsibilities .
Europe needs the South .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is my pleasure to address you today on the Union for the Mediterranean and the report prepared by Mr Vincent Peillon .
This valuable contribution by the European Parliament is particularly timely as it outlines some of the key challenges facing the Union for the Mediterranean in the months to come - and , by the way , Mr Peillon , I fully agree with the introduction to your report on that debate .
With the Treaty of Lisbon now in force , the European Union now has an enhanced and more cohesive institutional identity and a mandate to act more effectively on the world stage .
At the same time , most Mediterranean governments have pursued an ambitious agenda of economic reforms , and the European Neighbourhood Policy is transforming relations between the European Union and its Mediterranean neighbours .
Since 2004 , political contacts have increased in profile and intensity .
Trade has increased at double-digit rates aided by a steady process of liberalisation and regulatory convergence .
European Union assistance has been tailored to partners ' reform needs and its volume in the current financial framework has increased substantially .
This is what we have achieved in our bilateral relations .
However , in the Mediterranean , even more than elsewhere , our network of bilateral relations between the European Union and individual Mediterranean neighbour countries needs complementing with South-South integration and cooperation and the creation of a truly regional economic area .
Regional integration can make as important a contribution as national reforms to boosting investment and growth , reducing the wealth gap between Europe and its Mediterranean neighbours and , alongside this , ensuring greater convergence around our shared values and in our democratic practices .
South-South integration and intra-regional integration projects , such as the Agadir free trade agreement , are also key to creating the five million jobs which are needed every year to meet the needs of the region 's young population .
The launching of the Union for the Mediterranean in Paris in 2008 gave a new impetus to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , made a strong bid for co-ownership and shared responsibility through a co-presidency system , put more focus on concrete projects , and provided a technical secretariat to promote regional integration and spur investment .
As we all know , its implementation has been slowed down by increased tension in the Middle East , but there has been progress with the launching of the proximity talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
There is now space for cautious hope that the political circumstances in the region may become more conducive to cooperation .
Against the background of major global challenges such as the international economic and financial crisis , climate change and energy security , the Union for the Mediterranean will have to deal with the political situation in the Middle East , launch the operational functioning of the Union for the Mediterranean Secretariat and take stock of progress made by the partnership since July 2008 .
It is an opportunity for a collective reformation of our commitment and political will to create an area of peace , stability and shared prosperity in the Mediterranean .
To achieve this , the partners should also look specifically at the future development of the Union and at what it can deliver on the ground in terms of projects , jobs and growth .
The Mediterranean area is extremely dynamic , and the young generation are asking for more jobs and better opportunities .
They are asking for more accountability and a democratic representation , better education and easier mobility to travel and to study .
Their demands are not always easy to meet , but ultimately , they should be the beneficiaries of our collective action .
If we put into place practical projects , such as access to water , food and energy sources , and improved civil protection capabilities , it will be in the interest of our peoples .
The Union for the Mediterranean is about placing people , entrepreneurs , non-governmental organisations , universities and , above all , young people at the forefront of civil society , cooperation and economic development .
Better involvement of the citizens should also be accomplished by means of the full participation and involvement of elected representatives .
This is why the Commission firmly believes that a vibrant and strong parliamentary dimension reinforces the democratic legitimacy of the partnership .
The role of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly should be further consolidated and its work better articulated with the other bodies of the partnership .
We all want the Union to work , and we all know it will be judged on its ability to deliver concrete projects for the region .
The energy interconnections , the motorways of the sea to connect southern Mediterranean port facilities with European ones , and the Mediterranean solar plan are areas of considerable potential in terms of investment , job creation and enhancing trade relations .
If we want to tap that potential , we need the private sector and the major financial institutions to work hand in hand .
And for this to happen , we need one catalyst , and that is the secretariat of the Union for the Mediterranean .
After several months of hard work by the 43 Euro-Mediterranean partners , we eventually managed to adopt the legal status of the secretariat , to appoint the secretary-general and to approve a provisional budget for the functioning of the secretariat .
At the heart of our relations with our Mediterranean partner countries is our desire to promote security , growth and stability in the region .
But there is also the abiding conviction that we are taking part in an even more ambitious project : building a region of peace and affirming our common goals and values .
I am sure that together with the commitment of the European Parliament and with the parliaments of the European Union Member States and of our partners , and with a strong impetus from the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , we will rise to this challenge .
Mr President , without doubt , the Barcelona Summit is an uncertainty .
Without doubt , the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is echoing , but never mind .
The UfM is the only possible response we have at our disposal for speeding up development in the southern countries , strengthening links between them and improving dialogue on both sides of the Mediterranean .
The region needs to increase its economic development and cultural exchange agreements .
It needs specific future projects that mobilise energies and involve a larger number of countries .
With this in mind , we should do everything to promote private and public investment and the European Commission should be more active and should strengthen its role as investor .
It should also take better account of the effects of the process of liberalisation when preparing the new generation of association agreements .
Finally , the Agadir agreement should be extended in order to improve the development of South-South exchanges .
As for agricultural policy , it should preserve the need for food sovereignty and , as we all know , energy is a crucial sector .
It is important for projects to be implemented first and foremost in the interest of these countries , in order to respond to their needs and contribute to their development , despite , or rather , because of the difficulties .
The re-launch of the UfM is more urgent than ever before .
Mr President , in our report on the Euro-Mediterranean market , we confirmed that we recommend maintaining and developing the basic infrastructures which make an economy a single and cohesive economy and it is interesting that now , with the economic crisis , the present economic situation illustrates quite clearly that there are cohesion and common denominators in the South .
We need to bear this in mind for certain future developments .
My report places particular emphasis on LNG which , in the very short term , may be the driving economic force for the economy of the Euro-Mediterranean market , not only for supply but also for sale , and in renewable energy sources , another form of economy for the Euro-Mediterranean area , but which are more short term .
One comment : the Union strategy and policy in terms of energy for Northern Europe are very well documented .
We have , Commissioner , a huge weakness in policy and strategy for energy for Southern Europe .
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Vincent Peillon and the rapporteurs from the other committees , Mrs De Sarnez and Mrs Tzavela , for their reports .
The report on the Union for the Mediterranean is important because it focuses on immediate and quantifiable targets .
Their results may be very specific , because Parliament is calling , through the report , for specific budgets to be earmarked via the financial perspective , for assistance for the Secretariat of the Union for the Mediterranean in Barcelona and , of course , for the various differences which exist not to affect the objectives of the Union per se , which are growth , improved individual and human rights , cultural exchanges , energy issues and whatever else can link the peoples living there to the Mediterranean basin .
Of course , here , today , the Council and the Spanish Presidency , which I assume has a particular interest in the Union for the Mediterranean , are absent and I must say that that surprises me , because the Council should have heard everything the rapporteur and co-rapporteurs said and everything highlighted here , in other words , that this is an endeavour which overcomes the specific difficulties which have prevented programmes from progressing as they should have done .
The conflict between Palestine and Israel cannot , of course , be resolved through the Union for the Mediterranean , but the presence of officers in the Secretariat gives cause to hope that there will be no pressure from conflicts on our efforts to advance the Union for the Mediterranean with the criteria described earlier .
It is particularly important for the Union for the Mediterranean to send out a message of democratic development , equality between men and women , and efforts for a civil society in the countries of North Africa too .
Mr President , what I liked best about this report - and I would like to congratulate its author , Mr Vincent Peillon - is that it is precise and specific .
If only the precision of this report extended to its subject , that is , the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) .
This is because the least that can be said is that in the UfM , there is currently a signal lack of clarity .
I think that the leaders , who are due to meet - we hope - on 7 June in Barcelona , would do well to follow the specific , precise priorities laid out in the Peillon report .
Firstly , the political context .
The UfM cannot continue to be blocked or paralysed by the conflict in the Middle East but , at the same time , neither can it ignore it .
It must make a positive contribution to resolving the conflict , insofar as it is able .
Secondly , good projects must be set up and developed in a professional and intelligent manner .
Thirdly , adequate resources and financial commitments must be found .
Fourthly , progress needs to be made on creating a positive relationship which avoids obstacles and clashes and which instead seeks out synergies between the UfM and the Mediterranean structures of the European Union .
We must seek clarification on and commitment to these four central points , these four key challenges , and I believe that this report is a good instrument , a good roadmap , to help us seek this agreement .

Mr Vice-President , Commissioner Füle , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Peillon , for his constructive , open and creative involvement which has resulted in this report .
I hope that it will be of interest , not just to those of us who have helped draft it , but to others , as well .
The report deals with a region which throughout history has been a dynamic centre of cultural and spiritual life and of economic and commercial innovation .
Today , unfortunately , it is the source of numerous problems which concern all of us and the rest of the world , as well , and which we would like to see resolved .
The Union for the Mediterranean is an important project , but unfortunately , it has not advanced as quickly as we would have liked .
I would like to see the establishment of the secretariat in Barcelona followed by rapid progress in the implementation of the priority projects .
The projects must be the driving force behind , or the objective of , the work of the Union for the Mediterranean .
At the same time , however , we need to recognise that there are some ongoing issues of a political nature , especially the Palestinian question and the undefined status of Western Sahara , and that they have hampered the requisite progress .
For that reason , we need to make efforts towards more dialogue , more tolerance and confidence-building in the region .
In that respect , the European Parliament could certainly play a very important and active role and I hope that all the parties involved will welcome this House as one of the players that can help resolve the problem .
Finally , allow me to add that it is imperative that we pay due attention to future generations , that we promote the exchange of students within the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean and that we support EMUNI University , the participation of senior institutions and higher education and cultural fora .
That will help us raise the level of mutual understanding and interconnection .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union for the Mediterranean has never been as vital to our future as it is today .
Together we have tried , in the report on the UfM , to support a different vision of our Mediterranean .
More than just a simple free trade zone , it is a Union founded on the common civilisation of people who share fundamental values .
I should like to talk about the most serious obstacle to our Mediterranean ambitions ; the violence suffered by the Palestinian people , who are being occupied , expelled and killed by Israel , while Europe fails to assume its historic responsibility in this conflict and really act for peace by recognising the State of Palestine in accordance with the international laws on which our democracies are founded .
This coming week , an official Parliament delegation will visit the Gaza Strip in a bid to understand why aid to the tune of hundreds of millions of euro which Europeans are sending Palestinians is not arriving in the schools and hospitals in Gaza , which I visited in January .
I was shocked and dismayed to learn that the chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs decided , without informing either his members - of whom I am one - or the co-chairs of this delegation , not to visit Gaza with Parliament 's delegation on the instructions of the Israeli Embassy .
By boycotting Parliament 's delegation to Gaza , our committee chair is discrediting the whole of Parliament , which passed a resolution on the Goldstone report condemning the fact that contacts with the populations in Gaza were being blocked by the Israeli army and demanding that the block be lifted immediately .
We need to remember this resolution and Parliament 's position .
This being so , I call for Mr Albertini to resign as chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , of which I am a member , for failing to meet the demands of his office .
What is the point of financing and supervising elections , if we then refuse to recognise those who have chosen the ballot box over arms ?
Finally , another obstacle to a really fraternal Union for the Mediterranean is the victims who drown on their way from the south side , partly due to the fact that European borders are completely closed to them .
Our current migration policy is no longer acceptable .
We need to be able , as the UNDP recommends , to ensure that the mobility of citizens from the South is equal to our own mobility to the South .
We must be faithful to our project and to our values .
Our children will thank us for it and we will be the proud representatives of our peoples .
Mr President , the Union for the Mediterranean faces real obstacles and what I am asking of the European Union , of all the institutions and of Parliament , is determination , considerably more determination , when it comes to trying to overcoming these obstacles .
The first and most important of these - there is no doubt about this and other Members have raised this issue - are the conflicts : the Palestinian conflict , in the face of an attitude by the Israeli Government that systematically flouts international law and the very agreements it has signed , such as the Annapolis Agreement on the settlements ; the Western Sahara conflict ; and , indeed , the military occupation of the north of the Republic of Cyprus .
These are obviously clear obstacles for any institution that wishes to have that type of relationship between both shores of the Mediterranean .
Until they are resolved , these conflicts represent a real barrier .
The group I represent is asking for greater commitment , greater energy in response to all those players responsible for flouting international law .
However , nor should we forget that another problem facing us is that of the economic and social imbalances which exist throughout the Mediterranean .
I believe that any solution which seeks to deal with these imbalances in relation to trade by simply and straightforwardly proposing free-trade agreements is not on the right track .
The right track would be to take account of these imbalances and try to reach trade agreements based on complementarity and solidarity .
The fact of the matter is that many of the countries on the shores of the Mediterranean are in conditions of absolute poverty and utter deprivation .
However , and here I insist , the essential thing would be greater commitment on the part of the European Union in response to those conflicts which are currently festering ; I am talking about Palestine and Western Sahara .
There are even conflicts , such as the conflict in the Western Sahara , where the European Union is doing precisely nothing .
Not only is it doing nothing , but it is upgrading the advanced status relationship which Morocco currently enjoys and is also seeking , in the case of Israel , to upgrade the association agreement to an advanced-status agreement .

Mr President , I must congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Peillon , on the valuable report which he has presented to us .
We all know that the Mediterranean basin is a point at which many cultures meet ; at the same time , however , it is a nerve centre and a ' boiler ' which has been bubbling for many years now .
Climate change , the economic and financial crisis , immigration , pollution , over-fishing and damage to the natural environment are some of the problems that beset Europeans and non-Europeans living in the Mediterranean basin .
Particular importance must be attached to the question of illegal immigration and to effective border controls in the countries in the Mediterranean basin , especially Greece and Italy , which are gateways to the European Union for illegal immigrants .
A daily battle is waged on the borders of these countries .
Attention also needs to be paid to strengthening the energy sector and to making use of renewable energy sources and the Mediterranean solar energy programme to stimulate economic growth in the southern Mediterranean countries .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) In 2008 , the French President , Nicolas Sarkozy , announced that he had had a dream of a Union for the Mediterranean .
This Union was supposed to give a new impetus to the objectives of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation , objectives which are based on mutual recognition of common values , such as democracy , the rule of law , good governance and respect for human rights .
I wonder how you can talk about common values when , in a country like Mauritania , there is no religious freedom to speak of because , there , Islam has been dominant for well over a thousand years .
According to its constitution , Syria is officially a popular democratic and socialist-oriented unitary state .
In practice , however , Syria is a dictatorship .
Morocco occupies Western Sahara and in Tunisia , human rights are regularly flouted .
I could go on with a long list of these countries , but I have to be aware of my limited speaking time .
Are these countries with whom we wish to have more cultural exchange ?
Are these countries with whom we wish to set up a free trade zone , to be followed by promoting the free movement of persons across the Mediterranean ?
The outcome of this will be yet more Islam in Europe .
We cannot allow Europe to become Eurabia : not now , not ever !
Before this dream turns into a nightmare , we must call a halt to this process .
We had another dream concerning the Mediterranean back in 1995 , which took the form of the Barcelona Declaration , and then we just did it again in 2005 .
Apart from costing the European taxpayer several billions , these projects have come to nothing .
Stop wasting taxpayers ' money and stop dreaming !
All due respect to Mr Albertini , however , for taking a brave position .
He has the support of my group .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Euromed region constitutes a strategic area of EU policy : we cannot deal with fundamental issues such as the environment , religious values , culture , infrastructure , agriculture , energy , security and migration flows without the responsible assistance of the third countries bordering the Mediterranean .
Nevertheless , the cooperation framework still has a long way to go : we could say from Barcelona to Barcelona and looking beyond .
The European Union must step up its commitment in the process of renewing and verifying the individual association agreements with the third countries bordering the Mediterranean , and must fund the major strategic projects , those for infrastructure and for ports .
On the other hand , we must strongly protect comparable production sectors on both shores of the Mediterranean , especially farming , in order to guarantee sustainable development and a regulatory framework that is as uniform as possible .
We therefore hope that the EU 's role of governance with regard to the Mediterranean countries will be strengthened in order to assert a fundamental principle , namely , cooperation , which represents political success , entrepreneurial success , in a framework enhanced by guarantees protecting individuals .
I also wished to make a suggestion to Mrs Benarab-Attou : by all means attack Mr Albertini , who is providing strong leadership of the committee , but in his presence , so that he may defend himself .
This is an essential feature of every democratically elected assembly .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we are taking an extremely significant step forwards by adopting this report , and it will be very useful with a view to the Barcelona Summit of 7 June , a summit which , as we know , is set to be difficult given the deadlock in negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians , and also owing to various uncertainties and difficulties regarding the definition of the administrative set-up of the new secretariat structure .
Faced with these problems , the Peillon report has been drafted in the only way possible , highlighting , on the one hand , that the conflicts must not hinder tangible progress towards multilateral cooperation in specific sectors , while acknowledging , on the other , that the Union for the Mediterranean will not be fully successful unless these conflicts are settled .
Therefore , the real challenge now involves a clear , robust political commitment which must come out of the Barcelona Summit , finally enabling the structures of the new institution to function and commit to providing the funds necessary for the major projects that are its main objective .
Europe must realise that it needs to turn its political and economic efforts and its own interests southwards , because it is here that it can find the solutions to many of the problems currently plaguing it .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for years , an independent researcher , Gabriele Del Grande , has been posting on the Internet the number of people dying in attempts to cross the Mediterranean in boats managed by organised crime groups .
His meticulous tally-keeping has reached 4 200 victims , 18 of whom died this March : this is veritable carnage .
For many years in Lampedusa , the elderly cemetery caretaker has voluntarily been giving each body , from the few that are recovered , a decent burial with a cross and a flower .
These two European citizens are acting on our behalf , too ; they are acting to make up for our political failure .
Their spontaneous efforts highlight the urgent need for a new political architecture and substance , in contrast to the forced returns at sea employed by the Italian Government in breach of international law , which only heighten people 's desperation .
The Union for the Mediterranean should therefore represent a new humanity , bearing in mind that we are running out of time .
Today , over half of the population from Morocco to Turkey is under 18 years old .
The Mediterranean is therefore destined to change rapidly .
( EL ) I should like to start by thanking Mr Peillon for the work he has done .
The report calls on the Member States of the Union for the Mediterranean to establish open dialogue , within the framework of mutual respect and understanding , by promoting human rights and freedoms , and that is something that we support .
At the same time , however , it does not include any concrete proposal to combat the existing political problems that beset the area .
I understand Mr Peillon 's logic behind what he says , which may be considered helpful in starting the Union for the Mediterranean .
On the other hand , however , to turn a blind eye and pretend that nothing is ' going on ' in Gaza , for example , is a huge mistake that prevents us from dusting down the problems .
What worries me is that we are slowly learning in the European Union to live with problems rather than resolve them .
We need to become more pro-active on the fundamental issues that concern us .
There is no reference whatsoever to the need for Israel to enter into an immediate , fair and viable settlement of the Palestinian question .
There is no reference whatsoever to the need for Turkey to demonstrate the necessary respect to all the Member States of the Union for the Mediterranean without exception .
Reference to the need to withdraw Turkish occupying forces from a Member State is a necessary act of respect - the minimum , I would say - for European justice .
The Mediterranean washes the shores of several thousand towns and villages of different cultures which have been united by the same sea for over ten thousand years .
Just one town , however , out of these thousands of towns and villages on the shores of the Mediterranean , just one town is uninhabited .
Instead of being inhabited by people , it is inhabited by rats , lizards and snakes .
The houses of the people , together with their memories , have been eroded .
All that is left are the dreams of thousands of people , many of whom died as refugees .
The least we can do for the living is to return the town of Famagusta to its inhabitants .
This should have been a basic demand in the report on the Union for the Mediterranean , because we are working for union , not partition in the Mediterranean .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , own-initiative reports are usually just hot air , but if adopted they are an expression of the political will of the European Parliament .
This report proposes the setting up of a union of 17 non-EU countries with a parliamentary assembly and a secretariat with funding for projects of a truly ambitious nature .
The funding of these schemes would run into many billions of euros , which of course would have to be paid for by the citizens of Europe .
Where this money would come from is not mentioned ; the reality is not allowed to intrude on fantasy .
This report is truly bonkers !
But , before we laugh it off , we should remember that , under the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union has the legal right to sign the kind of treaties envisaged here .
This report proposes the setting up of a Union of non-European countries that could be later absorbed into the Union ; that is what this report is really all about .
( DE ) Mr President , when the Union for the Mediterranean was founded almost two years ago , the intention , as we know , was that it should be linked to the Barcelona Process in order to create a closer relationship between the Mediterranean countries and the EU .
However , this process has obviously come to a standstill because of the conflict between the Arab states and Israel .
The EU has concluded an association agreement with Israel and provided financial aid , including EUR 440 million as reconstruction aid for the Gaza Strip .
The citizens of the EU are rightly asking why their taxes are being pumped into the Gaza Strip when everything there is regularly bombed flat again and are calling for conclusions to be drawn from this .
It is also possible that Hamas is profiting from this aid .
Throughout all the years , the EU has not succeeded in acting as an impartial mediator in the Gaza Strip .
Now , the summit of the Union for the Mediterranean in Barcelona , which is planned for the beginning of June , is also likely to break down because of the conflict between Israel and the Arab states .
Particularly in times of crisis , it is important , in my opinion , to evaluate plans more carefully and , if necessary , to shelve them .
During this crisis , we will not be able to afford projects which are just about prestige or those which are simply money pits .
( FR ) Mr President , in the follow-up to the Barcelona process , the Union for the Mediterranean is an opportunity to develop our relations with the countries to the east and south of the Mediterranean basin .
As the excellent report by Vincent Peillon emphasises , we cannot neglect either the potential of this region or the risks which it brings with it .
Let us at least have the presence of mind to recognise that , since the bombing of Gaza and with the continuing colonisation of Palestinian territories , the Union for the Mediterranean has been painted into a corner .
The political aspect is blocked .
We are not even sure if the planned summit in Barcelona in June will actually take place .
I would not be surprised if we were to learn in the coming days or hours that it has been postponed indefinitely .
However , we should not give up ; the European Union should assume greater responsibility in the search for a political solution .
We cannot allow the United States to monopolise political crisis management in this region , our region , and confine ourselves to its development .
Our security and growth depend on the development and stability of the Mediterranean , which is why the Union for the Mediterranean is still the best instrument at our disposal .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his very comprehensive report .
The Union for the Mediterranean may make a decisive contribution towards the creation of balanced Euro-Mediterranean relations and towards strengthening trust between countries in the area .
The Mediterranean should be an area of peace , stability and security , where democratic principles and human rights are fully respected .
There are social and economic differences between Mediterranean countries .
The challenge is even greater as a result of the economic crisis .
It is to achieve real rapprochement between the Union and Mediterranean countries through growth , cooperation and trade .
Energy security , combating climate change and the maritime environment are also areas in which close cooperation is required .
The Union for the Mediterranean is not , of course , the framework for addressing regional conflicts .
However , cultivating a spirit of cooperation , political dialogue and joint efforts to meet specific targets will help enormously in building up trust , which is needed if viable solutions are to be achieved .
However , in order for all this to happen and for the Union for the Mediterranean to succeed , suitable financial resources are needed and this time we must not be neglectful .
( NL ) Thank you very much for squeezing me in , as I was held back by an emergency meeting of the Enlarged Bureau of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Thank you for your understanding .
Mr President , paragraph 5 of Mr Peillon 's report rightly dwells on the need for a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict .
The rapporteur calls on the European Union and all the Member States of the Union for the Mediterranean to devote maximum efforts to this cause .
As Chair of the Israel Delegation , I very much endorse such peace efforts , but I think that they will only be effective once two conditions have been met , and those are : a ) that the proposed two-state solution clearly be taken to mean the coexistence of a Jewish , that is Israeli , state and a Palestinian one , and b ) that Member States of the EU and those of the Union for the Mediterranean promote a climate of mutual trust between the conflicting parties in the Middle East .
Here , the common fight against the endemic evil of anti-Semitism , whichever form it takes ( including the form of anti-Zionism ) , occupies centre-stage .
You could also appoint the same number of Israelis and Palestinians to your secretariat , but we would still have to fight together to win mutual trust .
That is the acid test .

( ES ) Mr President , a preliminary clarification : in my view , either a representative of the Presidency of the Council , or , perhaps , of the current French co-presidency of the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) , should have spoken in this debate today ; their absence is deeply regrettable .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a priority for the European Union to ensure that its closest neighbours form an area of peace , prosperity , freedom and security .
This should be the primary objective of the UfM , which I hope is due to hold its second summit next month .
I would like to congratulate Mr Peillon and to express my thanks , most especially , for his open-minded and extremely constructive approach .
In spite of the proximity of the European Union to the southern shores of the Mediterranean , there are considerable differences separating us in economic , political , social , demographic and cultural terms , and so on .
Some of these disparities are due to serious deficiencies in our neighbouring states .
It is crucial to promote close dialogue and cooperation within the framework of the UfM , and to bring forward those major joint projects which it has identified , as well as the bilateral dimension of the association agreements , in order to strengthen the relationship between both shores and to be able to reduce these disparities .
In order to achieve this , our neighbours , too , must implement reforms .
Standing still cannot be an option .
I would like briefly to raise three further points .
Firstly , it is very important for the secretariat of the UfM in Barcelona to be fully operational as soon as possible .
Secondly , and closely linked to the previous point , the UfM must not fall hostage to conflicts , such as that in the Middle East .
The UfM can facilitate a solution but it does not claim to be the means to the solution nor should it be blocked by these confrontations .
Thirdly and lastly , the UfM must also pay particular attention to what is known as Chapter Four of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation : migration , security , social integration and justice .
Let me just apologise for the Council .
The representative of the Council could not be here today because it is Thursday morning and the debate on this report was originally scheduled for Monday .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask you to call in the trialogue for the Council always to be represented here on Thursday morning .
In the case of some Council presidencies , and I will not name them for reasons of modesty , the representative was even here on a Thursday afternoon .
I think that the Council should be present for the majority of the plenary part-session .
Thank you , I will do that .
I was simply attempting to explain what the Council said .
I will do that .
Thank you very much .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , I should like to thank Mrs De Sarnez for the way she has worked with us .
Today , more than ever before , there is a need for the Union for the Mediterranean , for support for major projects and for institutional development .
Today more than ever before , there is a need to find answers to the crisis , to research , to climate change , to water , to new energy models , to sustainable development .
We must therefore promote and conclude trade and economic relations in the area , with short and medium-term measures , a free-trade zone , lifting of tariff barriers , and the opening up of the North-South and South-South markets .
At the Barcelona Summit , the Spanish Presidency will offer the opportunity for a new agreement , a new situation , a new collaboration , democratisation , economic and social responses .
The Barcelona Summit can put us into the position where we can assume leadership in the Mediterranean .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today the proximity of the Mediterranean peoples is seen in particular , as pointed out by Mr Rinaldi , in terms of the pivotal phenomenon of immigration .
This should be considered a priority factor by the European Union , because migration flows can and have given rise to problems at human , social , cultural and economic levels which will affect the very future of the two opposite shores of the Mediterranean .
The mutual proximity of the Mediterranean peoples is also seen in the economic and social cooperation within the European Economic Area and between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries .
In this regard , our ingrained presence at all levels in the region must enable us to take a leading role to avoid the Union for the Mediterranean replicating the inconsistencies of Barcelona .
How many mistakes were made , how many times did we think we were making headway , when we were actually moving backwards ?
Therefore , what we need , first and foremost , is to launch social , cultural and human dialogue based on mutual understanding and promotion of the positive values underpinning our civilisation , but this indispensable factor depends on successful cooperation , primarily at the economic level .
In fact , the proliferation of agreements and trade has favoured , and will continue to favour , the growth of balanced economic and social relations between the parties .
Furthermore , in political terms , we must urgently continue the unremitting pursuit of dialogue on security policy , in order to develop ever stronger relations between the countries in question .
Colleagues , please keep to your time .
It is 10.57 , and at 12.00 we have the votes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming summit of the Heads of State or Government on 7-8 June in Barcelona is clearly an important occasion for the practical launch of the Union for the Mediterranean .
It therefore constitutes an extraordinary opportunity to lay down the lasting foundations for real and stronger cooperation for peace and security .
Precisely for this reason , we must take full advantage of the opportunity in order to establish a development strategy , and so that we can define projects capable of revitalising that area and promoting economic growth .
I hope that the meeting will strengthen initiatives such as Solar for Peace and Desertec , which are important instruments for the creation of an interdependent regional energy market .
Lastly , the UfM must boost scientific and technological research and innovation , using existing research institutes to increase the competitiveness of local businesses , too weak to face the challenges of the global market .
I am convinced that growth of the Union can reinforce the unity of Europe .
( RO ) I wish to say that , nearly two years after the launch of the Union for the Mediterranean , it is time for us take stock of this new federating project and also reflect on its prospects for development .
From this perspective , I think that the report drafted by Mr Peillon is welcome and I , too , would like to join my fellow Members in congratulating the author .
Looking ahead to the Barcelona Summit in June , I think that it is very important for us to reaffirm Parliament 's commitment to the success of this project in an area which , as we are all aware , is located at the crossroads of three continents and which is obviously important to Europe in geostrategic and cultural terms .
I am somewhat concerned by Mr Baudis 's scepticism regarding the possibility of this summit being postponed .
I hope that it will not come to this and that we will use all the institutional resources available to us to ensure this summit goes ahead .
This will mark not only an occasion for reflection , but also an institutional success because the Union for the Mediterranean needs to overcome political impasses and institutional difficulties in the process of implementing the six strategic projects which embody the institution 's very essence .
The durability and credibility of the Union for the Mediterranean depend on its ability to operate .
To do this , it not only needs adequate funding for implementing the projects and running the secretariat , but I also think that greater involvement is required from civil society and national and parliamentary groups , as well as from the EMPA to ensure the democratic legitimacy of the Union for the Mediterranean .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the European Parliament 's political priorities must be to help make the forthcoming Barcelona Summit a full success , following two years of deadlock since the Paris Summit of 2008 .
There are many goals , which have also been mentioned today , from tackling illegal immigration to combating human rights violations , but there is also a significant economic aspect : the Mediterranean offers huge potential , starting with renewable energies .
Accordingly , we must give our full backing to the Mediterranean Solar Plan and the industrial initiatives such as Desertec , involving businesses and universities in order to develop practical cooperation projects .
Indeed , the peace process , which is the priority , must be accompanied by a process of economic development , precisely to guarantee the necessary social cohesion which can help overcome conflicts .
( CS ) The Union for the Mediterranean is undoubtedly also a courageous inter-cultural project , the success of which depends , among other things , on a willingness to overcome different cultural and social traditions .
Cultural diversity leads to mutual enrichment if its impulses are perceived openly as an opportunity and not as a threat .
One of these opportunities is the approach to gender equality in society .
It is an area regarded with some sensitivity in this region .
The Union for the Mediterranean must therefore devote suitable attention to this area , and not only because of the commitments here of the Marrakech ministerial conference in November 2009 on supporting both the spirit and letter of gender equality and strengthening the role of women in society , including their participation in public life , and combating violence against women .
This is one of the key areas that can unleash and provide enormous human potential for the entire region , which can only profit as a result .
Double standards and a reluctance to change , which is often supported mainly on the pretext of custom and tradition , cannot be accepted but , on the contrary , should be rejected as an obstacle to the development of the Mediterranean region .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European Union must provide greater support to the Union for the Mediterranean project in both political and financial terms .
The summit of the 43 Heads of State or Government within the Union for the Mediterranean will take place on 7 June in Barcelona and , as the European Parliament , we must hope that this meeting proves a success for the launch of the UfM institutions and the implementation of the projects .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , I have drawn attention to aspects that I consider to be important , such as the creation of a Mediterranean free trade area , the participation of the research and education sector , the growth of broadband and information technology , and also increased opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises .
In particular , regarding this last point , SMEs and business development are already one of the strategic sectors .
The major projects must receive adequate support from European and international financial institutions and consequently , the new projects should endeavour to involve as many European partners as possible .
Mr President , President Sarkozy 's proposal for a Union for the Mediterranean was the highpoint of the French Presidency of the EU .
Since then , it appears to have lost some of its lustre .
This may not be a bad thing , because the EU is itself developing a robust and successful southern dimension of its own Neighbourhood Policy .
This follows almost two decades of the development of the Barcelona Process and its political apparatus .
Europe 's taxpayers rightly take a very dim view of duplication of effort and waste of resources , and there is some confusion about all these competing processes , but whatever the fate of the Union for the Mediterranean at the summit on 8 June , we must not allow the eastern dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy to fall behind .
Sadly , we have not developed the putative Euronest Assembly in the same way as the Euromed Assembly which has been active for so long .
This is principally because of the problems relating to Belarus ' participation .
Lastly , my ECR Group fully supports Mr Albertini , as Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , to resile from leading the visit to the Middle East .
This has been controversial and discussed this morning in the enlarged Bureau .
Any vote of no confidence in the Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs by the Socialist Group we will oppose .
( DE ) Mr President , the Mediterranean has been the cradle of European culture and the driving force behind it for millennia and , therefore , I very much welcome this joint approach .
However , the Mediterranean region is also a bridge for almost unrestricted immigration into the EU .
In our opinion , one of the most important problems in the Mediterranean area , in other words , illegal immigration , forms part of the six main strategic projects and , therefore , urgently needs to be included .
Only a joint approach in the Mediterranean countries , including those in North Africa , can help to slow down the flood of illegal immigration .
This is the only way in which we can stem the tide of refugees at its starting point .
As well as combating organised people smuggling , the EU must also focus increasingly on fighting poverty , raising awareness and providing information in the countries where the immigrants come from .
It must be clearly explained to those people who want to migrate that the streets of Europe are not paved with gold , that Europe cannot provide jobs , prosperity and asylum for everyone and that many of these traumatic journeys end in detention and deportation .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite the creation of the Union and the holding of the summit of Heads of State or Government , we still lack a clear definition of EU Mediterranean policy and a long-term strategic vision for the development and stabilisation of the region .
Yet the Mediterranean has enormous potential : one third of global maritime traffic now passes through Mediterranean waters , coming from China , Asia , European countries , India , reaching our waters via the Suez Canal .
The coastal countries of the Middle East and of Africa are advanced developing countries and for us , they are vital in certain fundamental areas , including that of migration flows .
We must therefore better define the operational structure of the institutions of the Union for the Mediterranean , providing the secretariat with financial resources and with criteria for membership and for implementing projects .
The key points include agriculture , transport , maritime highways , transnational corridors , renewable energy and the Solar Plan .
In the words of Paul Morand , a French diplomat and writer , the Mediterranean is , above all , the anti-desert civilisation .
Let us reassert these words .
Mr President , I will leave aside the most pertinent question this morning , and that is : how on earth are European taxpayers going to pay for all of the apparatus and secretariat that has been talked about and proposed in this House this morning ?
I want to give my view that there is no doubt that stability in the Mediterranean is certainly good for the wider European Union .
However , with European Union help comes responsibility from the very countries that want to benefit from the institutions and the enhanced economic opportunities .
I want to focus very quickly on one aspect , and that is the rejection of a thousand tonnes of seed potatoes from Northern Ireland by the Moroccan authorities this year ; a trade that had been going on for over 20 years ; potatoes that had been inspected according to the normal rules before they left my country and then were rejected by the Moroccan authorities under a different regime .
I do understand - and I respect - that Commissioner De Gucht is looking into this matter , but I want to stress that we do need responsibility from those who hope to benefit .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it was indeed a good and inspiring discussion .
I agree with those who say that we lost a lot of time , particularly in building a secretariat .
I shall come to that in a second .

We are still facing some very important questions : how to make sure that whatever is going on around the Middle East process does not take the Union for the Mediterranean hostage ; how to make sure that the summit takes place and that it creates the momentum you were talking about ; and how to solve the issue of the intergovernmental approach vis-à-vis the Community approach as far as the Union for the Mediterranean is concerned .
I shall make five very short remarks .
The first is that I should like to express my appreciation of the Spanish Presidency .
We worked very hard with the Spanish Presidency in recent months .
We inaugurated the secretariat on 4 March together and the Spanish Presidency is working very hard to make sure that the Barcelona Summit takes place .
My second remark is that it is very important not only that the secretariat starts its work , but also that it is funded .
So far , it is funded only by the Commission .
We will be sending one expert to make sure that there is compatibility between the project and EU policy .
The secretariat should be small - about 40 people , more or less - and it should be that instrument which makes it possible for us to have more and more projects for the benefit of the members of the Union for the Mediterranean .
It is also important to say in this connection that there are a number of sectoral meetings going on which will bring benefits .
Next week , there is a Finance Ministers ' meeting in Marseilles , and then next month , Agriculture Ministers will be meeting in Cairo .
While the Union for the Mediterranean is a very important part of our Neighbourhood Policy , the main bulk of our work with these countries is in the bilateral relationship where many of the southern partners would like to have an advanced status .
Advanced status , on my reading , also means advanced commitment from our partners across the board , including on human rights and mobility , which are also very important questions .
I agree with the honourable Members who were calling on us to ensure a greater synergy between the bilateral and multilateral approaches .
My last remark is that we are determined to work with the European Parliament .
One of the next occasions will be the discussion on the neighbourhood package where we assess both the bilateral and multilateral framework of our neighbourhood .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to make three brief comments .
Firstly , we have not been lacking in respect for anyone , especially not people who might be victims , but we considered that compassion , moral indignation and insults do not add up to a policy .
Secondly , we have not , of course , ignored the conflicts which exist either in Cyprus or in the Sahara or , of course , in the Palestinian territories .
Seriously , however , did we think , in the common foreign and security policy or in the various negotiations that have taken place , that it was up to the UfM to deal with these issues ?
You cannot be everything to everybody and confusion of the mind is not a recipe for efficiency .
Thirdly , I too am sorry that the Council is not here .
It is not a good sign when you find out that this lack of political will is giving us cause to believe - Dominique Baudis is right - that the summit on 7 June is in the balance .
Be that as it may , Parliament will have assumed its responsibilities .
The people who constructed Europe did so with a long-term vision and a keen sense - following the fratricidal wars that divided us - of the importance of specific policy .
It is this same spirit that we wanted to develop with the Mediterranean in this report .
With Europe in the throes of a major crisis , we need to be capable of defining a growth strategy , as I said earlier .
We also need to ensure that we do not turn in on ourselves .
When you turn in on yourself , when you stop having exchanges with the outside world , then you start to die .
That is why I think that this collective piece of work is an important piece of work and I hope that the Heads of State or Government - who have not recently lived up to their historic responsibility - listen and take heed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) and Eastern Partnership are two cooperation initiatives intended to consolidate the European Union 's neighbourhood policy .
I believe that the European Parliament needs to monitor developments with these initiatives closely , particularly at the present juncture when global geopolitical and economic balances are being redefined .
This initiative will help foster a suitable climate of trust for achieving common objectives , whether economic , cultural , educational or relating to regional security .
I wish to emphasis that real progress in strong , regional cooperation will only be achieved by implementing large-scale projects and conducting dialogue at every level .
In addition to the six strategic investment sectors specified , I think that new projects need to be launched in areas such as food , agriculture and culture .
The Barcelona Process stalled for political reasons , first and foremost , because of the regional conflicts in the Mediterranean area , but technically , it is still alive , as shown by the major integration projects that the Union is supporting with its own funding and by the progress made in defining the institutional structure of the UfM .
Since it was established in Naples in 2003 , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly has carried out its activities of coordination and democratic control over the implementation of these projects , which tie in with a number of major challenges facing the region : cleaning up the sea , transport , renewable energies , education , small and medium-sized enterprises and civil protection .
However , the political drive needed to get the Euro-Mediterranean strategy off the ground has been lacking .
The resolution on the Union for the Mediterranean is an important political act which , after more than two decades of considerable energy devoted to eastward expansion , draws the attention of the Council , the Commission and the Member States to the need to modify their geopolitical outlook and place the promotion of relations with countries of the Mediterranean basin at the heart of their foreign policy , starting with the adoption of a common position on the Middle Eastern conflict .
This report on the Union for the Mediterranean marks the interest and investment of the European Parliament in dialogue between the two sides of the Mediterranean .
The inauguration of the seat of the UfM in Barcelona and the designation of its first Secretary-General are a vital step in specifying the projects to be implemented within the framework of this Union .
However , the UfM does , nonetheless , face certain political tensions .
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is still blocking its development : the interruption of the process following events in Gaza , the boycott of a previous summit in Istanbul ; there are numerous examples .
In this difficult context , we seriously hope that the second UfM summit scheduled to take place in Barcelona on 7 June will give new impetus and a new dynamic to it and to the missions it has to accomplish .
Without doubt , persisting regional conflicts will make its mission difficult if they are not resolved , but we are asking the Heads of State or Government of the Member States of the UfM to live up to their political and historical responsibilities .
The meeting in Barcelona will mark our commitment to the Mediterranean .
The Union for the Mediterranean , which was founded almost two years ago on the basis of the Barcelona Process and under the leadership of France , still faces many challenges .
The political dialogue between the EU and its southern neighbours is not restricted simply to the subjects of migration and economic agreements .
It also includes areas such as disaster control , energy and the environment .
The Mediterranean regions are hard hit by water shortages and drought .
In 2007 , one third of Europeans lived in regions where water was in short supply .
This problem is even more acute in the Maghreb countries , which do not have the necessary technical and financial resources to use water more efficiently .
In the case of sudden , heavy rainfall , floods can cause even more damage , because of the infrastructure problems in these regions .
Water is fundamental to all life and , therefore , it is necessary for us to increase our financial and economic cooperation .
Projects which improve environmental protection can only be implemented on the basis of improved collaboration between the countries in the Mediterranean region .
The need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus ( debate )
. The next item is the report by Mr Kirilov , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus ( 2009 / 2216 ( INI ) ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and all the colleagues who contributed to the elaboration of this important report which outlines the need for an EU strategy towards the South Caucasus region .
The South Caucasus is not only a region in the immediate neighbourhood of the Union - Romania and Bulgaria have a sea border with it - but also a region of great strategic importance for the Union in political , economic and security aspects .
Therefore , the European Union 's main objective there should be to participate actively in its stabilisation and to encourage the development of Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia towards stability and democracy ; to establish good neighbourly relations and integration in EU policies .
The European Parliament supports strongly all the initiatives which increase the EU presence in the region and , in particular , the most recent one , the Eastern Partnership .
It offers a valuable framework for increased regional cooperation , introduction of visa-free travel to the Union and conclusion of comprehensive free trade agreements .
This is a two-way process that requires efforts and dedication from both sides ; it is in the vital interests of the three countries to continue their efforts towards further democratisation .
Good governance , political pluralism , rule of law and respect for human rights are of paramount importance for determining their future relations with the Union .
Therefore , the European Union should continue providing financial and technical assistance to them in order to promote these principles within the framework of political conditionality .
The region 's strategic geopolitical location , its increasing importance as an energy , transport and communication corridor connecting the Caspian Sea and Central Asia with Europe and the growing EU preoccupation with energy security suggest a more active participation in the energy projects of the region , including the completion of the Nabucco pipeline project .
However , these ambitious EU policies can hardly be achieved when there is a big shadow over the region : the unresolved conflicts in Georgia and Nagorno-Karabakh .
They are also a serious impediment to democratisation , political stability and social and economic development .
Unfortunately , it was owing to the 2008 war in Georgia that the Union realised that it needs to play a more active role in the region as far as conflict prevention and conflict management are concerned .
The deadlock situation due to these conflicts and the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty justify an increasing pro-active EU policy .
This is particularly valid for the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict where the Union has been practically absent .
Simply stating support for the work of the Minsk Group at this stage is not enough if the EU takes seriously its new , more active role in foreign policy .
The Union is the international mediator that is accepted by both sides and whose presence does not raise controversies .
There is a need for the Union to lead the international efforts for rehabilitation and reconstruction in this conflict area by initiating reconciliation projects , people-to-people programmes and contacts , and by sending a mission into the region once a political solution is found .
The conflicts in the region also demand a special effort with regard to the situation of the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons , which has serious humanitarian consequences .
The European Union has the means and experience to contribute to the creation of a more tolerant atmosphere in the South Caucasus .
It should also draw from its own historical experience and show to the people of the region that they can live together in peace and prosperity and can restore the good relations and trust which historically existed .
It is a main task for the Union to try to convince the leaders and the people - the hearts and minds of the people - in the region to support the peace initiatives , not the threats , not the tensions .
So there is a good future if we try to do it all together .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased to participate in this exchange of views with the European Parliament on the European Union 's relationship with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia , the three countries of the South Caucasus .
I already had a very good discussion on the South Caucasus with the members of the Foreign Affairs Committee on 28 April , shortly after my visit to the region .
I welcome this report as a valuable contribution to the reflection on how the European Union can build an even stronger and broader relationship with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
Let me recall that we have a solid framework of engagement , namely , the well-established European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership launched last year .
The former continues to be one of the European Union 's top priorities for its external relations .
Successful implementation of the latter , with the active engagement of the partner countries , will further strengthen our relations on the basis of shared values .
Let me underline two very important milestones along this road .
Last week , the Commission published its third annual progress report for the South Caucasus countries .
The ENP action plans and the regular assessment of their implementation remain an essential tool to advance political and economic reforms in those countries as well as their cooperation with the European Union .
This time , we have chosen a five-year assessment for the European Neighbourhood Policy package .
The main objective is that we want to use the findings as a basis for extensive consultations with the Member States , with you here in the European Parliament , and with our partners in the neighbourhood , to get your - and their - feedback as to whether we have the right tools and instruments in place , whether the amount and the allocation of resources is appropriate , and whether the speed and the scope of our efforts are right and are going in the right direction .
The results will be presented in the framework of next year 's package , which should make our policy more coherent and which will , without doubt , lead to a higher degree of ownership by our neighbours .
It will also be an ideal opportunity to make our case for the provision of adequate resources by the next financial perspective very strong .
The second milestone is the authorisation by the Council , again last week , of the opening of the negotiations on association agreements with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
The adoption of these negotiating directives is a clear signal of our strong commitment to further deepening the relationship between the European Union and the countries of the South Caucasus on the basis of shared values and principles including democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
The Commission is already preparing for such negotiations , which are expected to start within the next few months .
These two areas clearly demonstrate that the EU already has a well-established and comprehensive strategy for the South Caucasus , whose potential we are seeking to exploit to the fullest extent , a strategy to bring this region closer to the European Union .
In the light of the report by Mr Kirilov , which is a very valuable and much appreciated contribution , I conclude that the European Parliament 's views converge very much with those of the Commission on a number of points .
The stability and security of the South Caucasus have a direct impact on Europe .
Therefore , the European Union shares the responsibility for supporting the peaceful resolution of conflict and confidence-building .
The South Caucasus matters to the European Union , not least due to its energy and transport links .
Improved governance and a stronger system of the rule of law will facilitate trade and investment as well as mobility of persons .
The new association agreements will expand the trade provisions under the partnership and cooperation agreements .
I believe that the European Union is on the right track in strengthening relations with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
Let me stress , however , that the responsibility for the establishment of a constructive framework for engagement is a joint effort .
The commitment of our South Caucasus partners to approximation with Europe needs to be translated into further progress towards democracy , market economy and political stability on the ground .
I thus call on Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia to move forward in their efforts towards a modern , inclusive , pluralistic democratic and prosperous society at peace with their neighbours .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as coordinator for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I had the opportunity to present the opinion of the Committee on International Trade on the need for a European strategy for the South Caucasus .
I know that this report is complex and sensitive in many areas .
The strategy is vitally important for ensuring a consistent good neighbour policy .
It reaffirms the European Union 's role as a global player in the region in terms of general foreign policy and security policy .
Cooperation with the South Caucasus in the energy sector and in fostering democracy and good governance must be included among the EU 's main priorities .
This is important for regional cooperation as well , and also because of the geopolitical situation of Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan , on the one hand , and of Russia , Iran and Turkey as a candidate for accession to the European Union , on the other .
Trade barriers must be lifted and commercial and economic ties between the EU and the South Caucasus strengthened .
This will boost political stability and respect for human rights and will generate sustainable growth and prosperity in the region .
This is another reason why the signing of an association agreement and of comprehensive free trade agreements must become a key objective in our foreign policy for the South Caucasus .
This will contribute to the settlement of frozen conflicts , enable Azerbaijan to join the World Trade Organisation very soon and improve these countries ' administrative and institutional capacity .
In this respect , I call on the Commission to show greater commitment to achieving these goals .
Mr President , we will be voting today on a report on the need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus .
This is a very important subject .
Given the prevalent political situation in the region , it is crucial for the EU to play a more active political role .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I have been working very hard in particular to highlight the EU 's role in the South Caucasus and to identify what concrete measures we in the European Union can take in order to help the affected countries and to bring them closer to the EU at their own individual pace on the basis of their own specific conditions .
The report proposes two important steps that the EU should take quickly in order for it to be possible to implement the strategy - upping the pace of the negotiations on visa liberalisation and establishing a free trade area between the EU and the South Caucasus .
All the countries in the region - Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan - are former Soviet States , and Russia continues to influence the region much more than some people understand .
In order to enable security , stability and peace to be maintained in the future , the EU therefore needs to have a greater presence in the region than we have at the moment .
It is very important that the citizens of these countries have better prospects of joining the EU and it is crucial for the EU to understand the importance of stability in the Caucasus .
I have also been eager to obtain clear reports of the long-term antagonisms that exist in the region and the ever-present danger that these will evolve into armed conflicts .
I am therefore very pleased to see the text clearly reiterate our unconditional support for Georgia 's territorial integrity and inviolable , internationally recognised borders and strongly condemn the recognition by the Russian Federation of the independence of the breakaway Georgian regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as contrary to international law .
The report that we are voting on today received broad political support in the committee , which was pleasing to see .
I would like to call on everyone to vote ' yes ' to the amendments tabled by the PPE Group together with the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .

Mr President , firstly , I would like to thank Mr Kirilov very much for his comprehensive work , which , as has already been said , has made a valuable contribution to our strategy in this region .
When I was in the region recently , in Tbilisi , someone from another country in the area said that regional cooperation was a concept which had been imposed on the region by Europe .
This demonstrates the attitude of many politicians and people in positions of responsibility in this region .
Actually , we do not want to cooperate at all , but if Europe wants us to , then we probably have no other choice .
We must make it quite clear that in Europe , regional cooperation formed the basis for us to come together and for peaceful development and it must be the same in this region .
Many of the negative external influences to which the region is subject , including pressure from its former big brother , Russia , would certainly have less of an impact if the countries in the region were able to work together .
The region is not only important for Europe but also , of course , for its neighbours .
I am thinking in particular of Turkey , which is a neighbour we can work very closely with in this region .
I would like to see a joint solution found in the near future for the two problems which Turkey is or may be partly responsible for , in other words , those relating to its neighbour Armenia , on the one hand , and to Nagorno-Karabakh , on the other .
There is nothing to prevent the Armenian troops from at least leaving those provinces of Azerbaijan which do not form part of Nagorno-Karabakh .
This would lay the foundations for an improved relationship between Armenia and Turkey .
The members of this group , and Mr Severin and myself in particular , have repeatedly raised the idea of a union between the EU and the countries around the Black Sea , because we believe that cooperation between this region and the EU , but also with its neighbours Turkey and Russia , is very important .
I think that the content of this report could form the beginnings of a union of this kind .
At the moment , this is still a vision , but I hope that it will soon become a reality .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I believe that this report provides an important starting point for a coherent approach to the Caucasus region and provides a quality benchmark for the reports which we will have in the future .
For this reason , I wish to congratulate Mr Kirilov and I believe that the efforts made by all the political groups have managed to produce a totally coherent approach to this region .
In my view , 2010 can offer both the European Union and the countries in this region a window of opportunity because more active participation by European diplomacy in the three high-profile dossiers involving conflict , by which I am referring to Abkhazia and Ossetia , Nagorno-Karabakh and the dispute between Turkey and Armenia , may help make significant progress .
The conclusion of this report , which emphasises a key factor for our energy security , is that we , the European Union , need to have greater involvement in order to normalise the security situation in the region .
I think that the approach to adopt is to expand the commercial partnership .
However , this should be accompanied , at the same time , by significant attempts by the European Union to bring democracy and stability to the region because the temptation towards totalitarianism still has a strong influence in this region , and we also have a general lack of democracy .
We must devise major , well-supported policies and projects so that the factors relevant to this region , particularly , a lack of governance , the spread of conflict attitudes and , last but not least , corruption , can be eliminated .
However , to achieve this , democratic will is required from both us and the governments in the region .
The report mentions all these points which I have spoken about , and many others which are important to the European Union 's approach .
I am referring to individual rights and freedoms .
I also think that it is crucial for the European Union and its Member States to consider a strategic partnership .
Mr President , like the previous speakers , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kirilov , for his good work and for the high quality of the report , which is extremely comprehensive .
I would like to touch on a few points which have not yet been highlighted , but which are very important to me .
It is , unfortunately , the case that the three frozen conflicts in this region represent a huge obstacle to the full development of the European neighbourhood policy and not only that , but also the development of the countries themselves .
If you have a real or assumed external enemy , things are relatively simple .
In this case , governments and states often put too little emphasis on combating poverty , on doing something for their own population and on taking responsibility for their people .
This means that the need to move away from high levels of military spending , which are criticised in this report and which have risen in recent years , towards spending on social services , culture and the environment , which benefits the population , is a central element of this report and I am pleased that it has been included .
Another aspect which was addressed , for example , in the Tagliavini report on the conflict between Georgia and Russia , is the need for disarmament on an intellectual and linguistic level to counteract inflammatory language and the manipulation of history .
All of this is necessary in order for us to make genuine progress in bringing peace to this region .
Other factors include the need for more democracy , support for civil society , the protection of ethnic , sexual and religious minorities and human rights issues .
All of these things remain relevant .
One example from Azerbaijan is the case of two young bloggers who were brave enough to criticise the government and have now been in prison for six months and have not yet been released .
The freedom of the media is a problem in all the countries .
Fortunately , all of these aspects are covered in this report and I see this in the same way as the previous speakers .
The regional dimension and cross-border cooperation are important .
Therefore , we support the Commission in its ongoing joint activities in this area .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , as the Kirilov report makes clear , the countries of the South Caucasus are strategically important to our Union , not least in terms of energy security , e.g. Caspian oil and gas production and transit through the countries of the region .
Sadly , however , this region remains paralysed by frozen conflicts , the most recent of which is , of course , Russia 's de facto occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia which , in our view , are Georgian sovereign territory .
We cannot , in terms of EU-Russia relations , simply pretend that this did not happen .
Through the mechanisms of the ENP 's Eastern Partnership , we must now , of course , redouble our efforts to reward Georgia 's determined efforts to realise its Euro-Atlanticist aspirations , and I and my group fully support an FTA eventually , visa liberalisation and association agreements for all the countries in the South Caucasus .
As a strong friend of Armenia , I am glad that the final version of the report is more balanced than the initial ones .
However , I still remain concerned about elements of the report which appear to contradict the EU 's official position on the resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh issue and the Minsk Group 's position in particular .
Armenia has now made courageous efforts to resolve this long-standing impasse over Nagorno-Karabakh .
It has also sought to normalise relations with Turkey , a move which should stabilise the South Caucasus .
If only Turkey itself would respond in a similarly constructive manner without preconditions .
If this border could be reopened , it would not only relieve the embargo on long-suffering Armenia , which has gone on far too long , but also allow economic prosperity in a very poor and underdeveloped region of Eastern Turkey .
So there is enlightened self-interest for Turkey to move on this issue .
It is not credible in my view that Turkey can justify the permanent closure of this border with Armenia because of its so-called solidarity with its Turkic brother , Azerbaijan , over the unresolved NK dispute .
This is as logical as saying that Greece should shut down its border in Thrace with Turkey in solidarity with the Greek Cypriots over the Turkish occupation of Cyprus .
We in the EU believe in open borders and free trade as a sine qua non for peace and stability on our continent and also in the South Caucasus .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to congratulate Mr Kirilov on the excellent work he has carried out in a field full of difficulties , but also opportunities , such as that of relations between EU countries and the countries of the South Caucasus .
Europe has embarked on an interesting Eastern Partnership project , which has met with support and interest from Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan .
However , the challenges to be faced are many and concern energy , economic and political issues , and especially security issues , as in the case of Georgia , the Nagorno-Karabakh question and the tensions between Turkey and Armenia .
The development of relations between the European Union and these three countries will be much more effective if a climate of mutual cooperation can be established between Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan , in accordance with the principle of territorial integrity and with the UN resolutions that form the basis for ending the unresolved conflicts in the area .
It is important to stress the policy of the inviolability of a state 's borders , which the EU has always supported : borders that cannot , under any circumstances , be modified using military force .
( BG ) Mr President , I would like to begin by informing you , ladies and gentlemen , that the rapporteurs , Mr Kirilov and Mr Kazak , belong to parties which automatically vote in the Bulgarian National Assembly against acknowledging the Armenian genocide .

Against this background , it is not strange that , as Mr Tannock also said before me , this report deviates from some of the positions put forward so far .
A large number of respectable Armenian organisations have contacted me , especially about the Nagorno-Karabakh issue , and informed me that the report has not , for instance , been mentioned and that there were no consultations with leading figures in the Minsk Group .
It is also the case that , although the report refers to the Madrid criteria , it deviates from them .
This is why I would like to make this constructive criticism to Mr Kirilov because I believe that unilateral representation of the one side will not improve the situation and will not help resolve the conflicts .
A flexible approach is required which sees things from absolutely every perspective .
Otherwise , we will only deepen the conflicts rather than resolve them .
Mr President , I believe that democratisation , good governance , the rule of law and respect for human rights are the cornerstones on which our future relations with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia have to be built .
Cross-border cooperation at regional level in the South Caucasus will also increase this region 's potential cooperation with the European Union .
There are several very important dimensions to our economic cooperation , one of them being energy cooperation and security , especially in the context of valuable projects supported by the European Commission - such as the Nabucco Pipeline project .
The Caspian Sea and the Black Sea regions are vital for European energy security and the EU strategy for the South Caucasus rightly recognises those elements .
I would like to highlight very briefly three very specific elements .
One of them is the involvement of local authorities in cross-border cooperation , because we need strong regional cooperation in the South Caucasus ; then the issue of the accession of Azerbaijan to the WTO .
I believe that the Commission is to give Azerbaijan the technical assistance and all kinds of help needed to accomplish this accession .
The third and last point is the technical assistance mechanism that we could probably provide in order to strengthen the banking system and the financial system in the South Caucasus states .
This would give the business environment and investors a very good prospect .

Mr President , the report by Mr Kirilov speaks about the need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus .
Indeed , I believe a strategy is needed , but a strategy needs goals and goals pre-suppose a clear geopolitical identity .
Perhaps we have to work on our geopolitical identity to define it better .
What are our goals in the South Caucasus ?
In a nutshell , stability , openness in the region and interoperability , legislative , democratic , political and so on .
One has to recognise the specificity of the region within the Eastern Partnership and approach that specificity as such .
One has also to recognise the specificity of each country within the region and to address it properly .
We have to acknowledge and assess the role of Turkey in the region and use our negotiations with Turkey as a frame for developing an EU-Turkey partnership in addressing the local and regional challenges .
As has been said already , Turkey , I am sure , could be very instrumental from this point of view .
We must also acknowledge that the region is part of our common neighbourhood with Russia , and we have to try to find ways of promoting common policies in that common neighbourhood .
The security issues for sure , and perhaps some issues related to energy , could be dealt with in a trilateral format .
This would perhaps help us to promote solutions for the local , so-called ' frozen ' conflicts .
In this respect , we have to accept that those conflicts are only parts of a coherent , broader and more complex problem with a bigger , global relevance .
Therefore , a package deal should perhaps be considered .
Likewise , I think we have to get rid of some ambiguities and understand that the principles of self-determination and territorial integrity cannot always be applied together .
Finally , I think that we have to consider a conference on security and cooperation in the South Caucasus with a view to developing a stability pact for that region .
( PL ) As permanent rapporteur of the European Parliament for Armenia , I should like to emphasise the need to define a clear and effective European Union strategy for the South Caucasus .
We have great hopes for this region as we build a free and democratic Europe .
To do this , we must very consistently support the countries of this region and encourage them to make further free market reforms .
In this context , it is of fundamental importance to complete , as quickly as possible , the negotiation process for a new type of association agreement between the countries of the South Caucasus and the European Union .
I am convinced these agreements will be a stimulus for the region to continue efforts at introducing democratic standards .
The example of Georgia shows that such reforms have already brought results .
In Doing Business 2010 , a ranking of business-friendly states prepared by the World Bank , Georgia is in 11th place , which means that in four years , it has advanced by as many as 101 places .
Transparency International has said that , as a result of the reduction in bureaucracy achieved during President Saakashvili 's term of office , the Corruption Perceptions Index for Georgia has halved .
The European Union should appreciate the fact that President Saakashvili is consistently applying a free-market policy , and his reforms are a good example for the other Caucasus states .
( DE ) Mr President , on 9 May , President Buzek and 20 000 people celebrated the 60th anniversary of the Robert Schuman declaration here in Strasbourg .
Against this background , I would like to say that the South Caucasus is faced with two alternatives .
One is to become something like the Balkans before the First World War , but on a global scale , and the other is to become something like the European Coal and Steel Community after the Second World War .
In the Kirilov report , we are choosing the second of these two options .
I agree with Mr Swoboda that if the three states in the South Caucasus were to work more closely together , the impact of external influences , such as the Russian influence , could be reduced .
Therefore , it is in the interests of all three countries to come together .
I support Armenia in its efforts to gain recognition of the genocide carried out by the Ottoman Empire .
However , Armenia would be much more credible if it finally withdrew its troops from Azerbaijan .
We urgently need a peaceful solution in Nagorno-Karabakh and in the occupied Azerbaijani areas .
Just as importantly , we need more stability in Georgia , because if Georgia is broken up , as many people in Moscow want , then the whole region will be destabilised .
For this reason , the main issues are peace negotiations , a solution for the nationality conflicts and , above all , the return of displaced people to their homes .
In the 21st century , displacement must not continue to be used as a political tool .
People should not be attempting to maintain the process of displacement .
We need a great deal more sensitivity and much more action in this area .
( LT ) I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Evgeni Kirilov , for his thorough and very significant report .
The European Union calls on Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia to do everything they can to ensure that these countries become stable , peaceful and really democratic states where human and minority rights are guaranteed and where there is civilised competition between government and opposition .
It is not so easy to talk about regional cooperation when we know very well that all three countries have been damaged by frozen or completely fresh conflicts .
Nevertheless , the European experience ( in particular , if we remember the origins of the European Union following bloody wars ) is eloquent testimony to the fact that the only solution is to talk , negotiate , heal wounds and act with an eye to the future and not the past .
The countries of the South Caucasus will have a clearer European perspective if they are able to cooperate among themselves and in the broader region .
Clearly , that also depends on the behaviour of neighbouring countries .
The European Union has opportunities to play a more active political role in the South Caucasus to ensure , above all , the implementation of poverty reduction programmes , the alleviation of social isolation , gender equality and women 's rights and investment in education and health care .
It is important to accelerate the development of direct contact between citizens of the South Caucasus and European Union Member States .
In particular , we ought to increase the number of students , teachers and researchers participating in mobility programmes .
That is the common interest we all share .
( PL ) This is an important step for the European Parliament towards opening the door to nations which are obviously European , such as the Georgians and the Armenians .
Frankly speaking , it is a step which certainly is overdue .
It is a pity it did not happen two years ago , when Georgia became the object of Russian military intervention .
Nonetheless , it is a step in the right direction .
I hope it will be given specific political content , and also that the EURONEST Parliamentary Assembly will play a role as an instrument of support for the ambitions of those states which are obviously European in outlook .
Finally , I would very much like those of us who are talking , today , about the democratic deficit in the countries of this region , to speak as clearly about the democratic deficit in a neighbour of these countries , I mean Russia , so that we do not have a double standard .
( PL ) Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia are undoubtedly European states , they are undoubtedly European nations .
These states are members of the Council of Europe and take part in many international missions in cooperation with the countries of the European Union .
The European Union must recognise the fundamental right of all states to self-determination and the right of nations to decide their own future .
We cannot accept the archaic principle of regions and spheres of influence .
I would like to devote a few seconds to the question of Georgian territorial integrity .
It is very good that the Union has declared its support in this matter .
The Union is seen , not only in the world , but also - and more importantly - in these countries , as a guarantor of security in the region .
We must remember this .
Unfortunately , some parts of the ceasefire agreements of 12 August and 8 September 2008 have not been implemented .
I understand that talks are under way in Geneva , but perhaps we should draw attention to this once again in our bilateral talks with the Russian Federation .
A second matter is that of visas .
I agree with Mrs Malmström , who has said this is the way to bring people together and enable the citizens of Europe to travel .
This should , without doubt , also apply to Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
( RO ) Bearing in mind the importance of the geopolitical situation of Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan in relation to the European Union , Turkey , as a European Union candidate country , Russia and Iran , it is necessary to devise a European Union strategy for the South Caucasus , focused on promoting economic growth , political stability and respect for human rights .
Trade is one of the key instruments available to the EU for achieving these objectives .
Concluding free trade agreements with these states would boost foreign investments , create new jobs and encourage economic growth in the region .
Guaranteeing energy security is a common concern for the European Union and the South Caucasus region .
Energy cooperation must be stepped up specifically by completing the Nabucco project as quickly as possible and by providing the EU 's support for energy projects which promote energy efficiency and the development of alternative energy sources in the South Caucasus .
( PL ) Georgia and Armenia , and this is stressed by the authors of the report , are dynamically and successfully implementing a European strategy , a neighbourhood policy strategy .
We ought to respond to this , and we should , in every case , take account of the specific character of specific countries in the South Caucasus .
This strategy , for each of the countries , should include such areas as transport , the natural environment , culture and society .
Mr President , in the context of the South Caucasus , mention is very often made of frozen conflicts and ethnic problems .
It is very good that we do talk about them .
However , the correct response of the European Union to the problems of the South Caucasus should be an emphasis on modernisation and on changing these countries so that the conflicts do not play such a large role .
In this debate , we have very often forgotten that Georgia has just finished fighting a war .
We are considering what to do about this .
If we want the South Caucasus to be free from war , we must go for modernisation , because Georgia at least , but also Armenia and Azerbaijan , have recorded such high economic growth in recent years that they deserve our support . Thank you .

( BG ) Mr President , I welcome Mr Kirilov 's report , which highlights the need for the European Union to play a more active role in the South Caucasus , a region of significant geopolitical importance .
The positive development in the South Caucasus is of benefit to both the neighbouring Black Sea region , for which the European Union still does not have , unfortunately , a clear strategy which we can expect to discuss here some time soon , and to the European Union as a whole .
I wish to express my concern about the delay in the process of ratifying the protocols signed between Turkey and Armenia last October .
I think that neither side should stipulate conditions for ratifying these protocols which are in the interest of both the Turkish and Armenian peoples .
As the report correctly notes , the negotiations between Armenia and Turkey on opening the border and establishing diplomatic relations and those being conducted in the OSCE Minsk Group about Nagorno-Karabakh must be treated as separate issues .
The European Union must definitely make a more active commitment in the future settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
Based on our experience in the Balkans and recently from Georgia as well , the European Union is in a good position to play a key role in this region .
A stable , secure and prosperous South Caucasus is in our interests and it is high time for us to assume our responsibility .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides the European Union with a framework to become a real global player .
A specific example of this would be the European Union 's participation as a formal member of the Minsk Group , and not only certain individual Member States being members of this group .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are eight requests to speak under the ' catch the eye ' procedure .
There is not time for everybody because we must proceed to the vote .
I am , therefore , going to allow only six Members to speak .
( PL ) The report on the South Caucasus is a good report .
I would like to stress that in the report , particular attention is drawn to the role of the European Union as a mediator and a promoter of values but , above all , as a promoter of cooperation between the countries of the region .
The problems which we have to solve are , principally , questions of the territorial integrity of these countries , but also how to strengthen them economically .
As the European Union , we can help these countries here .
I would like to stress that one of the main problems is the unresolved matter of refugees .
Mr Posselt spoke about this .
I think it is really disgraceful that in this day and age , this problem cannot be solved .
I think a certain deficiency is the fact that the report does not refer to the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities , although all the countries in the region were , after all , signatories to it . Thank you very much .
Mr President , today we are debating a very important and well-drafted report on an important area close to the EU , the South Caucasus .
The area motivates perfectly the general recommendations of the EU security strategy .
It is strategically located ; it allows for the transport of Caspian oil and gas towards the EU ; and it has its own , significant reserves .
That requires our total attention and determination to act .
However , precisely because it is strategically and energetically relevant , the area is fiercely contested by foreign powers exploiting its internal divisions and conflicts , be they still ' frozen ' or ' defrosting ' .
If the EU is interested in making full use of the potential of the South Caucasus , then it must act together , rather than individually , and be more resolute in its actions , even if that involves making others less happy .
For that we need a strategy .


Mr President , I congratulate Mr Kirilov and Mr Kazak on their work .
If our relations are seen purely through the prism of our need for oil and gas , we will exacerbate tensions and fail to achieve security in other senses .
It is the need for peace and economic development in the South Caucasus which should drive our policy ; that means engaging with NATO to ensure their new strategic concept reflects this , engaging with Russia and Turkey as powers in the region to seek to maximise agreement and extending the true hand of friendship to the people through association agreements and visa arrangements and so on .

We should welcome the statement of Mr Medvedev and Mr Yanukovich on Moldova , which shows how much can be achieved through diplomacy , and I congratulate Commissioner Füle on the development of the Eastern Neighbourhood Partnership so far .
I look forward , as the European Union develops a common foreign and security policy , to a more active engagement of the Union on all aspects of relations with the Black Sea region .

( RO ) I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Kirilov and thank him for his cooperation in drafting the report .
I wish to emphasise two points .
The first one concerns the issue of democracy .
Bernd Posselt was saying earlier that the countries in this region need to cooperate .
These countries can cooperate if Azerbaijan , Georgia and Armenia are governed by the rule of law and they are going to be predictable and pluralist .
If this is going to happen , the EU will have something to gain .
The second point naturally concerns the energy issue .
I wish to stress at this point the role of Georgia and Azerbaijan as transit countries for energy resources and for the diversification of energy supply sources .
However , I would like to say that it is good that Armenia will also be involved in these projects , including transport-related projects .
In this regard , the keyword is transparency
( DE ) Mr President , in order to reduce Europe 's dependence on Russia for its supplies of energy , we should take natural gas from the Caspian basin through the South Caucasus to the EU .
This will give the Caucasus a key role .
This region is not only the world 's largest transit point for the trade in gas and oil .
It is also the place where the interests of Russia and the West collide and where even Turkey wants to become involved .
In addition to the oil and gas contracts , Turkey is attempting to conclude a stability and cooperation pact .
Stability in the Caucasus is undoubtedly also in the EU 's interests , but we must not leave the responsibility for this plan to Turkey , otherwise new dependencies and even pressures will arise in the accession process .
As the example of Cyprus shows , Ankara does not pull its punches .
The ongoing power struggles over the European supply of natural gas have already delayed the construction of the large-scale Nabucco pipeline project , which has been in the planning stage for a long time .
I hope that the competing South Stream project will have more success , so that the resources from the Caspian area are not lost to China .
( SK ) Armenian Government representatives yesterday warned me that the report on the need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus , in the section dealing with the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh , includes formulations which do not conform to the official EU position as set out in the provisions of the declaration adopted by the foreign ministers of all OSCE states , and the provisions of the declaration issued by OSCE ministers in Athens on 2 December 2009 .
Items 8 and 10 in particular contain formulations which do not correspond to the Madrid principles agreed between the signatories of the OSCE Minsk Group .
If these items are adopted in the proposed wording , they could become a serious obstacle to further progress in the process of a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh .
In the interests of enabling the previously-mentioned concerns to be reviewed , I would therefore like to propose that we consider one of the two previously-mentioned options : either to remove the contentious provisions from the report , or to postpone voting on the report until a later date , so as to give our friends in the Caucasus time to explain their position on the report to the European Parliament .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the last speaker , Mr Paška , made a very important point .
I would like to make three very short remarks .
Firstly , I believe that we have a strategy , through the Eastern Partnership , to get these three countries closer to the European Union - and , in fact , they are saying ' as close as it gets ' .
Secondly , I think we have instruments for that : association agreements , economic integration agreements , mobility ( the visa issue ) and , last but not least , a different European Union - a European Union which could combine the Community approach with the common foreign security policy approach .
My third remark is that I am looking forward to a discussion with honourable Members on the neighbourhood package , where we could also discuss the question of whether the concept ' as close as possible to the European Union ' needs to have some institutional definition .
rapporteur . - Mr President , once again , thank you very much for the comments and for the fruitful cooperation we had in the process .
Thank you for all the comments and for the support I received from the majority of the colleagues who spoke .
I would like to thank the INTA draftsperson , Mr Kazak , for the constructive ideas presented by his Committee , and the contribution of the ITRE Committee , many of whose suggestions found their place in the report .
My gratitude goes also to the AFET secretariat and for the numerous experts , NGOs and other organisations who work actively in the region and who gave their valuable input and support .
I just want to say one thing .
We should apply the same principles .
I heard some criticism from some colleagues .
We should know that this House definitely would not support us if we speak about territorial integrity and self-determination for Georgia .
We should know that the universal application of principles is the best basis to start and build relationships .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will take on board the recommendation made by the Parliament in this text and devise a comprehensive strategy for the EU towards the South Caucasus , and I would like to point out that Commissioner Füle made a very timely visit to this region .
I would like to appeal to Baroness Ashton to do likewise and try to engage in conflict prevention in the area .
Let me say that we welcome and support last week 's decision by the Council to adopt the negotiating directives for the future association agreements with the three countries , and we believe that upgrading the contractual relations with the three countries is an important step .
The time is right to step up with measures to prevent negative developments in the region and the escalation of tensions .
Otherwise , we risk intervening again when it is already too late .
We should not wait for it to happen again .
The big lesson Europe has learnt is the lesson of integration .
This is the only sustainable way of reconciliation with the past and investment in a better future .
The debate is closed .
We will now proceed to the vote .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In adopting this report , the European Parliament reaffirms the particular importance of the South Caucasus to the European Union , as well as the need to devise a strategy for this region .
The three countries in the South Caucasus region , Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan , are part of both the Black Sea Synergy and the Eastern Partnership .
Consequently , we have the framework and instruments to enable the European Union to become more actively involved in the region .
The European Commission must come up with specific initiatives on cooperation in the following areas : energy security , transport , economic development and environmental protection .
The South Caucasus region is particularly important for the southern corridor and , therefore , for the whole of Europe 's energy security .
Romania is involved in specific projects aimed at developing the southern corridor .
On this point , representatives of my country , Georgia and Azerbaijan signed the AGRI Agreement . This provides for the construction of two liquefied natural gas terminals in two Black Sea ports , one in Georgia and the other at Constanţa in Romania .
I would like to stress that we cannot ignore the frozen conflicts in the region as the situation in them may deteriorate , which would destabilise the region .
in writing . - The situation in the South Caucasus region needs especially now a proactive approach by the European Union with the Lisbon Treaty providing the EU with a mandate to become much more engaged and present in the region .
The full-scale Russian military invasion of large parts of Georgian territory in August 2007 dramatically demonstrated that so-called frozen conflicts can easily become sources of devastating regional conflicts if major powers like the EU are not actively engaged in the area .
In 2007 , both the EU and NATO were clearly left unprepared to face the new situation .
Within the framework of Eastern Neighbourhood Policy , the EU is well placed to have a prominent role in contributing to confidence-building , reconstruction and rehabilitation .
First of all , this means strengthening the presence of the EU in the region .
We support fully the constructive mission of our special representative Peter Semneby .
However , we cannot limit ourselves to monitoring missions .
In addition and in violation of 2007 agreements , the EUMM is still not allowed to enter the separatist entities under Russian control .
Such a situation is both intolerable and humiliating .
We can continue cooperation with the Russian authorities only on condition that they fully honour their own commitments .
The conflicts in the South Caucasus have reached a very dangerous ceiling , where we have got used to the idea that they are intractable conflicts .
Whatever efforts are made - whether real or feigned - are only intended to create a certain kind of fog in the negotiations , which will certainly not lead to resolution of the conflicts .
This applies to the territorial disputes between Georgia and Russia , and also , in a special way , to Nagorno-Karabakh .
From my point of view , development of the situation between two of the countries - Armenia and Azerbaijan , which , under the Eastern Partnership and in European Neighbourhood Policy , are our partners - is an unacceptable policy of consent to the fact that these conflicts are intractable .
The European Union , acting in agreement with Russia , which is a very important partner in this matter , must bring about a situation in which a clear statement of positions is made .
This should involve , above all , sending a clear message to those countries which want to aspire to membership of the EU that solving territorial problems and at least partial resolution of the matter of refugees are basic conditions for thinking seriously about membership in the near or distant future .
For me , the future and the way the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh is handled are a litmus test of what the sides want to show on European matters and how they demonstrate their credibility in this area .
in writing . - It was about time to discuss a strategy for the Caucasus , and this strategy should not close its eyes to the unpleasant processes ongoing between Ukraine and Russia .
The case concerns the prolonging of the lease of the Sevastopol naval base up to 2050 .
The statements by Russian leaders that the Black Sea fleet will never be used against its neighbours do not sound too sincere .
Why is the fleet there , then - to entertain kids and the elderly in Crimea ?
Ceterum censeo , France has decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia ; we believe that it will sincerely regret its action .
Announcement by the President
First of all , I would like to tell you about the difficult situation in Poland .
In view of the dramatic flooding in Poland , where a significant amount of the country is flooded and people have lost all their possessions , I would like , on behalf of the European Parliament and all of us , to convey expressions of support and solidarity with the Poles and most sincere expressions of sympathy with those who are suffering , today .
( Applause )
There will be a debate on this at the next part-session of the European Parliament , on 16 June 2010 .
I am sure the European Union will show solidarity and respond positively to the request from the Polish authorities for financial support .
We have our own European Union Solidarity Fund , which is so important in this kind of natural disaster .
Amendment of the agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , this morning , a meeting of the Conference of Presidents was held .
We finished the conference 10 minutes ago .
We discussed very thoroughly the questions of organising the vote on the resolutions on the Europe 2020 strategy .
As you very well know , it is a strategy which is intended to bring our citizens work , prosperity and stability throughout the Union for a whole decade .
So it is a crucial strategy for the future situation in the European Union , and also for outside the Union , because we can only be strong if we are strong internally .
In relation to the discussion during the meeting of the Conference of Presidents , arguments were put forward for voting on our resolutions on the Europe 2020 strategy today , because we would like to have them as quickly as possible so that we can participate responsibly in the discussion being held on this subject with other European institutions .
However , there were also arguments saying that we need a strategy which we will adopt by a huge majority .
If we want to influence the situation in the Union , we have to organise a big majority which supports the resolutions .
There is a fear that there may not be such a majority , today .
So , on the one hand , we need the strategy as quickly as possible and , on the other , we want a strong resolution .
This is what we need .
In relation to this responsible discussion among the chairs of our political groups , I have decided to submit a proposal that the debate be postponed .
This is in accordance with Rule 140 of our Rules of Procedure .
I will say this again : the decision is very important , because we realise the resolution is needed quickly , but we need a resolution which has strong support , and these matters are of great importance .
Mr President , thank you for your statement .
I should like to add that our Hungarian friends are in the same situation as our Polish friends in terms of floods .
We therefore have the same thoughts for our Hungarian fellow citizens as for our Polish fellow citizens .
( Applause )
I endorse your presentation .
In a crisis situation , democratic forces must join together .
It is with this in mind that I had proposed to the Conference of Presidents , before this Strasbourg session , that this decision be postponed to June , because I had noticed certain discrepancies and ambiguities .
I did not obtain a majority at the Conference of Presidents - we are a democratic Parliament here - and we have therefore tried to prepare this resolution .
At lunchtime yesterday , during discussions in our respective groups , we realised that time was short .
I do not want to say that the work was botched , as that would be to refuse to recognise the work done by our services , our Vice-Presidents and the people responsible for preparing this work .
We thought , before all or some of the heads of delegation , that it would probably be best , for Parliament 's image , to get the text withdrawn and to vote next time ; the crisis , may I point out , will not be over by the month of June .
We discussed the matter and we agreed to decide that the heads of the large groups would ask for the vote to be postponed until June .
Martin Schulz told me - and was the only one to do so - that first of all , I needed the majority of the group , but everyone needs the majority of the group .
We did not therefore discuss amendments in our group yesterday evening , nor did we discuss the resolution today , as the group was in favour of postponement , in order to find a solution , which Parliament considers indispensable towards our fellow citizens .
In the meantime , we have received a letter from Guy Verhofstadt ; that is what made us decide to request a simple three-week postponement .
In this crisis situation , I am asking you to grant it so that we , Parliament , can show our fellow citizens that we are a strong body and responsible men and women .
Mr Schulz would like to speak against the proposal .
Mr President , at the beginning of his speech , Mr Daul referred to the difficult situation in Hungary .
Many countries are currently experiencing problems .
For example , the people of Slovakia have been hard hit by flooding .
We have a strong feeling of solidarity with the citizens of all the countries affected by hardship of this kind , including Hungary , Poland and Slovakia .

Mr President , you and Mr Daul described the situation in the Conference of Presidents as well as yesterday and also this morning .
I have nothing to add about procedural matters .
However , on behalf of Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mr Bisky and myself , I would like to explain that we did not vote in favour of your proposal to postpone the vote this morning in the Conference of Presidents , because we believe that we should and , in fact , can vote today .
There was a desire to adopt a resolution of this kind in Parliament on a broader level and with a broader majority than was the case in February .
What has happened in the last few days does not relate to procedure but to content .
However , one thing is completely clear .
There has been a move away from the content which enjoyed general consensus in February and , given the serious crisis , this is not surprising .
There are several different solutions .
There are solutions which some people believe are good , and that is legitimate in democratic terms , and there are our solutions , which differ from those and which we believe are better .
We cannot bring ourselves to the point of exhaustion in the search for a consensus .
Now is the time to take up firm positions .
You can take up firm positions and we will do the same .
We have attempted to find a consensual solution , but this did not work . Therefore , we should now try to obtain a majority for one position or the other .
If there is a majority in favour of postponement , I must say at this point that we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament will , of course , remain open to new negotiations .
However , the starting point for these negotiations will be the text which we have submitted together with our fellow Members from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Therefore , Mr President , I am of the opinion that we should vote today .
( Parliament agreed to the request )

I would also like to thank Mr Daul and Mr Schulz for calling attention to the fact that there are also floods , today , in other parts of Europe .
You are absolutely right , and expressions of solidarity are due to all the affected countries and all the people of Europe who are today facing danger .
Mr President , the water flooding into Poland is flooding from the Czech Republic , where it caused enormous damage in the first stage of these floods .
The Czech Republic is also part of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was talking about this a moment ago , when I thanked Mr Daul and Mr Schulz .
Thank you , too , Mr Březina , for drawing attention to this .
We have disastrous floods .
Thank you very much .
1 .
Delivering a single market to consumers and citizens (
2 .
University Business Dialogue : A new partnership for the modernisation of Europe 's universities : (
3 .
Community financial assistance with respect to the decommissioning of Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant in Bulgaria ' Kozloduy Programme ' (
4 .
Implementation of the synergies of research and innovation earmarked funds in Regulation ( EC ) No 1080 / 2006 concerning the European Fund of Regional Development and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development (
- Before the vote :
There are no problems with this report .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like to request an electronic vote .
The time has actually run out , but , in the light of the limited transport options available this week and provided that the House has no objections , I propose that we hold a roll-call vote .
Does anyone wish to object ?
No one has objected , so we can vote .
5 .
Long-term sustainability of public finances for a recovering economy (
After the vote :
Mr President , the report on which we have just voted is a serious blow to the citizens of the European Union , whom the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe would like to foot the bill for this neoliberal crisis .
( Applause )
Under such circumstances , I cannot allow my name or that of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament to be associated with this document .
I therefore ask that you withdraw my signature .
( Applause )
Mr Hoang Ngoc , your statement will be noted in the Minutes .
6 .
Contribution of the Cohesion policy to the achievement of Lisbon and the EU2020 objectives (
( IT ) I just wanted to inform you that my voting machine was not working for the Hoang Ngoc report .
I was voting against it .
7 .
Union for the Mediterranean (
8 .
The need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus (
That concludes voting time .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased that small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) were mentioned in the report on delivering a single market to consumers and citizens .
Paragraph 46 rightly states that access to finance is their greatest problem .
That is correct , because it is still easier to secure financing of millions of euro for a hedge fund than to obtain a loan of EUR 100 000 for a small business .
Against this background , I would like to see the report not only describing what should ideally happen , but also requiring the Commission to take concrete action .
( SK ) Closer dialogue between universities and businesses will , in my opinion , contribute to economic growth .
I am alarmed at the increasing unemployment among young people .
The uncertain employment situation faced by young people often discourages them from starting a family or makes them want to postpone it excessively , and this ultimately has a negative impact in the economic and social sphere regarding the demographic transformation of Europe .
The dialogue should therefore include measures to support the entry of young people onto the job market , enabling the full development of their potential .
Other topics should include making use of education as a means of combating poverty , inequality and social exclusion , with special attention being devoted to people with disabilities .
For the reasons mentioned , I support the proposed report .
( GA ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report and it was the right thing to do .
As regards nuclear energy in general , however , I would like to say that many citizens are confused by it , and in my own country , almost everyone is against nuclear energy due to the terrible disasters which occurred in Sellafield and in Chernobyl .
As such , I recommend that the Commission investigate the advantages and disadvantages related to nuclear energy , and that they publish a paper in order to give citizens the opportunity to make up their minds based on the truth rather than on emotions .
Finally , I would like to congratulate you , Mr President , on the excellent job that you have done on your first day in the chair .
( SK ) The European Community provides financial assistance to Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria to support their efforts towards fulfilling obligations connected with the withdrawal from operation of first-generation nuclear reactors .
The financial assistance for operational withdrawals which was provided to Bulgaria up to 2009 was intended mainly for preparatory work .
The aim of the proposed continuation is to provide Bulgaria with assistance so that the country can operate and ensure the safety and maintenance ...
( The speaker was interrupted )
( NL ) Mr President , a few of the amendments which the rapporteur has tabled to his report are nothing short of staggering .
The rapporteur proposed dropping all the wordings about sound public finances , the breaches of the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) which need to be brought to an end and the importance of the strict enforcement of the SGP and 250 members actually supported him in this .
Staggering !
The aim of the rapporteur and of the 250 other members is to destroy the economy .
How can it be that we still have 250 members who refuse to cut their coats according to their cloth ?
Two hundred and fifty members of the European Parliament who fail to understand that the land of plenty does not exist !
All Member States will have to shed a lot of blood , sweat and tears to purge their debts , put their finances back in order and steer a different course .
Obviously , this is a tough message and will not go down well with the voters .
However , if we fail to do this , the whole of Europe will go bankrupt !
The path the rapporteur suggested is a recipe for how to destroy the sustainability of public finances in the short term .
Fortunately , the amendments have not been adopted .
Mr President , I welcome this report on public finances .
It is a vast improvement on the first draft .
High debt and deficit levels are a grave concern to the UK and across many Member States .
We must wean ourselves off fiscal stimuli and quantitative easing , and these should not be the accepted norm .
There is a need to focus on overcoming our high unemployment levels now and reducing the tax burden on employment and SMEs .
Resources are scarce and we agree that , where money is available , it should be directed to growth boosting investments , such as R & D and greener , smarter innovation .
Finally , we cannot hide from our issue of ever-ageing populations .
Pension schemes must be transparent and taken into account when looking at public debt .
There are some issues that I was wary of in this report .
Migration , for example , needs to be handled sensitively .
It can meet certain gaps in the labour force but must be controlled and take into account local factors .
Yes , I agree that European problems do need European solutions , but we must be aware of the global economy and must respect the fundamental powers of our national governments too .
( NL ) I voted against the Hoang Ngoc report , mainly because of the nonchalance with which it calls for yet more mass immigration into Europe .
How detached from the real world can the European Parliament actually get ?
Our cities are already groaning under the problems of mass , uncontrolled immigration .
It is time that we carried out a cost-benefit analysis at European level of the immigration of foreigners from outside the European Union .
The governments of several Member States that have already been confronted with this issue have refused to calculate the cost of immigration and seem to think that it would be undesirable to gain any knowledge about this matter .
How can that be ?
We must also take into account the problems this will cause the developing world , which will witness a brain drain and the vital forces of their societies being siphoned off into Europe .
Their problems will become even more severe , resulting in yet more immigration .
Mr President , I voted against the own-initiative report on the Union for the Mediterranean for a number of reasons .
There is no doubt that a stable Mediterranean is a huge prize for the wider Europe .
However , at a time when the economic climate across Europe is perilous , it is entirely inappropriate that this House should contemplate the expense associated with such a plan .
Grand meetings of Heads of State , a 40-strong secretariat and neighbourhood packages do not represent a frugal economic policy at this particular time .
Furthermore , I opposed Amendment 5 for asking that the upgrading of EU-Israel relations under the Preferential Economic Association Agreement should not proceed .
In the delicate balance that is required from Europe , such calls will do nothing to give confidence to Israel that this House will act as an honest broker .
( DE ) Mr President , in the early 1980s , when I was a young journalist , I paid a visit to King Hassan of Morocco whose accession bid to the EU had just been rejected .
Following the visit , I wrote an article calling for a Mediterranean community .
I had the privilege of working for Otto von Habsburg here , who said that the Mediterranean Sea had never separated Europe and its neighbours , but it must bring them together .
In his biography of President Sarkozy , Jean-Paul Picaper wrote that the idea for the Union of the Mediterranean came from the pan-European movement .
Why am I mentioning this ?
Because I want to make it clear that this is not just a French obsession , as many people have said , and it is not a waste of money , as a previous speaker has stated .
After the Eastern Partnership , it is the European Union 's most important foreign policy tool .
However , this is precisely the reason why we must ensure that it is properly designed and has a political structure .
It must not simply be a free trade zone , because we know that the Mediterranean , as Churchill said , and I am aiming this remark at my British fellow Members , is the soft underbelly of Europe .
We must ensure that this is not the case in future .
Mr President , I supported the original paragraph 12 in this report expressing concern about the use of ethnic cleansing as a prelude to Russia 's recognition of the puppet entities of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
My proposal was to call on Russia to honour its ceasefire commitments without delay and to lift immediately its blocking of EUMM access to South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
I find it is a really intolerable and humiliating situation that the EU representatives have to ask for access to these entities which had been agreed .
Against this background a call to Russia to respect the sovereignty and integrity of the Georgian Republic has no authority , unfortunately .
Written explanations of vote
The internal market and the euro represent two real shields for the European Union in the financial , budgetary , economic and social storm which the 27 are currently weathering .
I voted in favour of this report , because it reaffirms the key role played by the internal market and gives a very good overview of the current stakes ( budgetary coordination , development of education and research , aid for SMEs , strengthening and accessibility of SOLVIT and the Enterprise Europe Network ) .
This is a reflection and a travel warrant which perfectly complements that of Professor Monti , who recently submitted his report entitled ' A new strategy for the single market ' to the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Barroso .
in writing . - I voted for this report which addresses the current shortcomings of the internal market .
The economic and financial crisis has substantially damaged the single market integration process .
It is unfortunate to witness the re-emergence of economic protectionism at national levels which might result in fragmentation of the internal market .
A large number of SMEs are leaving the market because their access to finance has been severely restricted in the times of crisis .
It should not be forgotten that SMEs form an essential part of the backbone of the European economy and are the main drivers of economic growth and social cohesion .
Member States should put greater efforts in implementing the Small Business Act and removing red-tape and other administrative and bureaucratic obstacles for SMEs .
I voted against the report , because it promotes elements which are extremely onerous to real viable growth and to the interests of the workers and consumers in the EU in general .
Firstly , the rapporteur not only draws the wrong conclusions ; he also starts from the wrong premise in formulating his proposals , given that he claims that ' the single European market , along with the euro area , best illustrates the true meaning of EU economic integration and unity , and is certainly the most visible achievement of European integration for EU citizens ' .
He forgets the lack of fundamental social and political union and overlooks the real conditions in many of the countries in the euro area today .
He refers , in particular , to the social market economy , a vague term which basically means liberalisation of the market at the expense of even the last residue of social policy .
The rapporteur also fully adopts the philosophy of competitiveness and the Europe 2020 strategy , which is not only baseless , but will have even more negative consequences for the people of Europe .
We all know that the Europe 2020 strategy was launched with the aim of helping the European Union emerge from the current economic crisis and prepare its economy for the new decade .
For this reason , I believe that the EU 2020 strategy must set realistic objectives for achieving by 2020 a green , knowledge-based , social market economy and sustainable development .
Another objective is to create jobs in the agricultural and environmental sector as the single European market must be the cornerstone of the EU 2020 strategy , tackling the challenges of economic growth and consumer protection .
I voted for this report because it argues that the single market is not solely tied to the economic aspect .
It is essential to ensure that , in the revival of the single market , a holistic and a common approach is adopted whereby consumer and citizen goals , particularly those related to economic , social , health and environmental concerns , are fully integrated in a revived single market .
The internal market , as well as the policies related to it , has allowed the European public better access to goods and services , and more variety at a lower cost .
The principles of the internal market have meant that European consumers have had access to more information and better protection of their rights , but they are also becoming more aware of their obligations .
For this reason , the reality of the internal market is not static but dynamic .
It is a reality that is changing in a globalised world ; thought must continue to be given to how to develop it and improve its implementation .
I agree with the rapporteur and would stress the importance of the European Union 's internal market for European integration itself , for greater social cohesion , for sustainable development , for competitiveness , and for economic growth that will enable us to face up to future developments and compete in a globalised market .
The construction of an integrated , fully functioning single market is a process that is essential to deepened European integration , social cohesion , economic growth and the sustainable development of the EU .
However , the economic crisis has undoubtedly affected public and consumer confidence in the single market .
It is important that the European public sees the importance of the single market , the way it works and , most importantly , the benefits that it can bring to the public , consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Reviving the single market means that its various stakeholders must adopt a common holistic approach which incorporates the objectives of consumers and the public into a renewed single market , particularly those linked to economic , social , health and environmental concerns .
This new programme for consolidating the single market must be carefully monitored so that it values social justice , guarantees the integrity of the market , stimulates innovation and aids the transition to a new digital era .
These imperatives are likely to provide the single market with a competitive advantage against other major world economies .
In order to create confidence in this single market , it is necessary to ensure that consumers are protected and to safeguard the public 's social and environmental needs .
I admire the rapporteur for managing to write , in all seriousness and without laughing , that the single market and the euro have served as Europe 's protective shield during the profound crisis that has affected us for the last two years .
Nothing has protected us , least of all the Europe of Brussels .
On the contrary , it has established all the conditions needed for us to bear the full brunt : free global movement of capital , dismantling of public services and systems of social protection , increased job insecurity , and a monetary policy left in the hands of a central bank that is indifferent to the economic needs of Member States .
These are the consequences of establishing a single market that has remained incomplete since 1992 .
It has also been an element of inertia , a superfluous element to be taken into consideration when Member States took things in hand .
As for the euro , I think we should ask all those countries suffering from speculation what they think of its capacity to protect them .
Today , it is a crisis factor in itself .
The common European market is an important achievement of European Union integration .
It gives many possibilities to our citizens as well as to small and medium-sized enterprises .
In a report on the strategy and future of the EU market which was published and presented last week , Professor Mario Monti points clearly to the fact that citizens and consumers should be among the main beneficiaries of the common market .
The market is not always favourable to them .
Therefore , when working on further legislative proposals , their concerns should be taken into account to the greatest possible extent .
We should try to ensure that questions , for example , of recognition of professional qualifications , correct implementation of the Services Directive , e-commerce , small and medium-sized enterprises and consumer protection are priorities as we continue to build the common market .
As Professor Monti has rightly observed , a certain fatigue with questions of the EU market can be felt in Member States , but it is precisely now that we need a strong common market more than ever before , as the crisis of recent months has shown us .
Therefore , I welcome Mr Grech 's report , which I had the opportunity to work on and which was our comment on the matter of the consumers and citizens in the EU market .
in writing . - This report could not have come at a more critical moment .
The ongoing financial crisis has created a sense of mistrust and led to more discussions about protectionist measures by governments .
In the long term , this would have detrimental effects on Europe 's economy .
I believe there is a connection between the economic problems and the lack of motivation in completing the internal market .
Mr Grech correctly points out in his report that the citizen is the real centre of the internal market and that it should be the economy that works for the citizen , not the other way round .
In Mr Monti 's report , ' A new strategy for the internal market ' , he warns that the internal market is more unpopular than ever but also more needed than ever .
It is my belief that we must act boldly , whilst taking into account citizens ' concerns , to re-energise the internal market .
I voted in favour of the Grech report , although in my opinion , it could have underlined more the situation of SMEs .
However , with the important amendments passed , the result was well-balanced and I hope it will lead to well thought out legislative initiatives by the Commission .
The construction of a single market has always been and continues to be one of the EU 's main objectives .
A well-functioning single market is a fundamental process to further European integration , social cohesion , economic growth and sustainable development within the Union .
Doubts have been emerging over what stage the single market is at , because of the recent economic crisis : there are those who argue that it is fragile at the moment .
If this is true , it is very damaging to the integration process of the single market , and to the history of the Union itself .
It is very important at this stage to find an instrument that clearly and unequivocally informs the European public how the single market works , as well as the huge benefits that it can bring to consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why I voted as I did .
The report is moving in the wrong direction .
Now it is time to protect companies in the various Member States from the effects of the global financial crisis and to put in place clear regulations for speculators and the free market .
Instead of this , the cultural and economic differences between the markets , companies and business practices are being sacrificed in favour of a globalised market .
For these reasons , I have voted against this report .
I voted in favour of the Grech report on delivering a single market to consumers and citizens .
This document indeed finds a balance between , on the one hand , the objectives of an open economy capable of stimulating growth and job creation and of providing an integrated response to the major challenges of the future ( such as competitiveness , research and development , industrial policy , and demographic and environmental issues ) , and , on the other , those of an economic system that is up to the task of delivering consumer protection and the social and environmental safeguards that citizens need .
We must not forget the citizen and consumer in our recovery strategy .
Europe must also adopt a holistic approach that fully integrates our citizens ' concerns and other horizontal policy areas , particularly health , social and consumer protection , labour law , environment , sustainable development and external policies .
The report urges the Commission to bring forward a legislative proposal to ensure implementation of an affordable , expedient and accessible Europe-wide collective redress system by May 2011 , which I advocate .
This report consists of the best content-free rhetoric I have seen this year and , for this reason , I cannot support it .
That said , it does contain both good and bad proposals , and I am therefore abstaining .
I voted in favour of the report on university-business dialogue because , in my opinion , it is essential that the link between training and the labour market should be improved .
This is not a question of orienting students in line with the desiderata of the private sector , but of enabling young people to take account of the implications of working life .
Links between universities and businesses need to be strengthened in order to make it easier for students to access work and for businesses to accept untypical careers more easily .
I support this report on a more active partnership between universities and businesses .
Universities play a key role in the successful transition to a knowledge-based economy , but the active participation of other interested parties , i.e. businesses and government institutions , is also required .
To achieve efficient results , the education sector needs to be restructured and modernised and curricula need to be reformed and brought up to date in order to satisfy the needs of the labour market .
Once the conditions have been created for graduates to find work in small and medium-sized enterprises , we would bridge the gap between the supply of young specialists and the demand of the labour market .
This own-initiative report contains truly positive ideas for the future of our universities .
Any change to the academic training system which helps modernise training programmes and , above all , brings graduates and the world of employment closer together , should be welcomed and strongly encouraged .
Today , the European university system , one of the most important elements of our daily life with which we can sow the seeds for a robust , lasting economic recovery , must open up to the labour market : forging solid links , in terms of mutual exchange between universities and businesses , is a priority for Member States ' institutions , and it must be mainly local and regional authorities which have a say in endeavours to bring the economic and training sectors together successfully .
Only universities that talk to the businesses in their respective regions can hope to prepare young people to enter and permanently stay in the job market .
We all need , now and always , training establishments that are up-to-date and which , above all , reflect regional needs : this too , I am certain , is a vital ingredient for the growth of our regions .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
Today , knowledge is a greater priority than ever .
More needs to be done concerning the knowledge triangle , adopting a framework of reforms needed to make knowledge a social value , and strengthening the ties between businesses and universities , as in the case of the Knowledge and Information Communities of the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) .
It is crucial that universities integrate the economic and social environment into their main sphere of action within their research and innovation programmes .
It is essential to develop an investment strategy for new sources of growth , stimulating research , development , innovation and education with a view to strengthening our industrial base , an excellent service sector and a modern rural economy .
The role of both public and private institutes of higher education , universities and polytechnics will be very valuable in building state confidence in these institutions .
They should enjoy autonomy so that they are able to make their essential contribution to Europe 's development .
It is necessary to strengthen both the interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary facets of education and research programmes and cooperation between universities .
Information and communications technologies are a key instrument in this respect .
I voted for the report on university-business dialogue : a new partnership for the modernisation of Europe 's universities , because it presents measures that contribute to enhancing European learners ' employability .
Cooperation between the education sector and business is essential for bridging the gap between the supply logic of the education sector and the demand logic of the world of employment .
I believe that partnerships that enable the modernisation of universities , especially those that promote better education and qualifications for individuals , are essential for increased European competitiveness .
This qualification will be reflected in terms of innovation , research and development , which are crucial for sustained economic and social growth .
Partnerships must be established between universities and businesses in order to facilitate the entry of these workers into the labour market , helping reduce the high levels of unemployment that are being recorded today in particular .
In this context , I would also reiterate the importance of the European Union 's cohesion policy , funds from which will be extremely useful for this purpose .
In March 2000 in Lisbon , and March 2002 in Barcelona , the European Council approved the strategic objective of making the EU the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , making its education and training systems a global benchmark in terms of quality , and creating the European Area of Research and Innovation .
The Member States are responsible for education and training policies , while the role of the EU is to support the improvement of national systems through new instruments at EU level , mutual learning and the exchange of information and best practice .
The knowledge-based economy and rapid technological development present challenges to higher education and research in Europe , but they also open up new opportunities which must be effectively harnessed .
In this context , creating quality partnerships in higher education and business is of the utmost importance .
I believe that cooperation between the education sector and business at local , regional , national and transnational level is crucial for bridging the gap between the supply logic of the education sector and the demand logic of the world of employment .
The report on university-business dialogue adopts a position which we do not see as the way to modernise education .
We must take the looming threats to free , public and democratic access to education very seriously .
We believe that the errors resulting from the Bologna Process must be acknowledged urgently and , contrary to what the rapporteur says about the Bologna Process , the issue of mobility as a means of bringing the Member States closer together and making them more equal must be demystified .
Furthermore , we should not forget that the Bologna Process is not neutral and involved initial investment , or that it has , at the same time , followed a policy of taking responsibility for university funding away from the state .
The issue surrounding universities ' autonomy is referred to several times in the report in question , with the idea of a ' partnership ' between universities and companies being added to this point as a way of ensuring funding for the institutions .
This university-business concept is moving away from the real meaning and value of education as a universal right and approaches education in terms of commercialising it , stripping it of content and quality .
It is a neoliberal approach , to which we are opposed .
I endorsed the Schmitt report on university-business dialogue : a new partnership for the modernisation of Europe 's universities .
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , who is , unfortunately , no longer a Member of the European Parliament .
I warmly congratulate Mr Schmitt on his election to the Hungarian Parliament and on his being elected speaker .
I wish him all the best .
The EU currently finds itself in a very schizophrenic situation .
On the one hand , there is a clear demand for universities to train practically oriented professional workers on undergraduate courses .
On the other hand , people who really understand technical education know that the first three years of proper study at university should provide students with the theoretical foundation for further successful studies .
This is the root of all the misunderstanding .
A forum of universities and businesses , whatever format it takes , will always concentrate in particular on ' practically useful ' graduates .
However , the real bearers of fundamental research and important innovation are mainly graduates of engineering , master 's and doctoral studies .
If they are to achieve important results in their fields , of course , these graduates must acquire a proper grounding in the most important technical disciplines in the first three years of their studies .
It is hard to imagine that they could get by on secondary school mathematics and a fleeting knowledge of the basic technical sciences , supplemented with an examination in simple and double-entry bookkeeping and a practical knowledge of preparing projects for an application to a grant agency .
Responsible university lecturers advocate a view that does not vary greatly from my own , despite all the various declarations , forums , communications and new partnerships .
For future discussions , I therefore recommend drawing a clear distinction between university education according to the Bologna Declaration and ' traditional ' university education .
The new , additional forms of so-called lifelong learning are , of course , also desirable .
University-business dialogue is essential for the high-quality training to which the EU 's young people aspire .
Cooperation between the education sector and business at all levels is crucial for bridging the gap between the supply logic of the education sector and the demand logic of the world of employment .
Partnerships between education and training institutions and companies are essential in order to enhance learners ' employability , improve entrepreneurial potential , and facilitate familiarity with the world of work .
That is why I voted as I did .
In its communication , the Commission refers to universities and colleges being given real autonomy .
This kind of autonomy should go hand-in-hand with financial autonomy and this is unrealistic during the period of austerity which lies ahead of us .
There are many examples of very fruitful cooperation between educational institutions and business .
The need for increased dialogue in the context of the Bologna Process is not worded clearly enough and , for this reason , I have abstained .
Probably no EU Member State would doubt that cooperation between education and business is essential .
Given that the crisis has highlighted not only problems of unemployment , but the importance of education that meets the demands of the market , I am pleased that by approving this document , the European Parliament is striving to initiate dialogue between the academic and business world .
This should be viewed as something long-term , right from the beginning of studies in universities : various exchange programmes , the promotion of internships in companies , perhaps even consultations between universities and companies when devising curricula .
If future employers integrate into the education system right from the beginning , there is a greater chance that we will prepare specialists who can better meet the needs of employers in the labour market .
I voted in favour of European Parliament resolution No on university-business dialogue : a new partnership for the modernisation of Europe 's universities ( 2009 / 2099 ( INI ) ) , because the dynamics of today 's labour market , economic development and change to development priorities require cooperation at many levels .
Higher education throughout Europe faces a huge challenge .
It has to keep up with a dynamically developing world and changing expectations of the market with respect to new employees .
Today , the fact that opportunities in education and the level of education do not match market expectations is a very important problem .
Preservation of this system , which is full of inequalities , is a mistake we cannot accept .
For just this reason , the changes we should introduce must concern the whole field of education and the way young people perform in the labour market .
As a former president of the Students ' Parliament of the Republic of Poland , a statutory institution which represents all students in Poland , I often meet people who have just begun or are just ending university .
Awareness of the labour market and its requirements is very low , and the level of education is equally unsatisfactory .
In political bodies as well as student bodies , a common view is that what is important is how many practical and work experience placements people have completed , how many subjects they have studied or how many languages they can speak .
However , the market needs quality , not quantity .
Therefore , it is essential that we take action to improve cooperation between universities , the academic world and business .
I voted for the Schmitt report to encourage cooperation between universities and companies .
Nowadays , universities must engage in closer cooperation with the business world in order to provide a suitable response to the requirements of the labour market , especially in a globalised economy .
In this respect , dialogue and cooperation between universities and companies should be based on reciprocity , trust and respect .
This objective could be achieved by introducing a system of knowledge vouchers , similar to that used in several Member States at the moment , which will enable SMEs in particular to improve their research capacity without compromising the universities ' independence , autonomy and public nature .
Both universities and companies can benefit from jointly developing multi-disciplinary , interdisciplinary and entrepreneurial skills , as well as from the flexible adaptation of study areas , profiles and specialities to the needs of the economy and those of small and medium-sized businesses .
I voted for the report on the university-business dialogue : a new partnership for the modernisation of European universities .
The EU needs to establish closer links and partnerships between universities and the business sector in order to develop a society based on knowledge and applied research and improve graduates ' integration into the labour market .
Unfortunately , discrepancies are being noted increasingly more often between graduates ' skills and the qualifications required on the labour market .
I encourage the Commission and Member States to draw up medium- and long-term forecasts for the skills required in order to correlate study programmes with economic development .
Furthermore , I wish to draw attention to the need to increase the number of jobs , which is a priority for the EU , especially during the current recession .
We encourage the Commission to promote using the resources and instruments available to it the development of an entrepreneurial culture by simplifying procedures and cutting red tape in order to boost exchanges between universities and businesses .
Finally , I wish to stress the importance of lifelong learning , particularly through distance learning courses specially adapted to the new technologies and beneficial in particular to the over-45s , who are more vulnerable and exposed to social exclusion .
The European Union protects its citizens .
Apart from European regulations on dangerous products which people are trying to bring on to the internal market , apart from joint measures taken against terrorism , apart from joint initiatives to guarantee peace in Europe , the European Union is involved in the dismantling of nuclear power plants constructed during the Soviet era which might put our health in danger at any time .
Twenty-four years after the horrendous accident in Chernobyl , I am pleased to have contributed towards security on our continent by voting in favour of this report .
It is , in fact , vital that the measures taken in Bulgaria under the Kozloduy Programme continue in the period from 2010 to 2013 .
in writing . - UKIP regards the safety of nuclear power generation as being of great importance , but perceives the EU 's assistance to Bulgaria , ostensibly for this purpose , as being motivated by political considerations ( preventing the reprocessing of fissile material , conveniently close to Bulgaria , in neighbouring Russia ) and doctrinaire ones ( the imposition of unrealistic wind-power policies ) as well as by a desire to fund local conservation projects , which are not relevant to the remit of decommissioning .
Consequently , UKIP members have voted against the extra funding asked for in this report .
The rules in force in Central and Eastern European countries regarding nuclear power and radioactive waste prior to accession were less demanding than the rules applicable to the EU at the time .
The EU 's intervention and financial assistance were therefore necessary , with the aim of increasing the level of protection of human health and the environment .
The proposal on which we are voting fits into this framework .
The proposal for a regulation presented by the Commission is intended to provide financial assistance for the decommissioning of Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Plant in Bulgaria and to ensure that the resultant radioactive materials are dealt with .
According to the rapporteur , without EU assistance , safety may be compromised insofar as Type WWER 440 / 230 reactors have serious design faults which it would not be possible to overcome .
The protection and promotion of human and environmental health are priority objectives in European development policy .
Given this , I believe it is absolutely vital for the EU to safeguard sufficient financial and technical resources for decommissioning Units 1 to 4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Plant in Bulgaria , as advocated by Parliament in this resolution .
In so doing , Europe is closing off a major producer of high radioactive emissions and eliminating the risk of serious accidents .
Alongside the safety conditions for decommissioning operations , it is crucial that the European Community assume an active role in helping Bulgaria to overcome the negative effects that the decommissioning will have on economic competitiveness , energy sustainability and the state of the labour market .
In this context , the strategy for EU intervention must ensure support to encourage the creation of new jobs and sustainable industry in the areas affected by the decommissioning .
in writing . - The Parliament today approved EUR 300 million to further assist the decommissioning of the Kozloduy 1-4 nuclear reactors .
I do support this as further assistance will be necessary to ensure the safe decommissioning of the reactors .
Parliament , however , rejected financing by these funds for polluting lignite power plants .
Also , the proposal to use part of the funds to help Bulgaria find a solution for the final storage of nuclear waste was rejected .
This led me to vote against the amended proposal .
However , I abstained on the legislative resolution to allow for decommissioning funding by the EU .
We can only be delighted by any move towards the decommissioning of a nuclear power plant and the implementation of research programmes for renewable energies and nuclear waste .
This is a step towards the gradual phasing-out of nuclear power , which we advocate .
However , I wish to stress that I am baffled by the insistence on the ' final disposal ' of nuclear waste .
This method cannot provide a long-term solution , given the risks it poses to our ecosystem .
I am also concerned by the lack of guarantees regarding the allocation of EU financial assistance aimed at facilitating the decommissioning process .
How can we be sure that the EUR 300 million will not be partly used to finance the new Belene nuclear power plant in Bulgaria ?
Has Commissioner Oettinger not already committed himself to financing that project ?
I am voting in favour of this report in the hope of finally witnessing the decommissioning of the Kozloduy reactors .
The accession of Central and Eastern European countries to the EU and their use of nuclear energy have led to the need to provide financial assistance to these countries so that they can effectively deal with radioactive waste and can improve protection of human health and the environment .
The financial assistance adopted here is , therefore , within this framework .
That is why I voted as I did .
In its accession agreement , Bulgaria , like Slovakia and Lithuania , agreed to decommission part of its nuclear energy production .
Financial assistance was provided until 2009 for the permanent decommissioning of the nuclear energy plant at Kozloduy , but a request was made , as was done with the other Member States , for this to be extended until 2013 .
To this end , it will receive approximately EUR 860 million in assistance .
However , the complete decommissioning process takes a long time since it is not enough simply to disconnect the power plant completely from the grid .
In such cases , where there is a desire to shut a nuclear plant down earlier than planned , provision must be made for a replacement energy supply .
Bulgaria did not destroy its energy supply , but it affects neighbouring countries , since they stop receiving electricity .
The closure of four reactors means a loss of 1 700 MW of energy for Bulgaria .
The Bulgarian Government is unable , without the financial help of the European Union , to dispose safely of the spent fuel , part of which was , in any case , disposed of somewhere outside the EU Member States .
I am also aware of the fact that the Bulgarian Government does not have reserves to draw on in the event of permanent decommissioning and , therefore , we must provide assistance .
We have already invested a great deal of money in the permanent closure of nuclear power plants , but let us just consider whether it would not be more worthwhile if , instead of shutting down nuclear plants , we modernised them .
I am not thinking specifically of Kozloduy here .
We need to support the improvement of the safety norms in Central and Eastern European countries , since it is on account of their low level that nuclear power plants need to be shut down .
As long as there is no satisfactory solution to the problem of the final disposal of radioactive waste , it is hardly surprising that the candidate countries do not know which alternative they should choose .
We must ensure that we do not provide financial aid to increase the protection for people and the environment and then find that the fuel elements are sold and possibly used for military purposes .
Of course , it is in the security and environmental interests of the whole of Europe to find a final disposal solution .
However , the resale of atomic waste must be stopped .
When we have reached the point where the decommissioning of two reactor units costs EUR 1.78 billion , it is clear that the fairytale of cheap , climate-friendly nuclear power is over .
This report highlights some of the problems involved with nuclear power and the decommissioning of nuclear reactors , which is why I have voted in favour of it .
In keeping with the commitments assumed through the EU accession treaty , Bulgaria must close Units 1-4 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , which the EU granted financial assistance for up until 2009 .
I voted for this report to support Bulgaria 's action to obtain an additional EUR 300 million in funding up to 2013 in order to complete the decommissioning of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , clean up the site and manage all the resulting waste in a sustainable manner in conditions which will not cause any harm to people 's health and the environment .
Furthermore , I support the Commission 's request to monitor and audit the implementation of all the projects which will be run using this grant : research / innovation aimed at introducing technologies based on renewable energy sources in order to meet the requirement to realise a further reduction of 18 000 kt CO2-eq produced from decommissioning .
Particular attention must be focused on retraining the workforce to prevent unemployment from rising even higher and on the development of local communities , especially during the current crisis .
All these processes must be carried out in a manner which is completely transparent to citizens , in compliance with the provisions of all the multilateral environmental agreements which Bulgaria is party to ( Aarhus , Espoo , etc . ) .
in writing . - As expected , we the Greens lost our last chance to amend the Harms report during the plenary vote on Community financial assistance with respect to the decommissioning of four units of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant in Bulgaria .
Today , the EP agreed to give EUR 300 million ( until 2013 ) to Bulgaria for their current programme to decommission 4 nuclear units in Kozloduy .
This positive signal towards Bulgaria was the reason why the rapporteur and the Greens / EFA abstained on the legislative proposal .
Thanks to the Greens , the EP has finally recognised that Bulgaria has hardly any policy regarding the final disposal of nuclear waste .
However , the Bulgarian government - with the help of the EPP and S & D - managed to eliminate any provision that would support any real progress on the issue of final disposal .
Currently , the main hazards to humans and the environment are displaced to Russia , where most irradiated fuel elements are exported .
The EP has nevertheless managed to secure more public participation , transparency , auditing and reporting provisions compared to the original Commission proposal .
We will see now whether any of these will be incorporated by the Council , which has the final say since the EP is only consulted on nuclear related issues .
Ladies and gentlemen , as with Bulgaria 's Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant , the decommissioning of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant in Lithuania was one of the conditions for accession to the European Union .
The decommissioning of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant in 2009 has had a severe impact on Lithuania .
After Lithuania regained independence in 1991 , Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant contributed a lot to our economy and provided more than 70 % of our country 's energy consumption .
Due to decommissioning , we were forced to relinquish our status as an energy exporter and become an importer of a broad spectrum of energy .
Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant was a cheap source of energy for industry and consumers and was also a source of income thanks to exports .
Like the decommissioning of Kozloduy , the disappearance of Ignalina will result in the loss of business and jobs for the local economy .
Full financial support from the EU for Kozloduy and Ignalina is important in order to correct some of the economic and social consequences experienced with the decommissioning of the nuclear power plants .
The financial turmoil of recent years has shaken Lithuania and many EU Member States , and has put on hold hopes of building new advanced nuclear power plants in the near future .
However , it would be foolish on our part to give up nuclear power plants entirely .
Nuclear technology is by no means a panacea for our energy security and natural disasters , but the use of efficient and safe nuclear energy could contribute to overcoming long-term strategic challenges .
The Structural Funds put in place in our regions need to interlock better with European loans for research and innovation . The van Nistelrooij report contains useful recommendations on improving the use of all of these loans .
There is undeniable potential here for financing and growth for our territories .
Similarly , greater synergy between the various financial instruments can only be beneficial at a time when we need to kick-start economic activity .
Finally , these funds should all be involved in the implementation of the EU 2020 strategy .
Having noted the quality of the report , I supported it with my vote .
Innovation can be most effectively addressed at regional level by the proximity of entities such as universities , public research organisations or industry , promoting partnerships in the field of knowledge transfer , and the exchange of best practice between regions .
The cohesion policy is a fundamental pillar of the European integration process and one of the EU 's most successful policies , encouraging convergence between increasingly diverse regions , and stimulating economic growth and the creation of jobs .
Promoting and applying successful models in the knowledge triangle is vital , as is ensuring the sustainable development of regional strategic research frameworks for innovation , in conjunction with businesses , research centres , universities and public authorities .
I would like to highlight the potential of regional ' clusters ' of those leading the way in knowledge-based mobilisation of the capacity of regional competition , and the inclusion of the development of ' clusters ' in both the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme and the 7th framework programme .
I would also like to draw attention to the importance of the knowledge and innovation communities created within the framework of the European Transparency Initiative , which link the main regional knowledge-based ' clusters ' within Europe .
I call upon the exchange of knowledge in regional ' clusters ' to be promoted through the structural funds , since these ' clusters ' represent a great opportunity , particularly for disadvantaged regions .
I believe it is appropriate to analyse the way in which the indicative framework of the Community Strategic Guidelines 2007-2013 and , in particular , Guideline 1.2 on Improving Knowledge and Innovation for Growth , was followed by the Member States and Regions in their National Strategic Reference Frameworks ( NSRFs ) and Operational Programmes .
Such analysis enables us to have a more specific view of what has been done and what challenges remain to be overcome , in an area that is increasingly on the agenda .
At times of crisis , the avoidance of waste and duplications is not just beneficial but urgently required : I believe that it is important to carry out a thorough assessment of how cohesion , research and innovation policies are linked up with their instruments ( Structural Funds , Seventh Framework Programme for RTD and Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ) to make them more efficient and productive .
Research and innovation are priority areas and are absolutely crucial for competitiveness and the success of the European economy in the current global climate of crisis , intense competition and increased efforts to address new challenges such as climate change and territorial cohesion .
This crisis exacerbates the risk of regional imbalances and the worsening of economic and social conditions in the most disadvantaged regions .
In the light of this , I support this resolution , which stresses the urgent need to achieve greater efficiency , flexibility and simplification of access to structural funds , so as to ensure quick access to support and financing mechanisms for new business projects and for the revitalisation of small and medium-sized businesses .
This is a strategy that is extremely pertinent and important for the territorial cohesion of the EU , as it simultaneously ensures that this crisis becomes an opportunity to capitalise on strengths and improve efficiency in the profitability of resources .
I voted for this report as research , development and innovation are key elements which can help the European Union to emerge more quickly and stronger from the current economic crisis , while also achieving the proposed economic development objectives .
A consistent policy is required to do this , which is well targeted and funded appropriately .
However , I think that consideration must be given to the regions ' varying social and economic features .
Limits need to be accepted and objectives set according to the actual situation , while requirements need to be identified by consulting all local , regional and national agencies .
Innovations are important , but they cannot be dictated from above , as the Europe 2020 strategy attempts to do .
However , they can be supported by means of subsidy programmes .
It makes little sense for applicants for subsidies to be faced with a jungle of different funding institutions and regulations because of the lack of coordination between the EU and the Member States .
Every step which we take towards simplification is a good thing , provided that it does not open up opportunities for abuse .
The approaches described in the report seem to me to be good and I have voted in favour of them .
Cohesion policy is an essential pillar in the process of European integration and one of the most successful EU policies , facilitating convergence between regions , as well as stimulating growth and employment using financing from the structural funds . In the current period of 2007-2013 , all Member States have devoted a significant amount of their total financial allocations to innovation and development activities .
I believe that cohesion policy is ready to create synergies with research and innovation policies regarding capacity building , networking and knowledge transfer .
Better use of funds will mean better research , knowledge and innovation capacity in the various regions , with the strengthening of the territorial aspect of partnerships for the design and delivery of public policies .
This report is an initiative that I support because I think that it is essential for synergies to be implemented between the structural funds devoted to research and innovation and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development , with a view to greater efficiency in achieving the goal of the knowledge society .
I voted in favour of the resolution , as adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament .
The long-term sustainability of our public finances is fundamental today to the credibility of European economic and fiscal policy .
The Greek crisis has proven that .
Faced with the markets and credit rating agencies , the public powers need to demonstrate that they are responsible .
This is also a necessity imposed by the demographic reality of today and the coming years .
I therefore firmly rejected the positions advocated by the rapporteur , Mr Liem Hoang Ngoc , calling for the public deficit policy to be maintained .
We must assume today that the public finances of numerous Member States are not sustainable and have the courage to remedy that .
Our boat is taking on water .
Even if it is not yet sinking , it is high time we started bailing .
During the vote on Thursday 20 May on the report by the socialist MEP , Liem Hoang Ngoc , on the long-term sustainability of public finances , the UMP and Modem groups in the European Parliament voted enthusiastically for a text which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe had amended line by line in order to turn it into a neoliberal manifesto .
I voted against this text , which is an insult to the citizens of Europe .
The UMP and Modem are raising the spectre of unsustainable deficits to justify unprecedented austerity measures throughout Europe from 2011 .
They propose transforming the Stability Pact into a Social Regression Pact .
In this text , the right goes as far as rejecting the creation of a European public credit rating agency , while the private agencies are beating the drum and leading speculative attacks against the States in the euro area .
However , it forgets that the rise in deficits is first and foremost the result of the crisis , the bank bailout packages and the failure of neoliberal policies .
Today , the right is presenting the invoice to the citizens .
The huge deficits and debts facing many Member States of the EU is indeed an important problem , having created the financial crisis which we are experiencing and which we all need to manage .
However , the causes of these financial aberrations are not the causes identified by the rapporteur .
State budgets have been derailed because : a ) in every crisis , state spending ( social spending , spending for growth ) increases , b ) the merchant banks were saved and c ) tax competition was intensified , with a clear reduction in corporation tax over the last twenty years .
Consequently , our analysis of the facts is completely different from the analysis made by the rapporteur , who believes that the governments are responsible for the financial derailments .
Last year , the budget deficit and public debt in the euro area amounted to 6.3 % and 78.7 % respectively of GDP , which was a much higher level than that set in the Growth and Stability Pact .
The Growth and Stability Pact 's limitations have been highlighted in the current crisis , as it has not been an adequate instrument for harmonising national economies .
Consequently , I support a review of the Pact and the search for alternative mechanisms for restoring the convergence of the economies within the EU , as well as the setting up of a European public credit-rating agency and closer coordination of Member States ' budgetary and monetary policies .
In fact , I regard the decision made last week by the European Central Bank to purchase bonds issued by the governments in the euro area as a positive step .
I decided to vote against the final report on the long-term sustainability of public finances as these aspects which I consider as being fundamental to ensuring the single European market 's stability and to maintaining a modern welfare state in Europe have been removed from the report .
In the times that we are currently experiencing , in which many countries are facing serious difficulties with their public finances , it is essential to adopt political measures that lead to economic and social stability , but especially those that stimulate growth .
As well as the deficit , the level of public debt must be analysed and best practices regarding this issue adopted , in such a way as to make a more stable situation possible and to prevent the recurrence of the same errors in the future .
I also consider it essential to adopt reasonable criteria for the concept of recovering economy , since the Member States ' situations are different .
Finally , I would stress the need for a competitive tax policy , not just for the EU , but also with regard to third-country investments .
As the current crisis has shown , with its profound impact on economic development , the quality of life of citizens and social stability , the sustainability of public finances is a prerequisite for economic recovery and the reliability of development .
The inadequacy of the revision to the Stability and Growth Pact has also become clear .
I would therefore like to reiterate the need to strengthen the mechanisms of EU institutions , with a view to greater integration and territorial cohesion , so as to ensure greater capacity for intervention and protection in order to counter risks and deviation from common policy .
I would also like to highlight the social concerns stressed in this report , which warns of the wide disparity between incomes of members of the public .
This is a situation which undermines productivity and economic competitiveness .
I agree , therefore , with the need to encourage Member States to introduce appropriate reforms in order to address these imbalances .
Tax fairness and efficient government public spending are essential to the process of economic recovery and social cohesion .
Reducing poverty , ensuring social cohesion and stimulating economic growth and productivity are indisputable priorities in the EU , and they will certainly be helped by a gradual reduction of the tax burden on jobs and on small and medium-sized enterprises .
I agree with the report : current public debt and deficit levels will be difficult for future generations to bear , but are also a major problem today .
However , I disagree with the proposed solutions .
I do not believe that a report which omits the reason for the recent explosion of this debt and deficit can be taken seriously .
It should be noted instead that it is the fact that the private debts of banks and the financial sector have been taken on by Member States , and therefore by the citizens and taxpayers of Europe , which has caused these deficits to increase to such an extent .
We must hammer home the fact that the EU and the Eurogroup are now only taking action in order to please those markets that you believe to be rational and efficient , but which panic when the deficit becomes too great , and panic once again because they fear that the measures taken to reduce it may hinder a semblance of economic recovery .
They have gorged themselves by charging a high price for a risk taken on the Greek debt that you have just done away with by adopting the latest measures .
They have won on all fronts , increasing their own profits even further .
Never mind the consequences for the real economy and the people .
I was forced to vote against the report by my colleague , Liem Hoang Ngoc , which the European right and liberals completed in a way which deprived it of its substance , simply defending dogmatic adherence to the Stability Pact and hence to austerity policies .
Budgetary policy is not an end in itself ; it is a tool which responds to political objectives .
The priority should not be austerity , otherwise we shall nip in the bud what little growth is available ; what we need is a philosophy of employment growth that we need to defend .
For this , the EU needs to be given the resources to act , which means giving ourselves tools to steer the economy over and above those currently available to us under the Stability Pact , which are inadequate .
This document is proof of the desire to create a system of redistribution that caters for society as a whole .
Its positive proposals relate to migration policies .
It rejects the ' indiscriminate cuts ' that have been made in public investments in the name of the crisis .
After that , however , an inverse logic is introduced in specific proposals .
Raising the retirement age ; sanctioning a Stability and Growth Pact as a solution to the crisis even though it is clearly one of the causes ; congratulating the European Central Bank for rescuing the banking sector ; and promoting a social economy based on a sustainable , competitive market - so many neoliberal dogmas are repeated throughout the text .
The crisis will make no difference : Europe is blinded by its dogmatism and deaf to its citizens ' demands .
I am voting against this report .
Despite the fact that the global economic and financial crisis is spilling over onto the sustainability of national budgets to a worrying degree , the report under consideration by this House contains passages that prevent me from voting in favour .
First of all , paragraph 59 states that we can help end the crisis by raising employment levels and proposes the adoption of policies in favour of immigration from outside the EU , even leading to the award of citizenship .
On the one hand , the text unduly confuses the economic issue with that of migration policy , while disregarding , in particular , the already high unemployment rate .
On the other hand , I do not think that Europe should promote the award of citizenship .
Furthermore , some of the proposed amendments seek the creation of a tax on financial transactions and a European rating agency .
We certainly cannot achieve better financial market regulation by introducing a new tax .
Lastly , with regard to the creation of a public rating agency , the amendment tabled does not hit the mark , since the best practical way to safeguard investors ' trust is by guaranteeing the impartiality and independence of rating agencies , and not by subjecting them to political influence .
in writing . - I deeply regret that the right wing has finally ' kidnapped ' this report on public finances and has completely changed the main aim of it , making it a very neoliberal report .
I applaud the decision of the rapporteur , Hoang Ngoc , to withdraw his name from it .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is simply unacceptable that this report has been adopted by the majority Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament ; that is why , in line with our rapporteur Mr Hoang Ngoc , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has voted against it .
How can anyone want to make our fellow citizens pay for a crisis for which the banks and speculators are largely responsible ?
The measures advocated by the PPE Group and the ALDE Group , namely the swift consolidation of public finances , cuts in public spending , particularly pensions and health care , and the unconditional implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact , will have disastrous long-term consequences on our societies We are heading straight for disaster if we do not establish a tax on financial transactions , as Mr Hoang Ngoc has proposed , and if we do not launch viable recovery measures .
Let us not bring the citizens of Europe to their knees .
The main purpose of this report was to analyse the long-term sustainability of the European Union 's public finances with a view to its economic recovery .
The debate on this in plenary could not have come up at a more opportune time , given the unprecedented economic and financial understanding reached last week by European leaders .
On the one hand , the package of measures adopted - specifically the unblocking of aid for Greece , the accelerated restructuring of Member States ' public finances , and the creation of a financial stabilisation mechanism - demonstrate strong solidarity .
However , they make a period of sacrifice foreseeable , which will affect all Europeans .
These sacrifices must be distributed in a fair and balanced way .
This is a time for brave decisions at national level , with a long-term view and without cutting any corners .
The public books are balanced by cutting spending and by increasing income , or by both at the same time .
At a time of economic recession , we have no alternative but to substantially decrease public spending by cutting waste and optimising the state 's operations .
Following several amendments , the final content of this motion for a resolution focuses on some of these challenges ; that is why I voted for it .
Ladies and gentlemen , in 2009 , Lithuania and some of our neighbouring EU Member States almost hit rock bottom .
Maybe vultures are not circling above our heads , but we still do not feel safe : Lithuania 's GDP fell by 4.1 % from quarter to quarter and in the first quarter of 2010 .
Most Lithuanians understand that the need for painful victims and severe measures will not disappear overnight .
The long-term sustainability of public finances is essential to achieve stability and growth .
The solution is to reduce the budget deficit .
In the report , it is accurately observed that high indebtedness and deficit levels are threatening sustainability and could have a disastrous impact on employment , public health care and pensions .
The decision we have to make is not one to be taken lightly - the increasing government deficit is becoming a huge burden for future generations .
Financial stability is important for the recovery of the Lithuanian and European economies .
Therefore , I agree with the measures debated this week , for example , proposals on the European Systemic Risk Board and the European System of Financial Supervisors .
Now more than ever , we need smooth coordination of markets and hedge funds and better supervision .
We also have to continue to seriously implement our international commitments .
Most importantly , it is essential to regain the public 's trust and restore the economic self-esteem of each of our countries .
We can achieve this by ensuring the long-term sustainability of public finances , talking straight and being transparent in everything we do .
The report on the contribution of the cohesion policy to the achievement of the Lisbon and Europe 2020 objectives is fundamental , in that it illustrates the extent to which this policy may be instrumental to the future of the Union .
The Structural Funds , which guarantee the cohesion of European territories and finance innovation , help to bring about initiatives which , without any doubt , generate growth in the regions .
I sincerely believe that the cohesion policy will be a vital instrument in achieving the Europe 2020 objectives , which is why I voted for this report .
The difficulties that have always been highlighted by the political , social and economic diversity of Europe 's heritage - as part of a large , but still disparate territory - have resulted , since the eighties , in the development of the cohesion policy .
Cyclically , passing from one programming period to the next , Europe has been faced with the need to update its cohesion objectives .
It has done so by revamping both the means , for which the Structural Funds have been , are , and will continue to be the essential financial basis of any EU policy which seeks to increase internal cohesion , and the ends , with which the various objectives and individual actions have constantly been reoriented in line with the requirements of the time .
I am in favour of Mr Cortés Lastra 's own-initiative report : the EU 2020 strategy must be included among the objectives of the cohesion policy for the period 2007-2013 , supported by the objective of territorial cohesion and by the pragmatic approach of sharing the objectives at local level .
Only in this way will we avoid the risk that the EU 2020 strategy will be reduced to one where the eurocracy blows its own trumpets , as was the case with the Lisbon Strategy .
The Structural Funds play a vital role in delivering the EU 2020 strategy , insofar as they constitute a powerful instrument for the economic development of all of Europe 's regions .
Mr Cortes Lastra 's report rightly points out that the Lisbon Strategy only achieved concrete results when it was linked to the cohesion policy .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations on the improvements that need to be made to the governance system in the EU 2020 strategy compared to the Lisbon Strategy .
It is vital to establish closer links between local and regional authorities and civil society stakeholders within the framework of multi-level governance .
I would join the rapporteur in stressing the importance of a simplified approach to the use of Structural Funds in the future regulatory framework .
After all , simplicity is one of the keys to efficiency .
I am completely in favour of the proposals put forward in this report , seeking inclusion in the cohesion policy in order to pursue the objectives set out for the 2020 strategy .
The new Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the principle of economic , social and territorial cohesion , and without this solidarity clause , the EU itself does not make sense !
The ultimate objective of the cohesion policy is reducing disparities between the levels of economic development of the various regions and tackling the structural backwardness of the most disadvantaged and outermost regions .
In the approach to the 2020 strategy , which is engaged in promoting growth , competitiveness and employment , it is important to note that the cohesion policy can be an important instrument for successfully achieving the goals that the strategy sets out .
The ultimate objective of the cohesion policy is reducing disparities between the levels of economic development of the various regions , targeting resources specifically for growth and employment .
The 2020 strategy presents significant and ambitious challenges for Europe in five areas that are seen as strategic : ( i ) employment ; ( ii ) innovation and research ; ( iii ) climate change and energy ; ( iv ) education , and ( v ) combating poverty .
As I have said , this is an ambitious and daring strategy .
I agree with the rapporteur that it must be conceived so that it is in harmony with future cohesion policy , and that the 2020 strategy must also be implemented at regional and local level , something that failed to happen with the Lisbon Strategy .
This is crucial for economic development and growth in the different regions .
As I come from a region of Portugal whose interests and wishes are often passed over in the interests of centralised power , as I have already publicly stated , I believe that implementing the 2020 strategy objectives at regional level may be of greater benefit to more balanced regional development .
In the European development project , there is much progress to be made on territorial cohesion , which is crucial in combating poverty and social exclusion , promoting employment and sustainable development , and in social cohesion .
I have no doubt that small and medium-sized enterprises have a crucial role in the success of building Europe .
Therefore , I support the recommendations made in this report , such as the need to simplify the rules for accessing and managing the allocation of the available funds in order to encourage their use and effective implementation , covering the entire EU territory .
The regions implement more than a third of public investments in the EU , and the spending of the structural funds is increasingly concentrated on objectives related to growth and employment .
I believe that it is essential for the EU to take immediate steps and concrete measures to ' meet the special needs of regions characterised by natural or demographic handicaps of a serious and permanent nature , such as coastal regions , islands , mountain regions , cross-border and outermost regions ' .
I would also like to reiterate that ' education and training are the fundamental preconditions for the development of the EU and can make it more competitive in the face of global challenges ' .
The rapporteur finds it regrettable that the 2020 strategy has not duly incorporated an assessment of the Lisbon Strategy , and we share that opinion .
The stated objectives of the Lisbon Strategy - economic growth , employment and social cohesion - have not been met ; on the contrary , the situation in these areas has become worse .
As we have been saying , this situation is a result of the Lisbon Strategy 's objectives , and what objectives they were too !
Very specifically : liberalisations , privatisations , and making employment laws less regulated and more flexible .
These options , instruments and objectives have now been taken up again by the 2020 strategy .
In the same vein , the rapporteur argues for the completion of the ' free , open and functional Internal Market ' .
Well , it has been this very ' free , open and functional Internal Market ' that has led to the most poverty and social exclusion in the EU , and undermined its territorial cohesion .
We do not , therefore , accept the alignment of the cohesion policy with the 2020 strategy , for the sake of its real objective : reducing disparities in the development levels of the various regions , and instituting true economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The main objective of cohesion policy is to strive for a uniform degree of development across the regions of the EU .
Thanks to the multiannual programmes and strategies which have been put in place as part of that policy , individual regions and , in particular , the poorest ones , have the opportunity for sustained economic growth , increased competitiveness and the creation of jobs .
Over half of all investments in the public sector are being made at regional level , so local authorities are becoming the main participants in the realisation of the current Lisbon Strategy , and in the future of the EU 2020 strategy .
We should give full support to the realisation of projects which come under cohesion policy , remembering that their greatest beneficiaries will most often be rural areas , and the author 's promotion of the partnership approach makes it possible to inform the citizens efficiently about the objectives and results of projects which have been undertaken .
It seems that we are providing funding for disadvantaged areas which then ends up being spent in relatively prosperous regions .
There are problems with subsidy policy throughout the EU .
On the one hand , money is invested in regenerating villages to prevent rural communities from dying out and , on the other , these efforts are counteracted by regulations on privatisation and deregulation .
It is no use having a vibrant village centre if the village is almost cut off from the public transport network and the post office has been closed down .
The report does not focus in enough detail on the problems of cohesion policy and , therefore , I have voted against it .
This resolution is an important document as it sets out the best course for the association which is needed between the cohesion policy and the EU 2020 strategy .
At a time when there is much thought about the European cohesion policy after 2013 , it is indeed important to present it as an indispensable tool of compliance with the EU 2020 strategy , reiterating the statement that cohesion policies are essential for enforcing the original plan of EU integration .
The cohesion policy has been important in creating a better balance between European regions , and is now seen as crucial for overcoming the current financial crisis that the EU is experiencing by strengthening competitiveness and local potential .
At a time when the EU budget is not expected to increase and when there is pressure on the cohesion policy budget ( approximately 45 % of the EU budget ) , we believe that a good link between the objectives of the cohesion policy and those of the EU 2020 strategy are essential for strengthening cohesion and simultaneously contributing to a positive response from all regions and members of the public to the challenges facing the EU .
in writing . - It is a pity our alternative resolution on cohesion policy and EU2020 was rejected .
We , the Greens / EFA , have thus decided to abstain in the final vote on the Cortés Lastra resolution .
The rapporteur , Mr Cortés Lastra , originally produced a very balanced report on the relationship between cohesion policy and the Europe 2020 strategy .
Its aim was to correct the extensive earmarking of cohesion policy carried out by the first Barroso Commission .
It justifiably asked the question as to whether cohesion policy is a tool of the Lisbon Strategy and the new Europe 2020 strategy or whether it has independent significance and an independent value .
The rapporteur had achieved a balance between these two aspects .
We should be grateful to him for having promoted the independence of cohesion policy .
We supported his approach .
Unfortunately , the amendments , which were largely tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , heavily diluted the original intention of the report .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance very much regret that .
For this reason , we submitted the report once again to plenary as an alternative resolution , largely in its original form .
Unfortunately , it did not receive a majority of the votes .
This was not surprising , given the vote in the committee .
However , our aim was to use this alternative resolution to make it clear that there was a minority view in Parliament which wanted to give the regions more rights to independent development than the earmarking model of the current structural fund period made possible .
The cohesion policy is essential to realising the 2020 strategy 's objectives : the promotion of education , training and research , the creation of jobs , and economic growth .
Following the Lisbon Strategy 's failures regarding the goal of cohesion , not least the lack of adequate consultation of the European Parliament and of participation by regional and local authorities , the report stresses the importance of the cohesion policy 's contribution to future strategic objectives .
It is , therefore , important to move towards a greater sense of ownership of the strategy 's objectives amongst local and regional authorities and entities .
The regions have a crucial role to play as the vehicle to reach economic and social actors , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises .
Given its horizontal approach , only through a strong and properly financed cohesion policy can development be fostered in the European Union , and the Union made more competitive in the face of global challenges .
The regional dimension of Europe must be strengthened with a strategy that takes into account the specificities of the various regions or groups thereof , such as the outermost regions .
For the above reasons , I consider the cohesion policy an essential instrument for realising the objectives of the 2020 strategy , so I voted for the report .
The Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) is a formidable project which requires strong political involvement on the part of the European Parliament .
I voted in favour of this report , because it contains the following three ideas which are very important : 1 ) the new institutional structure needs to be effective quickly , in order to make the UfM operational ; 2 ) adequate funding is vital if the UfM is to achieve its objectives and thus clarify the six major strategic projects ( de-pollution of the Mediterranean , transport , renewable energies , education , SMEs , civil protection ) ; 3 ) the success of the UfM depends on resolving regional conflicts in the Mediterranean basin .
The Union for the Mediterranean is an ambitious project with a number of undoubtedly positive aspects , in particular , as regards the future possibility of strengthening , by means of this political and economic partnership , instruments to control immigration and combat the flows of illegal immigrants which have affected the Mediterranean in recent years .
This is another reason why Europe can benefit from the prospect of a forum for dialogue with the Mediterranean countries , almost always transit countries for the majority of the illegal immigrants who reach the southern coasts of the continent .
Of course , the channel for dialogue which will be opened must not be interpreted as an instrument to facilitate the flows , but one for regulation and for combating illegality ; it will be down to economic trade , together with an overall pacification of the Middle East region - to which the UfM will have to endeavour to make an active contribution - to promote social and economic growth in the immigrants ' countries of origin .
Therefore , if the Union is built on solid political bases and has specific objectives , it will enable us to help , in their own countries , those people who today would wish to arrive en masse on southern European shores .
In the hope that greater importance is placed on migration at the forthcoming summits of the Union for the Mediterranean , I am voting in favour .
By voting in favour of the Peillon report , we have all acknowledged that the Mediterranean basin is an area of key importance , and that in a multipolar and interdependent world , large regional integrations , such as that of the Mediterranean , will be better positioned to cope with social , cultural , economic , environmental , demographic , political and security-related challenges .
The Mediterranean encompasses at once all of these challenges , which are crucial for the stability of the entire region , and which call for concerted , determined action .
At the forthcoming meeting in Barcelona , the Euro-Mediterranean Heads of State or Government will come together again to assess the progress made by the Union for the Mediterranean .
In my opinion , three political points should be considered at that time :
a ) the time taken to follow up on the creation of the institutional set-up , determined in Paris , and the failure to make the most of the parliamentary dimension offered by the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly ;
b ) the inadequacy of the financial resources and synergies employed ; while recognising the progress and significant , tangible commitments made by some of our countries , including Italy , the overall impact of the Union for the Mediterranean with regard to creating an area of economic prosperity remains weak ;
c ) the difficulty in decisively tackling issues such as peace , stability and security , an essential requirement in order to provide the Union for the Mediterranean with a political dimension and unity of purpose .
in writing . - We oppose the Union for the Mediterranean .
This would facilitate mass immigration from impoverished countries in North Africa .
It would also allow North African al-Qaeda operatives in these countries to more easily enter Europe and carry out terrorist attacks .
We also note the way the EU grants Morocco privileged economic status , despite that country 's violent occupation of Western Sahara and the plundering of its resources .
In order to be an effective lever in building peace and prosperity and in promoting human rights , cooperation between European countries and other Mediterranean countries needs to be based on the principles of equality and mutually beneficial cooperation for the people in the area .
It should help to resolve international and bilateral problems on the basis of the UN Founding Charter and international law , putting particular emphasis on the need for a fair and viable solution to Palestine , the Western Sahara and Cyprus .
Unfortunately , no mention is made of these in the report , just as no mention is made of the unacceptable conditions under which thousands of people travelling with no travel papers are held on islands and in towns of the Mediterranean , affecting the human dignity of us all .
In order for there to be real cooperation , the procedures for dialogue and understanding need to be strengthened and account needs to taken of the asymmetries in the area in all trade agreements , so as to safeguard equality between all the states .
This sort of cooperation should strengthen and promote social and cultural exchanges and help to shape common policies and actions to protect the environment and combat climate change .
The Swedish Conservatives have today voted against report on the Union for the Mediterranean .
This is because we cannot support the EU contribution to projects as part of a Union for the Mediterranean being allocated significantly increased resources in the EU 's new financial perspective for 2014-2020 .
It is very important that we have constructive cooperation with the countries around the Mediterranean based on the principles of equality of treatment , solidarity , dialogue and respect for each country 's dissimilarities and distinctive features .
Regional cooperation with the EU in the Union for the Mediterranean must not , as some powers would like to see , become a substitute for integration into the EU and membership of the European Union .
In addition , it is crucial for the EU to take responsibility and maintain its credibility , meaning that it must not promise money for various purposes without sustainable funding .
Following the Paris Declaration on 13 July 2008 , which created a new Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) , the previous Barcelona Process should have acknowledged a new impetus , as expressed in the Declaration : ' a renewal of efforts to transform the Mediterranean region into a space of peace , democracy , cooperation and prosperity ' .
However , for the European Union , 2009 was a year of major changes ( there were European elections for the President of the Commission , the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force , the struggle against the economic and financial crisis , etc . ) which have delayed the implementation of the UfM .
I believe that this report correctly identifies the next steps towards achieving the objectives that were outlined when the UfM was created .
I also look forward to the results of the second summit of Heads of State or Government , scheduled for 7 June in Barcelona this year .
The strengthening of the Union 's Mediterranean relations is essential , and I believe that only political dialogue and increased cooperation between the Union and the other Mediterranean countries will stimulate the creation of a space of freedom , justice , peace and sustainable and lasting prosperity .
in writing . - I supported this report on the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) .
Europe and the Mediterranean share many cross-border challenges which can be better addressed through a regional integration process , with effective institutions which can surmount the limits of bilateral cooperation .
Such challenges are all the more acute in a context of crisis , and it is in the EU 's interest to address the growing disparities between both regions , thereby contributing to a viable and secure future for the people of the Mediterranean .
The EU and the governments within the UfM must prioritise the setting up of its institutions and infuse them with a coherent political strategy which keeps at its core the promotion of democracy and the advancement of human rights , including social rights .
If these goals are to be meaningfully furthered , peace agreements between neighbours in the Middle East have to be reached .
This necessitates an end to Israel 's siege of Gaza and settlement policy , combined Palestinian commitment to non-violence and its State building programme along with mutual respect for the 1967 borders .
I will continue to oppose the upgrading of the EU-Israel association agreement until Israel comes into compliance with its human rights obligations .
I voted for the report on the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) because it advocates greater involvement of the European Parliament in this regional initiative .
If the summit that is to take place in June in Barcelona is to be a success after two difficult years trying to get it off the ground , it is essential that the European Parliament be able to contribute because the result is of enormous importance to the success of the UfM .
Any impartial observer would say that the Euro-Mediterranean partnership has not been making as much progress as would be desirable , and that there is still much to do before it really takes shape and acquires real and productive content .
Historically , the Mediterranean Sea united rather than divided .
The cultures that emerged on its shores constituted the nucleus of what was Western civilisation , and both sides contributed to forging identities with clear affinities .
Religious wars replaced the bridge that had been there with a chasm , but in a way , that bridge is still there .
I hope that the European Union , alongside its partners , will take real steps towards promoting and structuring a Euro-Mediterranean partnership capable of conquering fear , differences and mistrust , and surviving into the future without collapsing .
Both sides of a sea that was once a powerful civilisation 's lake have everything to gain from this development .
Given the precarious social and economic situation in southern countries , the deepening of relations with the countries of the Mediterranean is now all the more important .
In this regard , I believe that there is an urgent need to move forward in a concrete and effective way with consolidating the Union for the Mediterranean .
The strengthening of Euro-Mediterranean relations is becoming more pressing due to the impact that it will certainly have on consolidating a space of peace and cultural , economic , political and social development .
I would like to emphasise , however , the concerns arising from situations relating to women 's rights , gender equality and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation : areas where the strengthening of European influence may be a factor for positive change .
On the other hand , the enormous potential of renewable energy resources in the Mediterranean region is an example of the gains that the European Union could enjoy and make use of in order to achieve efficient energy policies , besides broadening the EU 's trade area to 800 million people .
We completely disagree with the guidelines established in this report , which essentially aim to increase the economic domination of the EU 's big companies over the southern part of the Mediterranean ; access to , and control of , natural resources , energy in particular ; the exploitation of labour power ; and the repression of immigrants .
It is noticeable that the majority in Parliament seem to live in an ivory tower , totally unaware of the consequences of so-called ' free trade ' ; they persist with these policies and so contribute to making the situation worse .
For example , in Portugal , more than 100 000 jobs are being lost in the textile sector because thousands of companies are going bust , which is , in turn , because of increased external competition .
That is why a break with this path of progressively liberalising international trade is needed .
This path has meant that the rights won by the workers and the sovereignty of the people have come under attack , natural resources and biodiversity have been appropriated by the big multinationals , the environment has been destroyed , unemployment has increased , millions of small farmers have been ruined , and food sovereignty and security have been put at risk .
We demand the establishment of equitable and fair economic relations that are at the service of the people and the countries in both regions .
I supported the report drafted by my French socialist colleague , Vincent Peillon , because the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) aims to promote the process of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation through specific strategic measures both for Europe as a whole and also for the Mediterranean zone .
In fact , regional integration is necessary for the promotion of peace , which is one of the main issues at stake in this cooperation , and it therefore needed to be strengthened .
I think that the UfM is an excellent instrument for intervening with a very firm hand in the conflicts which persist in this zone and even for providing solutions to them .
I hope that the next summit in Barcelona is a success , that the Member States really do re-launch the UfM and that , once the secretariat has been set up in Barcelona , a whole series of projects can take shape , in everyone 's interests .
This report certainly has the virtue of stressing the urgency of recognising two states , the Palestinian State and the State of Israel , living in peace and security , and of fighting for women 's rights and against discrimination based on sexual orientation .
However , its virtue ends there .
This text is essentially a pledge to current and potential private investors in the region , as evidenced by the numerous injunctions regarding the necessary protection and financial security of investments .
This text also endorses the Barcelona Process and the creation of a Europe-Mediterranean Free Trade Area that goes entirely against the regulatory objectives that the situation demands .
I am voting against this report .
I believe that the interests of European and Mediterranean citizens should always take precedence over those of the financiers .
The role of elected representatives is to strive for the common good .
It is unfortunate that those who drafted this text did not make that their priority .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Union for the Mediterranean is seen by some people in Europe as a prestige project initiated by a few political leaders .
However , I believe that the increase in cooperation between the countries on the shores of the Mediterranean is very much a positive thing .
Particularly with regard to the increasing influx of migrants from Africa , it is essential for these states to coordinate the measures which they are taking in response .
The structures of the Union for the Mediterranean provide the ideal means of supporting the work done by Frontex and , in particular , of involving the African states in projects so that economic migrants can be encouraged to remain in Africa .
The various projects that are planned , such as an increase in the exchange of students and the numerous economic programmes , which are intended to promote trade between the EU and the African states , are also very positive .
However , these countries must not be pressurised into agreeing to a free trade zone , because this involves a serious risk of causing major damage to local and regional markets .
Although I do not fully agree with some of the points made for the reasons mentioned , the report is balanced and this is why I have voted in favour of it .
With a view to the constructive development of relations between the European Union and third countries , I endorsed the report on the Union for the Mediterranean .
In order to strengthen cooperation , we need to support the Barcelona Process , which has been less active recently .
However , the Union for the Mediterranean Summit of states planned for 7 June 2010 in Barcelona is the perfect opportunity to put current declarations into effect , for the European Union cannot allow itself to lose significance in the region , with which it has traditional ties .
Institutional structures , such as co-presidency , should be used to intensify measures for greater integration of the societies and economies of both sides of the Mediterranean Sea .
The Heads of State or Government on both sides of the Mediterranean will meet in Barcelona on 7 June 2010 .
It is vital that this meeting leads to real progress - I am referring in particular to the establishment of institutions of the Union for the Mediterranean , but also to progress in the areas of economy and commerce , employment , the reduction of poverty , agricultural issues , food security , water and rural development .
It is also essential that greater resources be devoted to the Union for the Mediterranean , which will be the main issue in upcoming financial negotiations for 2014-2020 .
With that in mind , we should remember that it will have to be possible for EU aid to be combined with private funds and coordinated with those offered by the European Investment Bank and investment funds such as InfraMed .
Moreover , the strengthening of South-South trade and the establishment of a Europe-Mediterranean Free Trade Area are essential for economic development and poverty reduction in countries on the southern shore .
These measures are clearly mentioned in the resolution that has been submitted to Parliament , and I therefore support it .
in writing . - There have not been any big surprises in the amendments tabled by GUE / NGL ( all were rejected ) except for the first part of Amendment 6 ( Western Sahara ) .
I wish to make it clear that I voted in favour of Amendment 6 , which stresses Morocco 's responsibility in the situation of Human Rights violations in Western Sahara .
The second part of Amendment 1 ( which underlined the need to increase finances for the UfM ) tabled by Brok , was also rejected .
We voted in favour of the report as a whole ( adopted by a large majority ) .
I voted for the Resolution on the ' Need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus ' .
The South Caucasus is strategically important to the European Union .
At the same time , the European Union can and must help this troubled region to develop economically and commercially .
We can use trade policy to promote respect for human rights , energy security , democracy and good governance .
In my capacity as well , as my political group 's virtual rapporteur for this resolution , I urge free trade agreements to be signed with Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
I believe that these agreements will foster economic development in the region by boosting investment and creating new jobs , which will reduce the level of poverty .
I completely agree with this report , as I believe that following the Joint Declaration of the Prague Eastern Partnership Summit , the EU should strengthen its partnerships in the East , particularly with the three southern Caucasus countries , through a clear and well defined strategy .
Maintaining peace , the stability of borders and the resolution of border disputes , progress towards democracy , the rule of law and the promotion of regional cooperation are essential for development in this region of the world .
I therefore believe that the EU 's action must be marked by encouragement for sustainable development , based on principles of good governance , absolute respect for human rights and policies of good neighbourliness , which should have peaceful coexistence between these countries and their neighbours as their prime objective .
In this regard , I would like to highlight the important role that will come to be played by the EU Parliamentary Assembly - Eastern Neighbourhood countries .
The geostrategic importance of the region , particularly with regard to the supply and transport of raw materials between the East and West , must be an important factor in establishing future agreements between the EU and these countries .
The recent conflict between Russia and Georgia - a country which has been proclaiming that it wants to join the European Union and that it shares the EU 's ideals - makes it clear that a strategy needs to be defined for the South Caucasus region .
Historically wracked by bloody conflicts and squarely within Russia 's sphere of influence , the South Caucasus has been taking tentative steps towards stabilisation .
However , potential sources of conflict remain , and these must be handled with the greatest possible seriousness and care ; the tense relationship between Armenia and Azerbaijan is ample evidence of this .
I hope that the European Union will expand on what it already knows about this region , and contribute to peace and progress between the peoples of the South Caucasus .
I also hope that the EU will contribute to the adoption of and generalised respect for freedom , democracy , fundamental rights and the rule of law in the region .
The policy of enlargement and strengthening EU trade , political and cultural relations with third countries underscores the strategic importance of the Southern Caucasus countries : Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
Considering the geostrategic location of these countries , bordered by the powerful Russia , Turkey , and Iran , the European Union can and should adopt an influential approach and a collaborative role which can further peace and security in this region .
This will be crucial for ensuring the best economic development conditions , both cultural and social , along with the democratisation of this region , which will also encompass the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea .
The process of deepening relations aimed at integrating these countries into the European Union will certainly help to improve levels of justice , freedom and human progress .
I also endorse the importance of an energy market development strategy for the EU , as advocated in this report .
This report on the EU 's strategy for the Caucasus is just another part of the process of spreading a narrow viewpoint to disguise its economic and geopolitical interests in the region .
This viewpoint is very focused on the 2008 conflict between Russia and Georgia , and on issues of territory and Russia 's sovereignty over South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
As the rapporteur himself states , what is at stake is that the three countries of the Caucasus are essential for the ' transit of energy resources ' and the ' EU 's energy supply ' - on which the Union depends greatly - and ' free trade ' agreements to make the ' economy more attractive to foreign investors ' .
It is in the light of these interests that the implicit support for the re-launched arms race and military build-up in the region should be understood ; the EU is taking part in this process by getting involved in the sabre rattling between the USA , NATO and Russia .
The majority in Parliament is involved in this hypocrisy : Parliament has set itself up as the knight in shining armour that defends states ' territorial integrity now that it is about Georgia , but promoted , aided and continues to aid the process of Kosovo 's secession from Serbia .
The South Caucasus is a very interesting area which has been a constant topic of discussion in Europe for two hundred years now .
There has been a conflict of interests in these places between Russia , Iran and Turkey throughout this period .
The rugged contours of the landscape and the rich history provide a hint of the enormous ethnic and religious complexities .
Now the EU has also discovered this region .
It is truly wonderful how Mrs Tagliavini has obtained a perfect knowledge of the entire area , including the historical and present-day contexts , on the basis of the negotiations in Georgia .
In fact , I bow down deeply before her .
It is excellent that the authors of a report on the need to develop a new EU strategy for the South Caucasus have taken notice of an organisation such as the OSCE .
It is a pity that they apparently failed to spot the relationships between the states in the area and Iran , and also the specific intentions of Turkey in the region .
The authors have clearly forgotten the ' glorious ' declaration of the independent state of Kosovo , and their unconcealed attacks on Russia and repudiation of local elections in Abkhazia and South Ossetia include the formulation ' de facto organs of the occupied territories ' .
This strongly reminds me of the findings of the mission of a certain Lord Runciman in the pre-war Czechoslovak Republic .
Despite this , I believe it will be possible in the near future for the Members concerned to improve their knowledge of this part of Europe and for the next session to be more balanced .
For the aforementioned reasons , the GUE / NGL Group will abstain from the final vote on the resolution .
Unfortunately , this report on the EU strategy is not balanced and I have already mentioned this in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Although the committee took some of my amendments into consideration , I still believe that the report is going in the wrong direction .
Instead of taking a neutral and balanced attitude to the issue of Georgia , it uses the wording of US foreign policy , which aims to weaken and isolate Russia .
With regard to the relationship with Armenia and , in particular , the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh , the EU has changed its position .
This is completely incomprehensible and should be condemned .
The rapporteur has apparently never visited the region and , therefore , he could not form his own opinion of the situation .
For these reasons , I have voted against the Kirilov report .
I voted against Amendment 7 because it removed an essential part of the report 's text where Parliament calls on Russia to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia and the inviolability of its borders which have been recognised internationally .
It also condemns the Russian Federation 's recognition of the independence of the Georgian separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as being contrary to international law .
Firmly setting out this stance will help avoid establishing a similar precedent in future .
in writing . - I am glad everything we wanted was adopted in the AFET Committee and the corrections tabled by the S & D , EPP and Greens were all adopted .
The final vote , which was positive , has been very easy for us .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Council position at first reading : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Religious freedom in Pakistan
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on religious freedom in Pakistan .
author . - Madam President , Pakistan 's inability to develop a strong and enduring democracy has impacted - quite severely , in my view - on religious freedom in that country .
Successive leaders have used Islam to justify repression of minorities and justify autocracy , particularly of a military nature , although recent government efforts to remedy this must be recognised .
Pakistan 's constitution , although nominally upholding religious freedom , still allows for laws such as the blasphemy laws , which are discriminatory towards non-Muslims , and the persecution of Shia and Ahmadiyya minorities is a common feature .
The emphasis on religious identity that was the basis for the foundation of Pakistan , and its creation , sadly appears to foster a climate of intolerance and often even violence towards those outside the religious mainstream .
The proliferation of Deobandi madrasahs , preaching messages of hatred against the West , has created an environment in which extremism and fundamentalism flourish and too many EU citizens - including from my own country , the UK - have gone through their clutches .
The clearest manifestation of this is the Pakistani Taliban , a terrorist movement whose intentions were again made only too clear recently in the , mercifully failed , Times Square bomb plot in New York .
I fear personally that nothing will change in Pakistan until that country develops an education and political system that truly supports the principles of religious freedom , tolerance and equality .
author . - Madam President , my group , ALDE , welcomes the measures taken in the interests of religious minorities by the government of Pakistan since November 2008 , and supports the efforts of the Federal Minister for Minorities in establishing a network of local inter-faith harmony committees to promote dialogue between religions .
Nevertheless , much needs to be done along the road towards genuine religious freedom in Pakistan .
Reports and surveys carried out by independent agencies reveal that minorities in Pakistan are deprived of basic civil liberties and equal opportunities in jobs , education and political representation .
The legal provisions are dangerously vague and continue to be open to misuse , which affects people of all faiths in Pakistan .
We know also that women in Pakistan face domestic abuse , including physical and psychological abuse .
Much , therefore , remains to be done .
Madam President , our resolution on Pakistan consistently raises concerns , which we see resulting especially from the laws on blasphemy .
At the same time , however , we are keen to acknowledge the excellent developments that have taken place under the present government in Pakistan , and we encourage the country to continue with the democratic policy of reform that respects the rights of minorities .
Shahbaz Bhatti , the first minister for minority affairs in Pakistan 's history , has this past week been a guest of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
We greatly value his work and the reforms that the government has made .
The list of improvements is impressive : a quota of 5 % for minorities in public office , the recognition of minority festivals and places in the future senate , to mention just a few .
The most inspiring project is the grassroots Interfaith Harmony committees , if they succeed in alleviating tensions between different groups in the country and thus prevent the recruitment of terrorists .
It is a significant act of peace whose impact will radiate far and wide .
This unarmed peacekeeping work is the best possible war against terrorism , because it gets to grips with its very causes .
If success is achieved in this , it will be worthy of a peace prize .
I would like to say to Mr Tannock that this is , at the same time , the very education system that he called for .
As representatives of a community based on liberty , equality and tolerance , we are obliged to condemn discriminatory practices even if they occur far beyond the borders of the Union .
The removal of representatives of religious minorities from the electoral register , as happened in 2007 in Pakistan , is certainly one such practice .
Furthermore , pursuant to Article 260 of the Constitution of Pakistan , the country 's citizens are divided into two categories : Muslims and non-Muslims .
A recent requirement now means that a note about religious identity also has to be included in passports .
A group which suffers particular discrimination in Pakistan is the Ahmadiyya community , which the Pakistani authorities do not even allow to take part in public assemblies or to engage in publishing .
The law on the crime of blasphemy and the death penalty it carries also affect religious minorities in particular .
The Council of the European Union should place this subject on the agenda for relations with Islamabad as a matter of urgency .
After all , under the Cooperation Agreement signed six years ago between the European Union and Pakistan for the years 2007-2013 , Pakistan is receiving EUR 200 million from the EU budget .
Recent events in Pakistan have shown that the country is ready for profound changes to its system .
I hope that just as in the case of the long-awaited revision of the constitution , which was at last carried out , it will soon also be possible to amend other legislation which clearly discriminates against Pakistan 's minorities .
Madam President , freedom of religion is not guaranteed in Pakistan .
In 2009 , an increase in violent attacks against religious minorities has been observed , and that includes murders .
In addition , nearly 80 % of people from minority groups live below the poverty line .
However , this is not the only problem with regard to the violation of human rights in Pakistan : other issues include a restriction on freedom of assembly , threats against civil society organisations , the arrest of trade unionists , kidnappings and the murder of journalists .
Since Pakistan declared its support for the war against terrorism waged by the United States , hundreds , if not thousands , of people suspected of having links with terrorist groups have been arbitrarily detained : arrests without warrant , detentions with no legal basis or access to a lawyer , detentions in unspecified locations , forced disappearances , ill-treatment and torture .
In the only prison in Lahore , 4 651 prisoners were held in 2009 , while the prison has a capacity of only 1 050 prisoners .
Violence against women continues to increase : rapes , suicides , acid attacks and women being burned .
I would need not two minutes or two hours but two whole days to describe the ordeal suffered by young girls and women in Pakistan .
It is within this context that this House , which is concerned about respect for women , freedom of conscience and human rights , is preparing to use its new power of veto for the conclusion of a readmission agreement between the European Union and Pakistan , thus demanding additional guarantees on the conditions for the implementation of such an agreement on the readmission of Pakistani nationals and Afghans who have transited through Pakistan .
author . - Madam President , as an international socialist , I strongly defend the right of each individual to freedom of religious belief and practice , on the basis that the fundamental rights of others are not transgressed .
The people of Pakistan , and even more so the religious minorities , are , at the present time , caught between the institutional bigotry of the Pakistani state and , in some regions , the ultra-reactionary and obscurantive forces of the Taliban .
There is , of course , a fundamental contradiction in right-wing groups in this European Parliament claiming to stand for freedom and human rights in Pakistan , while supporting the war in Afghanistan which is having a severe spill-over effect into Pakistan with very detrimental consequences .
The slaughter of civilians in Afghanistan by NATO forces and by Western-supplied armaments in Pakistan , apart from being criminal in itself , can push some civilians into the arms of the reactionary groups .
At the heart of the crisis in Pakistan are the feudal capitalist structures under which enormous levels of poverty flourish at the present time .
Neither the corrupt elite in Pakistan , represented by the present government , nor the main opposition party , have any answers for the people .
Independent organisations representing working people and the poor are critical .
The Progressive Workers Federation is one such organisation whose half a million members are trying to rebuild strong social traditions to unite working people , cross national and religious lines , and unite men and women .
This is the future direction that Pakistan needs to take .
Madam President , we must take a critical but also a very objective and discerning approach to Pakistan , which is an important ally .
Pakistan is an Islamic country and we must respect that .
It was founded by the Muslims from British India because of their religious affiliation , in the same way that India was founded by Hindus .
Both countries have had minorities from the beginning and both have developed a great tradition of tolerance .
This respect for all religious minorities and , in particular , for Christians , must be reinforced .
I believe that we can put the emphasis on this .
Who will support the cause of Christians , if Europe , a continent which is almost completely Christian in nature , does not ?
We are under a very special obligation but , at the same time , we must make it clear that we respect the leading and often constructive role which Pakistan has played and can continue to play in the Islamic world .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , blasphemy laws in Pakistan , as various colleagues have pointed out , are easily abused by extremists as an excuse to use violence against religious or non-religious minorities .
Of course , freedom of religion is important , but freedom from religion is also important .
These blasphemy laws in a society in which freedom of expression is repressed in the name of religion pose another risk ; last Wednesday , a court in Pakistan banned the social networking site Facebook in the country .
The Pakistani Telecom authority instructed all Internet providers to block the website .
The measure was taken to prevent people from learning about alleged insulting remarks on Islam or the prophet Mohammed .
A cartoonist took the initiative to call on people to produce drawings of the Prophet to resist pressures such as that brought upon the popular series South Park , which led to edits in the programme .
Facebook , as well as on-line services and platforms , are an important virtual passage to the rest of the world .
It opens up sources of information and contact for Pakistanis and allows them to engage in an exchange of ideas ; especially the young generation of Pakistanis can be enlightened through the Internet , as school materials often contain discriminatory and one-sided language .
Criminalising free speech is not an effective way of allowing Pakistani society to deal with diversity .
Cartoonists , journalists and citizens should be able to speak their minds freely even if that means insulting some people .
Challenges to free speech are not exclusively found in Pakistan ; in Europe , we face serious challenges to open debate as well .
Threats to journalists , cartoonists and artists are becoming more common and they challenge our liberal , democratic societies .
Self-censorship is becoming more common and politicians , cartoonists and journalists now need protection against death threats .
Let us be inspired to stand for freedom of expression in the European Union , but also in Pakistan and the world over .
It is the best remedy against extremism .
The 2008 elections restored democracy and civilian government in Pakistan , although that democracy is not completely stable .
A number of decisions made by the Pakistani authorities on questions of religious liberties are worthy of respect , but it would seem that further measures are now needed .
Making it possible for people from religious minorities to take up work in the federal sector , recognition of their holidays and the establishment of a National Minorities Day are a step towards the stabilisation and democratisation of the country .
It should , however , be pointed out that there are still no precisely defined rights which protect minorities , which can lead to bizarre situations like the handing down of a 25-year prison sentence to a Christian couple for touching the holy book of the Qur 'an with unclean hands .
Some religious communities are still being persecuted , and it is also disturbing to note the effective implementation of regulations based on Sharia law in rural areas , especially in the north of the country .
We should continue to give financial support to the defenders of human rights in Pakistan and urge the Pakistani authorities to give their citizens full rights to religious freedom .
Madam President , I agree with much of what has been said in connection with violations of human rights in Pakistan .
I would particularly like to highlight the situation of the Ahmadiyya Muslims and the persecution to which they are subjected .
This takes the form of habitual persecution , cold-blooded murder , discrimination and harassment at all levels of society .
It continues to take place , despite the fact that improvements were promised by both the previous and the current governments .
Such improvements have not been forthcoming , and the persecution continues .
It is time for the international community and the EU to wake up and take action to put a stop to the violations of human rights that are continually taking place in Pakistan .
When the state of Pakistan was established in 1947 , its founder , Mohammad Ali Jinnah , said these memorable words : ' We are starting with the fundamental principle that we are all citizens and equal citizens of one State . '
These are empty words these days , especially for the estimated 15 million Christians living in Pakistan .
They are surrounded by a pervasive atmosphere of intimidation and threat , both in the cities and in the countryside , and even in the capital , Islamabad .
Sadly enough , the Pakistani legal system condones the precarious position of the country 's indigenous Christians .
This is the result of the historical process of creeping Islamification of Pakistani society since the late 1970s which has led to the alarming deterioration in the legal status of Pakistan 's Christian community .
In specific terms , we are talking about the testimonies and blasphemy laws of the 1980s , legal instruments which have effectively outlawed Christianity , as testimony given by a non-Muslim in a trial is worth only half as much as testimony given by a Muslim - and that is if the judge wishes to hear evidence from a Christian in the first place !
The blasphemy laws pose even more danger to Pakistani Christians .
They prescribe life imprisonment for desecration of the Qur 'an and the death sentence for derogatory remarks about Islam and the Prophet Mohammed .
In short , a Christian in Pakistan can suddenly end up on death row if any Muslim testifies against him !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that has created an almost unbearable atmosphere of fear and uncertainty .
Hundreds of Pakistani Christians vegetate in prison for years without access to any legal process .
I therefore urge the Council and the Commission to link any form of aid to the Pakistani Government to the urgent abolition of this pernicious discrimination against the country 's religious minorities .
Madam President , the constitution of Pakistan differentiates between Muslims and non-Muslims , thereby enabling discrimination on the basis of religion .
In this context , it is important to recall that in December 2009 , President Asif Ali Zardari reiterated the pledge of the PPP ( Pakistan People 's Party ) to uphold the rights of minorities to be treated as equal citizens .
Unfortunately , reports and surveys done by independent agencies reveal that minorities in Pakistan are deprived of basic civil liberties and equal opportunities in jobs , education and political representation .
So , the overall picture concerning religious freedom in Pakistan , even without going into the details , is controversial and gives a lot of ground for concern .
I would also like to stress the contradiction between the Pakistan Government 's commitment to freedom of religion and its leading role in the organisation of Islamic countries in endorsing their ' Combating Defamation of Religion ' agenda at the United Nations .
In this context , I would like to recall the EU Council conclusion of 16 November 2009 on the relationship between international human rights law , which protects individuals and groups of individuals , and the concept of defamation of religion .
Colleagues , I would like to remind you all that we are going to be short of time this afternoon , and everybody that goes over time detracts from the number of one-minute catch-the-eye interventions that we will be able to take .
( PL ) There is an American saying that there are no free lunches .
Meanwhile , we should be saying that European Union aid cannot be given for free and that we cannot give EUR 200 million without wanting anything in return .
Let us want something !
We should at least want respect , for example , for similar standards to those which are , for us , a kind of moral , ethical and political beacon .
The situation in which for many years now in Pakistan , there has been persecution of people of creeds other than Islam - and most of them are Christians - is absolutely unacceptable .
We often talk about the affairs of different minorities , not necessarily religious minorities , in Europe and the world .
Let us now defend the Christian minority and other religious minorities in Pakistan although , of course , this is not the only problem facing a country troubled by serious political conflicts and which , unfortunately , faces the prospect of destabilisation .
( HU ) If we examine the Pakistani situation , we are faced with two incontrovertible facts .
First , Pakistan is a key strategic player in the fight against terrorism .
We must do everything possible to ensure that the safety of European citizens is not in danger .
Secondly , Pakistan takes a different view of religious and ethnic minorities when compared to the view based on the values affirmed by Europe and by advanced liberal democracies .
Europe cannot remain silent if other states grossly violate human rights and , therefore , we must express our concern even if one of our strategic partners is concerned .
The European Union can take credible steps with regard to third countries only if it addresses satisfactorily the problems of religious and national minorities on its own territory .
It must be clear throughout the world that one of the core values of the EU is the high level of protection given to human and minority rights , which the Union considers first of all to be binding on itself , or would say that it ought to regard these as binding on itself .
Only then can we effectively demand that our partners make similar advances or steps on the path towards them .
( PL ) We welcome the fact that Pakistan is engaged in the fight against international terrorism , but this circumstance must not obscure other , very drastic facts , which show that in this country , drastic violations of the rights of religious minorities , especially Christians , are being committed .
Every so often , indeed very often , information reaches us of further attacks , beatings , threats and even murders , including the burning alive of Christian people only because they are Christians , including women and children .
This kind of information gives rise to a question .
Why is this happening in a country which plays such a significant role in international relations and in the fight against terrorism ?
Well , it is happening because , unfortunately , the authorities in Pakistan are , to a considerable degree , responsible for creating an atmosphere which encourages such things , by unsuitable legislation on blasphemy and by not reacting to inappropriate actions of the law enforcement agencies and the judicial system in Pakistan .
We must expect fundamental change , including from the European Union and its institutions , in relation to such conduct .
( DE ) Madam President , around 75 % to 80 % of all those suffering religious persecution worldwide are Christians .
We in the European Parliament are fighting specifically for human rights throughout the world .
For me , religious freedom is a central concept of our human rights policy .
Therefore , I regret that those on the left and the liberal left in the European Parliament often join together to keep silent about the fate of Christians .
At the same time , I am pleased that we are jointly tabling a resolution today about the dreadful situation in Pakistan .
Of the 156 million people in Pakistan , 95 % are Muslims , around 3 % Christians and around 2 % Hindus .
As a Christian , I would like to focus once again on the situation of the Pakistani Christians , who are subjected to severe persecution .
Anyone who allows violent attacks on Christians to take place must receive a response from the civilised world .
Therefore , the EU should introduce a criterion in its development policy and economic cooperation which covers this issue and allows sanctions to be applied if necessary .
We now move to the catch-the-eye part of the debate .
I have had far more requests than we can accommodate .
We are only meant to have two minutes .
I am going to take four speakers .
( DE ) Madam President , in the case of any country , it is important to consider its origins and whether the developments in the area of human and minority rights are moving in the right direction .
As head of the European Union monitoring mission during the last elections two years ago , I made several recommendations and I am pleased to see that the country has begun implementing some of them .
These include ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - this has not only been signed , but has evidently also now been ratified - and also the UN Convention against Torture .
It is good that there is now a minister in place who is responsible ex officio for minority issues and who will gradually attempt to overcome discrimination .
Among other questions , that of the Ahmadis has also been raised .
One of my recommendations was that next time , they should be taken off their separate electoral register and incorporated into the main electoral register .
I believe that this would be a specific measure which would help to bring an end to discrimination against this minority .
( FI ) Madam President , I would like to say that I , too , met the minister for minority affairs here this week .
I was convinced that he was trying to establish mutual understanding among religious groups .
He too , however , was unable to answer the question of why Pakistan , even though it is in the UN and is a member of the Human Rights Council , has , in its role in the organisation of Islamic countries , very strongly defended a new international code to combat blasphemy and the defamation of religion .
This surely cannot be an ideal way to promote mutual understanding between religious groups .
I would hope that the European Union will take firmer action internationally in this matter to prevent such new laws , which jeopardise the implementation of human rights , from entering into force .
The United States of America has been a lot more active than the European Union in this matter .
( PL ) Madam President , the situation in Pakistan is developing dynamically and we are receiving conflicting information , and we have to observe the situation there very carefully , so as not to make a mistake .
It is good that the government of Pakistan has adopted certain measures in the interests of religious minorities , such as guaranteeing minorities 5 % of jobs in the public sector .
It is good that the government of Pakistan has reserved , or has promised to reserve , seats in the Senate for minorities , including women representing minority groups .
Nevertheless , something must be done .
Both the government of Pakistan and the authorities in Pakistan must do something about the law against blasphemy , which carries the death penalty in Pakistan and is often used to justify censorship , criminalisation , persecution and , in some cases , the murder of members of political , racial and religious minorities .
The authorities in Pakistan must do something about the Penal Code , which provides for the death penalty for all people guilty of and convicted for blasphemy .
In a country which is receiving help from the European Union , and in the 21st century , killing people in this way must not be allowed . Thank you very much .
( RO ) After nearly nine years of military dictatorship , the elections held in Pakistan in 2008 heralded the start of a process of democratisation in this country .
Unfortunately , Benazir Bhutto was assassinated a few weeks prior to the elections .
The Pakistan People 's Party , which she headed , won these elections .
Although minorities in Pakistan face a number of problems , several positive measures have been initiated under the leadership of the current government .
Intercultural dialogue has been promoted , a 5 % quota has been set for minorities in the federal administration and some Muslim public holidays have been recognised .
The Pakistani Government 's commitment to give seats to minorities in the Senate is to be commended .
I would finally like to emphasise the particularly important role played by Pakistan in the fight against terrorism and extremism .
Madam President , honourable Members , the European Union has been closely following the situation regarding religious minorities in Pakistan .
Pakistan 's constitution recognises freedom of religion and provides that the State will protect the rights of minorities .
Recently , Pakistan has made progress : this includes the adoption of constitutional amendments , strengthening the role of elected assemblies in Pakistan , and institutional developments in the area of human rights , in particular , the establishment of a Ministry of Human Rights and a Ministry of Minorities .
In addition , an independent National Commission of Human Rights is being set up .
Moreover , Pakistan ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment .
This is a step in the right direction , provided that these instruments are implemented effectively .
Nevertheless , Pakistan should redouble its efforts to ensure better integration of religious minorities , including the Christian minority , within social , economic and political institutions .
Pakistan 's international reputation has been tarnished by incidents such as that which took place last year in Gojra , when seven Christians were burned alive when extremists attacked a church and people 's homes , as well as attacks on Shi 'ite Muslims and discrimination against Ahmadis .
With regard to the rights of religious minorities , the EU has consistently used political dialogue with Pakistan in order to raise human rights issues , and has also taken diplomatic steps on a number of occasions .
In addition to this , since 2007 the EU has maintained a dialogue on human rights within the framework of the Cooperation Agreement with Pakistan , which makes provision for a regular dialogue on governance and human rights .
During these discussions , the EU has always insisted on respect for individual rights and minority rights .
As part of that dialogue on human rights , the EU has also repeatedly raised the issue of the application of the blasphemy laws with the government of Pakistan .
In absolute terms , it seems that most of the defendants are Muslims , but I am aware that the blasphemy laws have often been used against religious minorities , and that false accusations have been made as a way of settling personal scores or for reasons of financial greed .
The last meeting of the Joint Committee took place on 25 March 2010 , preceded the day before by the meeting of a subgroup on governance , human rights and migration .
On that occasion , the issue of minorities in Pakistan was raised .
At the same time , we did not hesitate to mention Pakistani concerns over the situation regarding religious minorities here at home , in Europe .
The European Union also plans to raise these issues at the next meeting with Pakistan , on 4 June this year .
Much of Pakistan 's population has no access to education and is ignorant of the basic rules of social behaviour .
Through the cooperation aid provided by the European Commission , priority has been given to improving access to basic education in the context of Pakistan 's politics and education .
I am hopeful that in the medium term , this will lead to a more tolerant attitude towards the concept of religious freedom .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Reportedly , Pakistan has the harshest blasphemy laws in the world .
The exercise of the rights to free expression and religion can result in imprisonment and death .
Section 295B and C of Pakistan 's Penal Code criminalise derogatory remarks regarding the Koran and the Prophet , providing for punishments of life imprisonment , and death , respectively .
Section 298 punishes the deliberate wounding of religious feelings , and sections 298A , B and C penalise derogatory remarks of holy figures and places , and outlaw the religious group of Ahmadis ( who consider themselves Muslim ) .
Freedom of religion includes the freedom to believe in any religion and the freedom not to believe in any religion .
Pakistan 's minister for minority affairs announced yesterday that amendments are being prepared to stop the misuse of the blasphemy laws .
I believe these laws should be repealed , as any modified text will only be a legacy of the past and allow for continued violence and discrimination .
In recent years , the Pakistani Government has adopted a series of measures which clearly demonstrate a certain sensitivity to the situation of national minorities .
These include the appointment of Shahbaz Bhatti as federal minister for minorities , a 5 % quota for public sector workers and the commitment to representation for religious minorities in the Senate , to name but a few .
These efforts must be encouraged .
However , many more steps need to be taken to improve the situation of religious minorities .
I believe that one key element in this is to review the provisions on offences committed against religions , known as the Blasphemy Law .
The possibility of abusing the provisions of this law has created a climate of intolerance which has encouraged religious violence , discrimination , intimidation and persecution of religious minorities .
Apart from the legal aspect , it is important for the government to adopt decisive measures to prevent violence .
The promotion of tolerance is the key to protecting religious minorities in Pakistan .
European civilisation as we know it today would not be possible without religious freedom .
The search for something which goes beyond the individual must go hand in hand with toleration .
The path to God - and also the path from God - is different and unique for each individual .
If nothing else , we have learned this during the two thousand years of Christianity in Europe .
This experience has been long and painful , purchased with the lives of millions of innocent people .
We Europeans therefore have the right to tell others not to take that path .
Therefore , we will always , and in every country , condemn the perpetration of violence and the murder of innocent people , especially now , when it involves our ally and friend .
2 .
Situation in Thailand
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Thailand .
author . - Madam President , Thailand is going through a violent crisis with the red-shirt demonstrators on the one hand , and the army and the yellow-shirts on the other .
Around 80 people have already lost their lives and nearly 2 000 have been injured .
Democracy is threatened and the country finds itself in a government-declared state of emergency .
The state of emergency has resulted in censorship .
Media sources such as TV , radio and Internet have been blocked .
Halting violence is very important , and we encourage all parties to use self-restraint in the process of doing so , but in seeking to restore the calm , the state of emergency should not be abused to restrict fundamental rights and individual freedoms .
Censorship needs to end and freedom of the media and expression need to be restored .
These values are important for the European Parliament in their valuable relationship with Thailand .
As we have all observed , because it has been the main topic of news , since early April , Thailand has experienced an atmosphere of political violence that it had not seen in the last decade .
I would first of all like to express my solidarity with the families of the victims of the violence on the streets .
I think that we have here what I would describe as a conventional confrontation between the freedom of expression and association , on the one hand , and the need for the government to maintain public order , on the other .
The train of events has passed very quickly over recent days and hours .
Relative calm seems to have returned to Bangkok , although the capital was ablaze last night following intervention by government forces .
Let us hope that a new spiral of violence can be avoided .
However , to ensure this happens , we need moderation because democracy cannot prevail through violence .
I think that the government will have to implement the roadmap which it presented on 3 May .
I also believe that investigation of the recent events and punishment of the guilty are measures required to ensure reconciliation .
Madam President , the ' red-shirt ' demonstrations have been suppressed with bloodshed .
I would just like to say the following , without wishing to add fuel to the fire , since a European Parliament urgency procedure requires us to appease a crisis and to seek solutions rather than further inflame people 's anger .
Firstly , any citizen can legitimately aspire to free and fair elections .
That is an undeniable right , and one that should be granted to all Thai people .
This option was proposed at one point by Prime Minister Vejjajiva , then rejected by the ' red-shirts ' .
We must now return to it .
Secondly , I condemn the use of live gunfire on protestors and the brutal repression of recent days which , according to official sources , has claimed at least 12 victims , including an Italian journalist , and left many people injured .
It is time to stop the violence that has become widespread across the whole country .
In doing so , I do not advocate taking one side or another , but I call on the Thai Government to prioritise a negotiated solution , to ensure that the declared state of emergency does not limit individual freedoms or freedom of expression , which would only exacerbate tensions , and I call on him in particular to consider a return to the polls .
The current turmoil runs the risk of dividing the country .
In the north-east , which is a rural area with a Laotian culture , there would be almost insurgent opposition against the central area , Bangkok and the south , which are all Democratic strongholds .
This could lead to the emergence of quasi-terrorist movements , attacking what can be called the bureaucracy and elite that are the bastions of power .
There absolutely must be a return to elections , negotiations , and an end to the violence , whilst maintaining freedoms .
Of course , these are very simple words , and perhaps rather naive in relation to modern-day violence .
This parliamentary resolution was deliberately chosen to avoid any explosion of violence in Thailand and to leave room for dialogue , but that does not mean that we can dispense with all calls for democracy .
Madam President , the images of the anger , violence and destruction in Bangkok are still fresh in our minds .
Although attention has now , to a certain extent , moved away from the highly charged situation in the Thai capital , the risk of further violent clashes is by no means over .
The violent conflict between the so-called red shirts and the government , backed by the army , has already resulted in more than 70 people being killed and almost 2 000 injured .
The government has announced that it will investigate these deaths and those which occurred in the last few days must also be included in this investigation .
It is important to consider the fundamental causes of these recurring protests and clashes in order to find a viable political solution .
Part of the Thai population is severely disadvantaged and socially excluded .
These people are very critical of their unfair treatment and lack of rights .
They are fighting against their comparatively low standard of living .
Other factors include conspicuous and widespread corruption within the political leadership , but also among the people in positions of responsibility within civil society .
These structural problems must be exposed and resolved , if a lasting solution is to be found , rather than just bringing an end to hostilities .
We call on all the parties in the conflict to play a serious and constructive role in finding a solution to this major crisis .
However , both sides must use only peaceful and democratic means to bring this about and , for this , they need the support of the EU .
Madam President , for several weeks now , the ' red-shirts ' popular movement has been demonstrating in Bangkok in order to demand respect for democracy .
Let us remember that the current government , even though the President has only been in power since December 2008 , is nevertheless the result of a military coup that occurred in September 2006 .
What were the ' red-shirts ' demanding ?
The Prime Minister 's resignation , the dissolution of parliament , early elections - in short , democracy .
On 4 May 2010 , the Prime Minister announced a reconciliation plan based on those famous early elections , but the assassination , on 13 May , of General Khattiya , commander of the ' red-shirts ' , terminated negotiations .
This is the context in which we have prepared the resolution before us today .
Yesterday , the army intervened , killing several people including an Italian journalist .
For us , it is essential that the resolution on which we are going to vote takes account of these events , particularly given that the main leaders of the ' red-shirt ' movement immediately surrendered and urged the population to remain calm .
In fact , it is the matter of the succession of the king that is being called into question .
He has remained strangely silent .
The message we must convey is that democracy cannot be imposed by force , and that it is not acceptable to quash demonstrations by sending in the army with orders to shoot on sight .
The resolution does not even condemn the violence .
We will not vote in favour of it .
The Thai people have the right to democracy , and everything must be done to avoid another military coup .
Thailand - a country which , until recently , was considered a bastion of democracy and stability in South-East Asia - has recently experienced its most dramatic events in almost half a century .
Fighting continues in the conflict between supporters of former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra , known as the ' red-shirts ' , and the government and the army .
Over 60 people have been killed , including foreign nationals and , among them , citizens of EU countries , nearly 2 000 people have been injured , and the capital , Bangkok , has sustained a significant degree of damage .
Of course , the victims ' families deserve our expressions of sympathy , condolences and solidarity , but we must also be aware that the Thai nation is , today , very divided .
Human rights such as freedom of assembly and freedom of speech are significantly restricted , and the conflict will be very difficult to solve by peaceful and political means .
Therefore , pressure is needed - international pressure , including from the European Union - on both sides of the conflict so that they will resume talks and try to resolve their dispute by political means , and not through violence .
Madam President , in the street fighting which has come to resemble a civil war , 75 people have been killed and more than 1 800 injured since last week alone .
Following heavy military intervention , the leaders of the demonstrators have surrendered .
However , the situation in Bangkok is continuing to escalate .
I have received phone calls about it both yesterday and today .
Until now , some areas of the capital were not affected by the conflict , but that has changed .
The situation in the north-east is also chaotic .
The dramatic images convey one clear message .
Regardless of whether people are wearing red , black , yellow or green shirts , they must stop the violence and not allow the situation to escalate any further .
The position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is clear .
There is no alternative to objective discussions .
All the incidents must be investigated by an independent commission .
We very much welcome the plan to bring the parliamentary elections forward .
Mr Tajani , the EU must take an active role and act as mediator .
We have the diplomatic means to break the spiral of violence and start the process of constructive dialogue .
Mr Tajani , we must act , because Thailand is being shaken to its foundations .
I , too , wish to express my solidarity with the Thai families grieving in the wake of the violent clashes in Bangkok .
The situation is all the more alarming as there are no real prospects of resolving the internal conflict .
Reprisals on the streets of the Thai capital , which have caused tens of deaths and hundreds of injured , cannot be accepted in any way as a means of resolving existing problems .
The brutal use of force and introduction of censorship , which bans television channels from broadcasting anything other than programmes approved by the government , are violations of basic human rights .
In fact , it is the duty of the European Union and the whole civilised world to condemn the use of armed force against civilians and to request the release of those arrested illegally , as well as the most impartial investigation possible into the deaths which have occurred .
If anything , the losses of human life are only serving to harden the opposition 's intransigence and fuel the violence which has also spread to the north-east of the country .
There is the risk of these street clashes degenerating into civil war .
I believe that international organisations , primarily the UN , have to intervene as soon as possible to prevent an even more serious deterioration in the situation and to mediate the start of a necessary dialogue between the authorities and the opposition , as the only democratic option for resolving the current crisis peacefully .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Madam President , I condemn the brutal repression by the Thai Government and State against the protestors in Bangkok and elsewhere in Thailand .
Despite propaganda that these were terrorists , in the main , they were , in fact , impoverished farmers from the north and around Bangkok , sections of the urban working class , and their families , who saw their protest as a struggle against the enormous poverty and hardship that they suffer .
Unfortunately , these oppressed people look to the billionaire and former Prime Minister , Thaksin Shinawatra , for a solution .
Despite some populist measures against poverty when he was in government , Mr Thaksin represents the capitalist elite and deceives the masses .
On the other side , there is the current Prime Minister Abhisit and his party , who represent other sections of the elite .
I think the poor rural masses and the urban working class in Thailand urgently need their own independent organisation to fight for their rights , and I hope that the next mobilisation in Thailand might be a united struggle of workers , poor farmers , students and youth , dedicated to overthrowing all corrupt elites and bringing the major wealth of Thailand into public ownership and democratic control and , in a socialist Thailand , transforming the lives of its people and also fighting for the rights of all minorities .
Madam President , I condemn the use of bullets against protestors in Thailand : thousands of people died ; hundreds were injured .
As reported by Amnesty International , eyewitness accounts and video recordings show clearly that the military is firing live rounds at unarmed people who pose no threat whatsoever to the soldiers or to others .
Among the dead , there are medical doctors and children .
Thai soldiers must stop firing ; violence against protestors cannot lead , and will not lead , to a democratic solution .
The government must be aware that crushing the protestors may clear the streets for now but will not solve the problem that brought the people onto the streets , and before anything else comes human life , so stop the firing .
( SK ) The demonstrations in Thailand have unfortunately been going on for several weeks now .
The civilian population are suffering violence as the direct victims of bloody confrontations between armed anti-government demonstrators and the forces of the state .
I would therefore like to express my sympathy with those who have lost family members .
I consider it an absolute priority in this tense situation for both sides to denounce physical force and to prevent further losses of life .
I also support the call for an immediate end to the ongoing violence and for the opening of constructive dialogue , with the aim of settling the conflict by peaceful and democratic means .
At the same time , I call on the Thai Government not to resort to unwarranted and unjustified violations of human rights during the declared state of emergency .
( SK ) The political conflict in Thailand very quickly grew into serious civil unrest , which resulted in the deaths of many protestors following intervention by the forces of repression .
If the state authorities use brute force and uncontrolled repression against the citizens of their own country , this deserves condemnation .
Therefore , Madam President , Commissioner , the EU must use its political influence on the parties involved in the conflict and call for a peaceful solution to the political solution in such a way that Thai citizens do not pay the price for the political disputes between leaders of individual groups .
The Thai Government in particular must take responsibility for providing a calm and peaceful solution to this conflict .

( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a ceasefire and an end to censorship : I believe this to be the two-pronged action which the Commission , with the greatest determination , but also with the greatest consistency , with those values considered inalienable by this Parliament , must endeavour to obtain .
In a climate of civil war such as that prevailing in Thailand , a return to democracy through free elections - initially discussed , initially hoped for , but now in some doubt - requires a crucial step , namely , awareness of the international community 's support for the Thai people and for the country 's return to full democracy .
To allow the international community to be involved in this phase , the crucial factor is information , and this is why the state of emergency must not be a form of veiled censorship .
The Internet , newspapers and the media must be in a position to inform the international community of the dynamics in play in Thailand , so that the international community , with as much awareness of the facts as possible , can be supportive at this time of restoring democracy .
Madam President , honourable Members , Thailand is going through a tragic phase in its political history .
The country , known for its economic and social dynamism , is currently affected by a profound crisis which could threaten stability if a solution to the current conflict is not found .
Indeed , this crisis strikes at the very heart of the country : much of the population seems to have lost confidence in the institutions that govern it .
In turn , the government is struggling to implement the solutions that the current circumstances demand .
Political fragility has resulted from this , leading to violent confrontations and acts of aggression which directly affect human rights and fundamental rights .
There is persistent uncertainty over the future of the country .
In such circumstances , the European Union deplores the fact that people have lost their lives , such as the Italian journalist Fabio Polenghi , who was killed yesterday morning during clashes between demonstrators and soldiers .
No political or ideological crisis can justify this fact , nor the armed confrontation .
On two occasions already , the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy has reminded the warring parties to show restraint .
Even a state of emergency cannot be allowed to result in excessive measures when it comes to fundamental rights and the right to freedom of expression .
These rights are threatened by the disproportionate use of force .
To prevent the situation deteriorating any further , it is crucial that negotiations should resume .
The Commission has taken note of the roadmap put forward by Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva .
Thailand will not emerge from the current crisis unless it deals with its major structural problems .
It is essential that the legitimate claims of disadvantaged social groups are recognised by all parties involved in governing the country .
This is an indispensable step towards national reconciliation .
It is therefore imperative for Thailand to find a consensus with all parties on how to move towards a more incisive society .
As a partner to Thailand , the European Union is ready to support the country , as far as it is able , during this complex process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Thailand is going through a very serious period in its history .
The ' Land of Smiles ' has become one of tears , blood and , maybe tomorrow , one of a civil war between government forces and the so-called ' red-shirts ' .
How did things reach the point where a demonstration calling for democratic elections ended with dozens of dead and thousands injured , the political assassination of an opposition leader , scenes of urban guerrilla warfare , the beginning of insurgency in several provinces and the establishment of a state of emergency and curfews ?
The King is a highly respected figure in the country , but does not seem able to reduce tensions .
Continued uncertainties over his succession suggest that this instability will persist .
The violence must stop .
The current government certainly came about through elections , but elections that were held following a coup and the dissolution of the opposition parties .
This injustice must stop .
The solution lies only in the swift organisation of general elections and the prior restoration of the political freedom of all parties involved , so as to ensure the elections are democratic .
The EU should use its good economic and political relations with Thailand in order to bring about this solution .
3 .
Burma
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on Burma .
author . - Madam President , with this resolution , the European Parliament calls on the Burmese Government to put an end to human rights violations and to start genuine dialogue with the opposition and ethnic representatives of Burma , as well as with the international community , and to take concrete steps towards a peaceful transition to a democratic system of government .
Burma is going to hold an election this year for the first time in 30 years .
Unfortunately , the election laws published do not provide for fair and free elections .
The opposition is not involved in the process and many of the opposition leaders are still under house arrest .
Many political activists are in prison , and the opposition party has decided to boycott the elections completely .
The last thing I want to say is that the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Burma has condemned the gross and systematic human rights abuses .
I hope Parliament will do the same .
The situation in Burma forces us to turn our attention to this country repeatedly .
Today , we condemn the intention to conduct elections under completely undemocratic conditions and on principles which have excluded the main opposition party and deprived hundreds of thousands of Burmese of the right to vote and to be candidates .
This is an obvious attempt to keep the opposition out of the elections .
In such conditions , even the very expression ' elections ' does not correspond to reality .
We also condemn the fact that under the new constitution , the army will be guaranteed at least 25 % of the seats in parliament and will have the authority to suspend civil liberties and the legislature at any time it deems this necessary in the interests of national security .
We condemn the continued and systematic violation of human rights , fundamental freedoms and democratic rights of the people of Burma , but we also appeal to the governments of other countries - of China , India and Russia - to do what they can by putting economic and political pressure on the Burmese authorities to bring about change there .
Madam President , the starting point for this resolution is the almost mezza voce dissolution of the party led by Aung San Suu Kyi , who is a recipient of the Sakharov Prize and has been under house arrest for years .
By dissolving her party , the National League for Democracy , winner of the last elections , the military junta is trying to eliminate a whole section of the opposition before the elections this coming October .
However , to put the icing on the cake of what will be not so much a democratic ballot as a complete electoral farce , political prisoners and monks have now also been excluded from the ballot .
The junta continues its abuses of power , large multinational companies continue to benefit from their contracts with that junta , and the Commission has reduced aid for refugees who have fled to the border with Thailand .
Unfortunately , we have a series of examples of countries and regions where the international community is powerless to restore democracy and the rule of law .
Burma is one of them , with its stream of resistance fighters and martyrs , of which Aung San Suu Kyi is the most famous icon .
Is it too much to ask the European Union , I might almost say out of decency , not to cut its aid for the refugees on the border of Thailand and Burma , and to begin immediately to finance cross-border aid , particularly medical assistance ?
Is it not a matter of urgency that High Representative Ashton and the Member States should support the recommendations of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Burma , namely , that a committee be established to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity , which could be included in a United Nations General Assembly resolution this year ?
Let us make Burma a textbook case , one that shows our ability to promote democracy without the use of bombs and tanks .
Madam President , in 1990 , the Burmese human rights activist , Aung San Suu Kyi , was awarded the Sakharov prize by the European Parliament .
In the years before and after this date , the critical human rights situation in Burma was the subject of numerous parliamentary resolutions .
Similarly , other international human rights organisations have been involved with the situation there .
Although improvements have been made in individual cases , the human rights situation in Burma remains extremely poor .
Against the background of a very good and comprehensive report , the UN Special Rapporteur on Burma has now called for an international investigation commission to be established which will have the mandate to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Baroness Ashton , should take up and support this call , for example , in the next General Assembly of the United Nations .
Elections are due to take place in Burma at the end of 2010 and the government has now implemented measures which deny many citizens the right to vote and stand for election .
This applies , in particular , to political prisoners and Buddhist monks , who make up a total of 400 000 people .
We are protesting against this and calling on the High Representative to express this criticism clearly in her bilateral and multilateral talks .
Finally , in the light of the complex human rights problems in Burma , it is incomprehensible that the European Union has cut its financial support for refugees on the Thai-Burmese border .
That is not acceptable and we are calling on the Commission to reverse these cuts and to begin providing cross-border aid for Burmese refugees once again .
Madam President , this is the second time since the start of the year that we have discussed the situation in Burma .
The concerns we expressed on 10 March this year , with regard to the so-called electoral process initiated by the Burmese junta , have merely been confirmed .
The conditions imposed by the electoral law have led to the National League for Democracy refusing to participate in the process .
It must be noted that these electoral laws forbid prisoners to vote and therefore exclude hundreds of political prisoners .
Since then , the National League for Democracy has been banned .
We welcome the tone of this resolution calling for increased economic sanctions .
We also regret the reduction in humanitarian aid for refugees .
Personally , I would like us to go further and , as President Obama and the United States have done , for the European Union to ban any investment in euro in Burma .
However , some major economic groups in Europe have powerful interests in that country .
I am delighted that we have called for an international arms embargo , and I sincerely hope that the EU can play an active role in bringing about global consensus on the matter .
Commissioner , I would like you to inform us of your position on this matter , either today or later on .
author . - Madam President , what more can we say about Burma that has not already been said , including calling again for the release of political prisoners like Aung San Suu Kyi who has become a global icon in the struggle for freedom ?
This resolution , like many before it in this House , chronicles the brutal repression of the Burmese people led by a military junta they never elected and have fought very hard to get rid of for many years .
The way in which this junta is now cynically trying to hold sham elections such as to ensure the opposition will be muzzled is entirely characteristic of these generals and the way in which they arrogantly disregard the opinions not only of the Burmese people - their own people - but of democratic leaders around the free world .
Despite this resolution 's focus on immediate events in Burma , I urge the Council and Commission also to give due consideration to how best to support Burma when it is finally free and democratic once again .
Burma will need our help , not least to develop a strong civil society and a legal system which should focus on transitional justice for the many crimes committed by the junta .
That may all seem a long way away , but if the brave people of Burma can learn anything from us in this Parliament in Europe , it is that the light of liberty can never be extinguished by tyranny and that the freedom that is their inalienable right will surely once again be theirs one day .
The human rights situation in Burma is giving particular cause for concern .
This country has been governed for several decades by a military dictatorship which has violently repressed opponents of the regime .
The authorities have announced the organisation of elections during this year for the first time since 1990 .
However , they will be run based on an undemocratic framework .
Hundreds of thousands of citizens will not have the right to vote or stand as candidates , and at least 25 % of MPs will be from the military .
The main opposition party led by Aung San Suu Kyi , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and Sakharov Prize , will not take part in the elections .
I urge the European Union , through the High Representative , and the international community to step up their efforts to establish democracy in Burma and secure the earliest possible release of Aung San Suu Kyi .
She has been under house arrest since 2003 and is an important symbol of the struggle for democracy and human rights .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , in organising farcical elections and refusing a national dialogue involving all political and ethnic groups , the Junta shows that the ' pragmatic ' engagement with it is not working at all .
The international community must act against the oppressors of the Burmese people .
The EU can do much more than just renewing sanctions on the regime .
It should use all means to strengthen civil society and assist those who resist oppression in Burma .
It must work to mobilise the UN , ASEAN and the USA to put pressure on China and India to end their support for the Burmese regime and to stop the arms trade going on , namely with North Korea .
The UN special rapporteur on the human rights situation in Burma concluded last March that ' human rights violations are the result of a state policy that involves authorities in the executive , military and judiciary at all levels ' and that these human rights violations ' may entail categories of crimes against humanity or war crimes under the terms of the [ Rome ] Statute of the International Criminal Court ' .
His predecessor had already called for the UN Security Council to investigate crimes against humanity in Burma , as it did in Rwanda , Bosnia and Darfur .
What are EU Member States waiting for to ask the UN Security Council to refer the criminals in power in Burma to the International Criminal Court ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Burma will hold so-called elections this year .
However , these cannot be free and fair if Buddhist monks are banned from voting and the opposition is not even involved .
The National League for Democracy was disbanded by law this month and Aung San Suu Kyi , a political prisoner and recipient of the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought , cannot run in the elections .
Democracy and the rule of law are essential for economic growth and the European Parliament remains strongly committed to the people in Burma .
Asian countries are encouraged to do the same and to use their economic leverage in the process .
The Burmese people need our support as gross and systematic human rights abuses continue at the hands of the dictatorial state .
These serious crimes need to be investigated , yet the government in Burma chooses self-isolation and refuses to allow the EU envoy for Burma to enter the country .
Self-isolation impacts the population on many levels such as through news media that cannot operate freely in the country .
Regrettably , the new constitution does not grant human rights , and we call on the Commission and the Council to support the UN recommendations in setting up a commission of inquiry into the human rights violations .
In the meantime , restrictions on freedom of assembly , association and expression , including those on the Internet and mobile phones , need to end .
Until then , restrictive measures provided for in the EU decision will have to be enforced .
By banning the trade in arms and by funding refugee programmes , the EU continues to stand by the Burmese people and their human rights and fundamental freedoms .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I have just had some sad news .
One hour ago , I was informed that a senior leader of the National League for Democracy , Takin Soe Myint , has passed away .
That is very sad news which we have to add to that special joke that some call elections in Burma .
I add my voice to those who clearly condemn these elections , especially the fact that they are depriving hundreds of thousands of Burmese access to their passive or active right to vote .
This also includes the situation of Aung San Suu Kyi , who is in prison .
This is something that we cannot remain silent on .
Once again , we have to ask the Burmese regime to heed the appeals of the international community to allow all those prisoners of conscience to be released .
This is important also in the sense that has been mentioned by Ana Gomes .
I also understand that we have a strong responsibility in asking , urging and pushing India , Russia and China to stop selling weapons to the junta regime in Burma .
There is also good news there .
We have to welcome the European Union 's support for the global arms embargo , and , once again , we have to urge the European Member States to have a clear coalition on a consensus for such a ban .
It is also important to remember - and this has also been said - that we cannot now cut the funds for the refugees living on the frontier .
We have to establish a clear policy of support for these people .
I have been there many times .
We have to say clearly that this is not the time to stop the help these people need , especially for medical assistance at the present time .
( RO ) Burma is not a democracy , even though it is going to organise elections , because , as we are aware , the authorities in this country show deep contempt for any democratic principle .
This military dictatorship is completely unscrupulous and reserves , as has already been said , seats in parliament for the military and bans , in general , citizens with democratic convictions from participating in politics .
There can be no question of an improvement in the political climate in this country unless Aung San Suu Kyi is released .
Another leader of the National League for Democracy also said that he is unable to serve his country after spending 20 years in prison for his convictions , simply because the military in Burma ban people , who have served such sentences which the military have actually passed , from standing as candidates .
I call for a national dialogue because this will be the only way to enable this country 's society to be changed .
( FI ) Madam President , Burma is holding its first parliamentary elections for 20 years .
It will hardly come as a surprise to anyone that the elections are already , at this stage , looking anything but free and democratic .
The amendment to the constitution in 2008 guarantees that 25 % of the seats in its parliament will be for the army .
In addition , this year 's legislative reforms would exclude tens of thousands of Burmese from the right to vote , including political prisoners and religious minorities .
Buddhist monks have long been the target of a special kind of persecution .
The international community needs to make an effort to do something .
It is regrettable that the Commission has cut funding for refugee camps on the border between Thailand and Burma .
Humanitarian aid is needed in abundance , and there must be international efforts made to get it there .
It is also most important that Burma embarks on a dialogue between political and ethnic groups .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , honourable Members , the situation in Burma continues to concern us .
As you are aware , the roadmap continues to be put into action , with preparations for the first elections held by the government in 20 years .
Thirty-one political parties have come forward so far to stand for election .
Civil society has been active .
Aung San Suu Kyi 's National League for Democracy withdrew from the elections following pressure from the government ; it has therefore been dissolved .
A new party , the National Front for Democracy , which may be eligible , consists partly of former leaders of the National League for Democracy , in other words , the former party of Aung San Suu Kyi ;
It accepts the decision of ethnic groups as to whether or not they will vote .
If they boycott the election , following a disagreement over the replacement of ethnic armies with border guards , it would take away the credibility that these elections need .
This shows the degree to which the situation keeps changing , and I doubt that the European Union will be invited to observe the elections .
We are also still very concerned about the human rights situation .
The report by Mr Quintana , the United Nations Special Rapporteur , is very clear .
Many political prisoners have still not been released , despite appeals from the international community .
Fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and freedom of assembly are still not respected .
Socio-economic conditions are difficult for most of the population , especially in areas inhabited by ethnic groups .
How can we really help ?
The European Union 's statements are evidence of our critical view and our willingness to contribute to a solution .
Our approach includes development aid ; in fact , the EU is one of the most generous donors .
Furthermore , the Millennium Development Goals and a continued dialogue with the government of Burma on sectoral policies are vitally important .
In addition to the areas affected by the hurricane of 2008 , our aid targets the most vulnerable regions of the country , as well as the refugee camps along the Thailand-Burma border .
In answer to your questions , I can assure you that the Commission will continue to help uprooted communities in order to enable them to find decent living conditions .
The conditions needed for them to make a return to their countries do not exist .
We need to guard against the institutionalisation of the camps and , consequently , the extent of our aid will be determined by local needs .
In addition , the Commission has been in contact with the Thai authorities .
It should be remembered that there are also aid programmes focusing on education , agriculture and food security .
In addition , the European Commission Humanitarian Aid programmes provide aid in the area of water and food security .
There is also aid aimed at restoring socio-economic conditions in Burma .
Each citizen receives about USD 2.4 on average , in comparison with USD 36 in Laos and USD 60 in Cambodia .
In conclusion , I can confirm that we will redouble our efforts to promote our values .
The people of Burma are entitled to receive aid and to know that the European Union will not lose interest in their future .
( DE ) Madam President , you are undoubtedly a competent vice-president and you are also highly influential .
I very much welcome that fact .
You have not given some Members the opportunity to take the floor as part of the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure , not because you did not want to , but because we have such a tight schedule .
The European Parliament is the voice of human rights and we are making do with just one hour .
So many of us have something to say and want to put pressure on the Commission in order to achieve results .
Are you personally in favour of holding the vote not at 16.00 or 16.30 , but instead at 17.00 or 17.30 , for example , so that we could have an extra hour and finally change this rule of