Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Wednesday , 7 April 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Fight against breast cancer in the European Union ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Written Declaration number 0071 / 2009 , submitted by Members Elizabeth Lynne , Michail Tremopoulos , Lívia Járóka and Lidia Joanna Geringer de Oedenberg , on the fight against breast cancer in the European Union , has been signed by over half of Parliament 's Members .
Consequently , in accordance with Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure , it will be forwarded to its addressees and published together with other texts adopted in plenary on 24 February 2010 .
The names of the signatories will be published in the Minutes of the sitting .
Mr President , I should just like to thank everybody for signing Written Declaration 71 on breast cancer .
Most of you know that this is the leading cause of death across the EU of women aged between 35 and 59 , and we want Member States to set up nationwide screening programmes and breast cancer specialist units among other things .
I hope that the signing of this written declaration will be another step forward to help to make sure that we have EU-wide action to stop the dire consequences of breast cancer .
I would like to thank our fellow Member , as well as all of you who signed this declaration .
Parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Council positions at first reading : see Minutes
Statements by the President
Before we begin the sitting , I would like to say that our thoughts and prayers are , today , with the families and friends of the victims and with those who were injured in the railway accident which happened last week in the north of Italy .
It was , as we all remember , a very serious railway accident .
I would also like to thank all of you , Members and staff of Parliament - many people from Parliament - for attending and for organising the ceremony on Wednesday last week at 12.00 in connection with the Polish air disaster .
The funeral of the President of Poland was held yesterday , and the funeral of the President of Poland in exile was held today .
On Wednesday last week , we observed a one-minute silence in memory of the victims of the disaster .
I would like to thank you again for this act of solidarity .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you most sincerely , Mr President , for the sympathy that you expressed for the victims of the accident that occurred in my region and my country , the autonomous province of Bozen - South Tyrol - last week .
The people in my region are indeed extremely shocked by this accident , which cost the lives of nine , predominantly young , people and left many people injured .
It is all the more shocking because this train was not an old train , but a jewel of our region and it was a new route that was only opened a few years ago .
This accident was not due to a technical fault , either .
It was purely and simply the result of a landslide , which is something that can occur in a mountainous region like the Alps .
Thank you very much , Mr President . I will pass on your words of sympathy to the victims and to the people of my country .
( Applause )
I would like to thank everyone who is present in the House today , because we have overcome very great transport problems in getting to Strasbourg .
Not everyone has managed to come .
An extraordinary meeting of the Conference of Presidents ended a few minutes ago .
The chairs of the political groups have specific proposals for you , which have been agreed and endorsed by the chairs of all the political groups .
These proposals mean , in essence , that we will not have a plenary sitting on Thursday , and so there will be no order of business on Thursday .
However , on Thursday and Friday , Members will be able to sign the attendance register and work as usual .
There will be no plenary sitting and no order of business , but it is , of course , our obligation to work , and those who sign the attendance register on Thursday and Friday will be treated normally , as always on Thursdays and Fridays .
I would also like to emphasise that no votes will be taken this week in plenary or in committee , if any committee meetings are held .
A committee meeting may be held , even on Thursday , but without taking a vote .
This is what we have decided .
The reason for this is that not all our fellow Members were able , physically , to get here , and we cannot deprive them of the right to participate in this part-session .
So this has nothing to do with a quorum , because there will , probably , be a quorum , but it has to do with the fact that not everyone has been able to come to the part-session .
Deferring the votes is not serious from the legal point of view of our obligations to the Council .
The votes are important , and so we are postponing them by two weeks , and they will be taken at the May part-session in Brussels .
From the point of view of our work with the Council of Ministers , and of agreements and second readings , this can be done .
I would also like to say that there is an important reason why those of us who are here should meet and discuss , because tomorrow there is an extraordinary item which we had not foreseen .
This item , which we will discuss tomorrow morning , is related to the current transport situation in Europe and its consequences for Europe 's citizens .
Tomorrow , during a two-hour discussion attended by the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , we want to think about the situation in Europe , because mobility has fallen , airlines are in danger , and we are faced with unemployment in places where there are large airports and where European airlines might collapse if they are not able to serve passengers for many days .
This is , therefore , a serious threat to all of Europe 's citizens , and so tomorrow morning 's discussion is of key significance .
This item of business had not been agreed earlier ; it is a completely new item added as a consequence of the difficult situation in the European Union , and we must think seriously about it .
The remaining items will be discussed , except some of the items planned for Thursday .
I would also like to inform you that on 7 April this year , I received a letter from the Member , Mr Farage .
In his letter , the Co-Chair of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group refers to Rule 6 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure and makes a formal complaint concerning a breach of protocol on European Union privileges and immunities .
I have forwarded the request contained in Mr Farage 's letter to the competent committee for consideration .
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Monday , 19 April 2010 pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
( First part of the changes : see previous item )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order for your information .
It is nice for you to congratulate us for being here today .
Although it is difficult , it is our job .
It is nothing special .
I would simply like to recommend for next time that you make this job a little easier for us by providing us with information more quickly and by answering our emails so that we know what is likely to happen .
Those who are not here today may then perhaps also come .
( Applause )
I must admit that I do not fully understand your remark , Mr Leichtfried , because the Members have reacted very well .
However , let us leave this discussion .
Mr President , I would like to concur with the gentleman over there .
We know there is an issue regarding air travel - of course we do ; we are not silly - but I cannot understand why it has taken until tonight to come to this conclusion .
We have all arrived here today , there are many people in the Chamber , and there are many staff .
The costs to the taxpayer run into millions of pounds for us all to be here , and yet you decide to cancel it at a moment 's notice .
I think it is absolutely abysmal that you have done that .
I think there are enough people here to vote .
We know the difficult conditions , but this is supposed to be a parliament .
You have turned round now and said we are not going to vote , but you can come along and discuss things , debate things , which quite often means absolutely nothing , and then , when it comes to voting , we are told we cannot .
I think the taxpayer back in the UK will be absolutely appalled by this .
We have trouble in the UK with finances , we are cutting services , we have a general election , we are talking about saving money , and yet we are wasting money hand over fist over here .
Surely the time has come for this place to be shut down .
Thank you for your remark .
I treat all comments very seriously , but I would like to tell you that all the political groups and their representatives have agreed to the changes which I am about to propose .
( NL ) Mr President , I think it was a wise decision to postpone the vote because , although we have the required number of members for a quorum , we do not have the geographical distribution .
However , I would suggest that the points on the agenda that have not been covered are condensed so that we can finish a full day earlier than normal , i.e. at the end of Wednesday afternoon , as we usually do on Thursdays , rather than at Wednesday midnight .
That would at least allow people who are here to travel back home and we would not have to stay here on Thursday .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will give people the floor after establishing the order of business .
Mr President , thanks to the law of unintended consequences , moving this week 's votes to 6 May - that is the day of the general election in the United Kingdom - means that many , if not all , of the British MEPs from all parties and delegations will not be here on that day , which will also distort the final outcome .
Could you move it to Wednesday , 5 May instead of Thursday , 6 May please ?
Ladies and gentlemen , this is my proposal to you .
We shall start now with the agenda and after the agenda , we can start again with all your questions about the part-session on 5 and 6 May .
We will decide later ; it is not necessary to decide that now .
The only thing is that the votes will be held on 5 and 6 May .
All the decisions will be taken later .
We will start with the agenda .
I do not want any further points of order now .
The final draft agenda for the April part-session has been distributed , in which the following changes are proposed ( Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure ) :
Monday :
No changes .
Tuesday :
The sitting will begin at 09.00 with statements from the Council and the Commission on the disruption of air traffic in Europe .
The debate will continue until 11.00 .

From 11.00 to 13.00 , the following items will be discussed : a statement from Mr Barroso on the Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2010 and a statement from the Commission on coordination of humanitarian aid and reconstruction in Haiti .
No votes will be taken on Tuesday .
Wednesday :
No changes .
No votes will be taken on Wednesday .
Thursday :
There will be no sitting on Thursday .
( The order of business was thus established )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , thank you for letting me speak again .
In view of what has been said here now , at very short notice , I would urge you to look again at that matter of voting at the next session on 5 and 6 May .
It is quite likely that most of the MEPs from the UK will not be present .
It is our general election on 6 May .
The whole country will not be here .
You are going to discuss things which will not represent the United Kingdom .
I urge you to perhaps look at 4 May - bring it back a few days - because , if you deny that vote , you are going to deny the United Kingdom a chance to oppose or support measures ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
If I may give you my answer : I will take what you have said very seriously .
We have two days : 5 and 6 May .
We will decide how to proceed with the votes scheduled for 5 and 6 May , and how to divide them .
Before we begin , I would like to make an announcement .
As we all know , Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure allows for one-minute speeches .
Experience shows that we receive over two times more requests to speak than we can accept in view of the time available .
The disappointment expressed by Members who were waiting for the opportunity to speak , and then did not have the opportunity , is inevitable .
In order to avoid further uncertainty and disappointment , I am going to apply the following procedure in future for the one-minute speeches .
Pursuant to Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure , a list will be drawn up of 30 speakers , who will be chosen selectively so as to maintain a representative political and geographical balance .
Priority will be given to Members who did not have the opportunity to make a one-minute speech at the two previous part-sessions .
All Members who have requested the opportunity to speak will be told in advance if they have been chosen or not .
Members chosen to speak will be expected to be present in the Chamber at the time when it is their turn to speak .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the question of genetically modified food .
The European Commission is working on a proposal to change EU law , to give Member States greater freedom in deciding if they want to allow genetically modified organisms , because at the present time under EU law , it is not possible to introduce a ban on GMOs in Member States .
The European Commission is soon to propose that Member States be able to decide individually on the cultivation of genetically modified plants .
However , decisions on the importation and processing of GMO seeds would still be made at EU level .
In view of this , we should consider whether a special label should be introduced for GMO-free products .
Such labelling should be clear and universally recognisable , so that European consumers will know the product they are buying has not been produced from animals fed with genetically modified feed .
We should , therefore , think about a specific design of label .
Mr President , may I remind this House that one year ago , Communist abuses were met by a popular revolt in the Republic of Moldova .
The protests brought to power a pro-European coalition and , one year on , the new government proved its European stance .
The Moldovan Government needs immediate support from the EU , and there are three ways in which European support can help Moldova : quick financial assistance , abolishing of visas and the conclusion of an association agreement .
I also have to mention here the case of Ernest Vardanian , a journalist arrested , held incommunicado and indicted for high treason by the so-called authorities in Transnistria .
It is a serious human rights violation .
I am asking the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and the EU Head of Delegation to Moldova to act urgently for the immediate release of the detained journalist .
( SK ) Mr President , Secretary General , Commissioner , I should now deliver the speech I have prepared , but there have been some exceptional circumstances .
We all know that meteorological conditions do not favour us all meeting here in Strasbourg without difficulties .
This has caused many fellow Members and officials a lot of stress and anxiety .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you , Mr President , and also the General Secretariat under the leadership of Klaus Welle , for leaving nothing to chance and providing us with the best possible working conditions .
From the first days of the aviation problem , Parliament set to work on the reorganisation of transport to Strasbourg , and I would therefore also like to offer sincere thanks on behalf of those who cannot be here today . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , I tried to attract your attention earlier when you were talking about the new rules for the one-minute speeches .
Coming from Poland as you do , you will know what it means to have different classes of people and parliamentarians .
I would , however , ask that the people in the back rows also be taken into account in connection with points of order .
I have some specific questions .
Firstly , can you please clarify for me what you said earlier , namely whether , by the next two part-sessions , you mean the next two Strasbourg part sessions or whether you are also including Brussels in that ?
Secondly , what will you do if - as has just happened - Members are not here for whatever reason , even though they have requested the floor ?
Will there perhaps be another few minutes of catch-the-eye ?
Thirdly , in line with this new efficiency - which is to be welcomed - could you please make a start right away today by reading out the names of the 30 speakers you intend to give the floor to today ?
Thank you for your remark .
Application of the new rules will begin with the meeting in Brussels .
The part-session in Brussels will be the first one held under the new rules .
( DE ) Mr President , the problem of stray dogs in Romania has become topical once again as a result of the planned lifting of the ban on killing these dogs that has been in place since 15 January 2008 .
I am pleased that Romania has again refrained from implementing these plans .
However , the alternative that has now been chosen , namely to place dogs in mass animal shelters , is not the solution either .
The only sensible thing to do is to implement a castration programme .
Romania has refused to do this , however .
When it comes to this matter - like any animal protection matters - the European Union really should do something - and not before time .
Mr President , that was my one-minute speech .
I wanted to use the remaining time to explain once again what it was I wanted to say earlier .
( RO ) Mr President , when Simon Kuznets , the man who created the concept of ' gross national product ' , recognised how difficult it can be to measure a nation 's well-being , based only on the size of its national income , I do not think he imagined that it would take three quarters of a century before five Nobel prize winners would work on a set of proposals for providing a more accurate assessment of economic performance and social product than that offered by GDP .
This macro-economic indicator ignores the quality of products , fails to measure sustainable economic growth , and excludes other factors such as subsistence and suburban economies , household work and voluntary work .
Based on the outcome of the work carried out by this committee , summarised in the Stiglitz report , a proposal has been drafted for improving the national statistics system , defining the quality of life more accurately and including sustainable development in the calculation of the economic and social progress index .
In this context , I believe that we must have a coordinated system across the whole of the European Union for measuring quality of life , the extent to which economic growth can be sustained and , last but not least , social disparities .
This step would signal that we have learnt the lesson from the recession which is having such a major impact on us .
( ES ) Madam President , last week , a court ruled that the closure of the Basque language newspaper Egunkaria , which I spoke about here a few weeks ago , was an unjust , illegal and arbitrary act .
The ruling states that neither the Spanish Constitution nor the Criminal Code allows a newspaper to be closed down , and that the whole charge was built on the premise that defending Basque culture means collaborating with ETA , which is absurd .
It says that the people charged are completely innocent , that they do not belong to ETA , and that the newspaper has not funded ETA , nor has ETA funded the newspaper .
The ruling also states that the detainees were held incommunicado , with insufficient judicial controls , which gives credibility to the claims of ill treatment and torture made by the detainees .
I would therefore like to make two requests : I would like us to take note of the consequences that demagogy and the manipulation of feelings and emergency legislation have in a democracy , and of the fact that in Spain , the main elements of the media and the main parties accused all of us who opposed this injustice of collaborating with ETA .
I would also like us to work together to ensure that justice is done for these victims and that the case is closed fairly .
( EL ) Madam President , last February , the European Commission report edited by Reuter and Trautmann on global illicit drug markets from 1998 onwards was presented to the European Parliament .
This report is a valuable database and its conclusions corroborate certain evaluations made to date about the ineffectiveness of drugs policies in the European Union and at global level .
The basic conclusion is that current policies have failed in their main objective , namely , to reduce the demand for and supply of illicit substances , and are a key factor in exacerbating the harm to individual users , their environment , the economy and society .
In 2004 , the European Parliament approved a package of recommendations , such as the Catania report .
We are therefore calling for this issue to be revisited , within a broader framework , so that no harm comes to users .
( PL ) Madam President , my nation has been hit by a great tragedy .
The President , the head of the Central Bank and military leaders have been killed .
The funeral of the President and his wife was held yesterday .
I would like to express my thanks for the expressions of solidarity which have been received from very many Member States of the European Union .
The concept of European solidarity has proved itself , and this is , for us Poles , something very important .
The Presidents of the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Germany , Lithuania , Latvia , Romania and Slovenia and the Prime Minister of Estonia attended the funeral .
I regret that the head of the Council and the President of the European Commission were not there .
They could not come , but the Prime Ministers of Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia did come , for example , and they had a longer journey .
I would like to thank everyone who was there for these expressions of solidarity .
( DE ) Madam President , please allow me , in one minute , to make a few comments with regard to Serbia .
Serbia 's ambitions to join the EU seem to be putting wind in the country 's sails .
In any case , the country formally apologised recently for the genocide in Srebrenica - that is certainly not something that can be said about the controversial candidate country Turkey , where there is the threat of sanctions if a country merely debates the issue of the Armenian genocide .
The interpretation of the Copenhagen criteria is , in my view , arbitrary , if Belgrade is accused of a lack of cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague but the human rights violations by Ankara are considered unimportant .
However , it is nothing new for the European Union to apply double standards .
In Bosnia , several ethnic groups are to be thrust into one multicultural state , whereas in Kosovo , it is suddenly legitimate for one ethnic group to split away from an existing state .
In contrast to Turkey , Serbia is historically , spiritually and culturally part of Europe and a key state for the security of the Balkans .
Of course , we must not repeat the mistakes made in connection with the rushed accession of Bulgaria and Romania .
All accession criteria must definitely be met , but Serbia is a European country and should become part of the Union .
( EL ) Madam President , the recent dismantling of an important terrorist cell in Greece reminds us that violence and the threat to democratic institutions have no borders and are undiscriminating .
It is important to remember that the current economic crisis and the pessimism that it engenders in citizens feeds aggression and produces violence .
No one disagrees that violence is reprehensible , whatever form it takes and wherever it originates .
However , what we need to agree and put greater emphasis on is the importance of prevention rather than cure .
That is why we need to put issues relating to SWIFT , the PNR and the strengthening of Europol and Eurojust higher up on the agenda .
Having said which , it is vital that we correct the chronic social pathogenies that give birth to violence .
We need to strike at poverty and unemployment .
There is no longer any margin for inaction .
Last time the leaders of Europe backed away from the social challenges of difficult economic times , this continent sank into the depths of hatred and totalitarianism .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw the attention of the European Commission and of this House to the worrying developments with regard to the prices of raw materials .
Duisburg , home of the largest steelworks in Europe , is in my constituency .
Here , and in the other steel-producing locations in the EU , the employees are very concerned about their jobs because the three large suppliers of iron ore are forcing price increases of 100 % on the steel industry .
In future , the price of ore is to be traded on the London Metal Exchange instead of price security being ensured , as was previously the case , by means of long-term supply contracts .
The workforce and its trade unions fear that this will result in an extreme rise in the price of the base material , steel .
This comes at a time when the potential areas for savings by means of cost-cutting programmes and reductions in the workforce , particularly after the most recent restructuring in the steel industry , have been completely exhausted .
In order to draw attention to this situation , works councils and Germany 's Industrial Union of Metalworkers have directed an appeal on behalf of Duisburg to Chancellor Merkel and to President Barroso .
I would ask the Commission to respond to this appeal .
Madam President , travellers whose holiday plans have been ruined by the volcanic ash face confusion over insurance .
Although airlines will refund or rebook flights under the Air Passenger Rights Directive , many passengers face the cost of hotel rooms and car hire and perhaps alternative flight arrangements , but some travel insurance policies are expected to pay out for the losses .
There are others claiming that this is an act of God , but I would call on these companies to be pragmatic , to be reasonable and to reconsider that decision , bearing in mind that I , like many others , have numerous constituents who are at airports in various parts of the world , costing them money that they do not have .
I understand that the Package Travel Directive is being reviewed , and this must be done urgently .
In conclusion , it is essential that this travel directive ensures that there is a standard set of rules which applies to a situation of this kind .
Even at this stage , I would ask the Commission to look at this .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to propose in this , the democratic heart of the European institutions , a brief overview of the ultimate impact that European interventions have on communities , regions and individuals .
I believe that we must decide whether to present a universalist and globalist vision or , instead , to preserve the contribution and the identity of each individual .
I believe that the second option is preferable ; it is a broad vision in which the more unique dimensions deriving from specific vocations and traditions also have their place and their dignity .
Let us consider , for example , the effects of the 2006 Services Directive , the so-called Bolkestein Directive , on the Italian bathing resort sector . I do not believe that we should sacrifice , for the sake of a supposedly more efficient global system , the culture and the tradition of hospitality that have always characterised local communities .
I believe that , economically speaking , small enterprises are the most genuine expression of the cultural identity of local communities and that they should therefore always be safeguarded .
( DE ) Madam President , it is not easy these days to be a fervent pro-European .
I would like , today , to mention the problem of Eurostat .
It has turned out that Eurostat was much more aware of the real situation in Greece than it was generally thought to have been .
There are reports of which only parts were published and which uncovered cases of fraud as long ago as 2002 , and then , of course , there was the great report of 2008 .
However , it is totally unclear where the reports go , what the effects of these reports are , and who can be held responsible for them - in this instance , for not acting on them .
I would therefore like to suggest at this point that we deal constructively with Eurostat and not just with regard to the scandalous practices , which of course also existed in the past .
Thus , my suggestion is that the Commission takes action here to ensure the independence of Eurostat and to provide citizens with the information that we so badly need in order to revolutionise our democracy .
( PT ) Today , we are facing a natural disaster with unpredictable consequences .
Science allows us to calculate the effect of the particles in the atmosphere on aircraft engines and avionic systems with reasonable precision .
Science also allows us to calculate the movement of those particles in the atmosphere with a reasonable degree of precision .
EU transport ministers are meeting today to decide how to deal with the air transport situation .
The conclusions of this meeting should be based on scientific knowledge and the precautionary principle .
The economy cannot take priority over people 's safety .
Europe must continue to act as a bastion of safety and quality of life .
However , we expect swift , pragmatic solutions on alternative transport systems by land and sea .
Over the last year , we have been faced with a number of crises , natural disasters and an epidemic ; in view of all that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) Madam President , at the end of this year , the Third Postal Directive is due to come into force , which will completely deregulate this market .
The repercussions of the economic and financial crisis are well known , including on the postal market .
The effects of the crisis have multiplied following the implementation of the directive in Member States where the postal market has been completely deregulated .
In this sector , the level of redundancies and the reductions in the incomes of the remaining staff are higher than average .
There has also been a decrease in the number of transactions , an increase in postal rates , not to mention depriving citizens living in locations and areas which are difficult to reach of access to a means of communication and a universal service .
I believe that the social consequences resulting from the implementation of this directive must be assessed .
It is our duty to prevent the occurrence of social dumping .
I urge the relevant European institutions to examine the option of applying a minimum 2-year moratorium to the deadlines envisaged for implementing this directive , with some variation in each of the remaining Member States .
( RO ) I wish to speak to you today about the extremely delicate situation which a journalist called Ernest Vardanian finds himself in .
He was arrested by Igor Smirnov 's regime in the self-proclaimed Republic of Transnistria .
Ernest Vardanian is accused of high treason and espionage , which is not only absurd , but is completely laughable .
Indeed , the journalist has been refused release on bail and is being kept in totally awful conditions .
I would like to say that this action is used by the authorities in Tiraspol to intimidate Chişinău at a time when the new government which took office after last year 's elections would like to move closer to the European Union and also resolve the Transnistrian conflict .
I am calling for the immediate , unconditional release of the journalist Ernest Vardanian , and I urge the authorities in the self-proclaimed Republic of Transnistria to make a move towards Chişinău in order to resolve the conflict there .
( PL ) The financial and economic crisis has hit the poorest people the hardest .
To meet their needs , the European Union has declared the year 2010 to be European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It is estimated that in Europe , over 40 million people live in poverty , and nearly 40 million more are threatened with poverty .
It is particularly regrettable that a quarter of this number - 20 million - are children .
The problems they have to face concern not only a lack of food , medical care and clothing but , above all , the absence of the prospect of an improvement in the situation and an escape from poverty .
Providing a high level of education is the most important step which can help change this tragic situation .
This need can be seen most clearly in small towns and rural areas which are a long way from academic centres .
Therefore , I think a key solution for change is to increase funding for scholarship programmes for young people from poor backgrounds .
Mr President , I welcome the debate tomorrow on the air crisis because we need to remember that this has an impact not just on this Parliament , but on individuals and businesses across Europe .
This is at a time when Europe , or most of Europe , is recovering from a deep recession .
The UK , like many other countries - not all - is recovering from that recession , and that is due to the government intervening when the market failed and not standing on the sidelines as some would have us do .
There are many economic figures coming out in the UK in the next few weeks and I believe many of them will be positive .
That is because the government has intervened .
I think it is important for EU institutions also to intervene in difficult economic times .
All the institutions of the EU should , in the future , make sure our budgets are aimed at helping individuals and businesses come through difficult economic times and to plan for the recovery .
( PT ) The matter I am bringing before this plenary session today is the budgetary position of the various Member States .
I am doing so now that the time for submitting the stability and growth programmes has ended .
These programmes forecast the medium- and long-term positions of the various Member States .
In the specific case of my own country , Portugal , the Commission has remarked that the programme submitted is a risky one .
That is a worrying sign for the markets , but it was essentially a sign that it was looking at stability and the health of public accounts , when it is also important to look at the issue of growth .
Again , here too , the figures submitted by my country are not satisfactory , and concern for issues such as simplification for businesses and the situation of tax competitiveness is , unfortunately , still lacking .
Madam President , it was actually two speeches back , but I would like to ask the gentleman over there who was advocating EU intervention how he thinks the EU should intervene against volcanic ash .
Supplementary questions using the blue card are not permitted during the one-minute speeches .
Thus , it was not a point of order .
Your fellow Member could perhaps answer your question on a one-to-one basis , but in any case not during the plenary debate .
( FR ) Madam President , I would have liked you to bear in mind a male-female balance when giving the floor .
You gave the floor to a man five times in a row .
Thank you very much .
As you can imagine , as President of the High Level Group on Gender Equality and Diversity , equality is very important to me .
We have a list of speakers and we did try to make it balanced .
Who gets the opportunity to speak during the debate is , of course , also dependent on who is actually present .
That concludes this item .
Power of legislative delegation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Szájer , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the power of legislative delegation - .

rapporteur . - ( HU ) Madam President , Mr Šefčovič , many speakers start their speech in Parliament by saying that their topic is important , very important or even among the most important .
I , too , would like to say this , but with much more reason than many others , since the subject we are discussing now , Parliament 's power of legislative delegation to the Commission , is perhaps the most important and yet often neglected innovation in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Those who criticised the Treaty of Lisbon spoke of a democratic deficit .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that this amendment , that is , the guarantee of Parliament 's power of legislative delegation , is one of the most significant expansions of Parliament 's jurisdiction .
This means that representatives elected directly by citizens will henceforth be able , in Parliament and by virtue of their legislative powers , to oversee and veto the implementing resolutions and decisions introduced by the European Commission .
In other words , this element of the Treaty of Lisbon , frequently mentioned in connection with the expansion of Parliament 's powers , namely , that the codecision procedures have increased significantly in number and that the areas in which Parliament can participate have expanded , represents , along with the question of Parliament 's power of legislative delegation , not only a quantitative but also a significant qualitative expansion .
In other words , from now on , as the result of a long struggle and battle which has been fought here for many years , and which continues to be fought by the Members of the European Parliament , we are guaranteed that the decisions taken by the European Commission which do not fall within its own jurisdiction but are adopted through delegated legislative powers are overseen by Parliament .
Many may say , of course , that in a formal sense , this oversight already existed .
In a sense , that is true , but with such deadlines and in such circumstances , and as a result of such legislative and interinstitutional cooperation as did not allow for effective oversight .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that this new possibility , that is , Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon , will also transform the work of Parliament in the coming years , particularly if we , Members of Parliament , take these powers seriously and are truly able to take decisions on these matters .
If the outside world and non-specialists in this area are also to understand what this is all about , since this is a very technically complex subject matter that nevertheless concerns a democratic institution and serves to eliminate the so-called democratic deficit in Europe , we should point out the following : What this means is that Parliament and the Council , the two legislative powers of the European Union , cannot on their own deal with every matter of detail .
Parliament sits every month , and sometimes there are circumstances , like now , when we are sitting but cannot vote , even though Parliament must , after all , oversee those issues which the Council or the Commission , under delegated legislation , addresses .
From now on , it will be possible to do so .
In my report , I strove to make it clear that Parliament insists on these rights .
We will not accept any additional obligation that goes beyond what is laid down in the treaty .
We will not accept it because we wish to exercise our rights fully , and I think that European democracy will increase as a result .
If we are to do so , close cooperation with the Commission and the Council is , of course , necessary , but we must not forget that now the competence rests with the legislators , and therefore with Parliament and the Council .
I wish to thank everyone , all my fellow Members , for their cooperation in this complex subject matter , and also wish that Parliament will , in future , use its new powers to the full .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Szájer for the very high quality report because we in the Commission appreciate very much the support Parliament has indicated for the horizontal approach to the delegated acts .
The legislator , of course , is entirely free to regulate all questions related to delegated acts in each basic act , but some guidelines are needed in order to avoid a piecemeal approach .
This was the purpose of the communication the Commission already made in December to indicate to the legislator what would be the preferred course of action for having a good and practical approach to the future legislation .
I would like to underline that the Commission strongly supports the idea of common understanding , or even interinstitutional agreement between the three institutions on the delegated acts , because this will bring the necessary order into the preparation of the legislation .
On the substance , I can just reiterate that the Commission very much welcomes the report .
We might disagree on some specific questions but our objectives are the same .
We want to see precision , efficiency , transparency and a clear and fair balance of power .
If you would allow me to be a little bit more specific , I will just make some telegraphic comments on some particular parts of the report .
Regarding the limitative nature of Article 290 , especially the second paragraph , here we have a slight difference of opinion with regard to the means of control of the legislator over the delegated acts , but we would not like to enter into the legal controversy because what we think is that it is very important to look for the practical solutions as regards specific legislation .
Regarding the duration of the delegation of power , here we very much welcome and support the idea of tacit renewal , as expressed in the report , because we found it very constructive and we can say that some solutions of this nature have already been found in several legislative files .
I have another specific comment on the duration of the right of objection .
Here , again , I would say that we are singing from the same hymn sheet because we also largely share the opinion of the rapporteur for the standard formulation of two months , with a possibility of extension for an additional two months , which could be fixed in a common understanding among our three institutions , which , hopefully , we will have in the future .
I think we have already seen something like 10 positive examples of how this was applied in the current legislative work .
Regarding the urgency procedure , here we already had some clear examples in the past that there are issues as regards food safety or safety of toys , for instance , that sometimes call for a very urgent procedure and , therefore , we think that we have to find something even more urgent than the early approval proposition made by the rapporteur .
If you would allow me to conclude on the alignment , because this is very important for Parliament , here again we would advocate the pragmatic approach , because this Parliament , together with the Commission , has already done considerable work as regards the alignment of more than 250 basic legislative acts which have been aligned under the pragmatic approach .
Now we think that the priority should lie in the areas in which we have not , until now , aligned to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
I think that we should focus on them .
Again , it would be an enormous amount of work , but we are already reflecting on how we can approach it in the most pragmatic and flexible way .
Madam President , Commissioner , the European Parliament has been waiting for this moment for a long time , namely for Parliament to be on an equal footing with the Council with respect to the control of legislative delegation .
To illustrate this point : in 2008 , there were 6 000 delegated acts , in other words , a huge mountain of standards , which were turned into a kind of secondary legislation by the Commission and the old comitology procedure .
Parliament had very few rights in this process .
We were informed , but we were not colegislators .
The Treaty of Lisbon has now changed that .
With regard to the control of delegated acts , we are on an equal footing with the Council , and we also want to utilise our equal standing to the full .
That means , Commissioner , that when you argue that the urgency procedure is possible , then we will also need to receive information at as early a stage as possible .
We want to receive information as early as the Council receives it .
I think it is only fair to start by congratulating Mr Szájer on the excellent report he has presented to us .
As has rightly been said , the Treaty of Lisbon strengthens the powers of the European Parliament and introduces rules to reinforce democratic control .
I therefore think Parliament deserves to be congratulated twice over : not only on Mr Szájer 's excellent report , which I have just mentioned , but also because the new rules abolish the old comitology system , which we have criticised so often in this House .
We now have Article 290 of the Treaty of Lisbon , and I note that Mr Szájer 's report suggests a number of ways of working that safeguard Parliament 's prerogatives .
With this new provision , Parliament can concentrate on essential legislative acts and give the Commission a margin of flexibility to complete non-essential legislative acts within the limits laid down by the legislator .
As Mr Leinen has rightly said , we are now on an equal footing with the Council and , therefore , Parliament is not in a position of inferiority .
Madam President , I would like to highlight some aspects of Mr Szájer 's report that I think are particularly important .
The first is the idea that we reject any provisions that impose on the legislator additional obligations over and above those already included in Article 290 .
Secondly , the Commission must ensure early and continuous transmission of information and relevant documents .
Thirdly , the periods should only start once all the language versions - I repeat , all the language versions - have been received .
The last point is that Parliament 's recess periods must be taken into account .
Madam President , these often underestimated structural issues with regard to the relationships within the institutional triangle have been summed up very well indeed in Mr Szájer 's report .
The cooperation was extremely constructive and I would also like to express my sincere thanks for that .
Through the Treaty of Lisbon , we have created new relationships , and these new relationships must not be undermined again through the back door .
That is actually the key point in this regard .
The purpose behind this was to place the European Parliament on an equal footing with the Council , including with regard to delegated acts , and to ensure , firstly , that this is feasible and , secondly , can be guaranteed during the procedure .
The absolutely key issues for us , therefore , are that the appropriate conditions are created , for example , by us having clear access to the documents in good time in order to take the necessary decisions and , secondly , that no procedures are operated on the basis of a ' common understanding ' , but that instead we have agreements that are fixed and which cannot be subject to political arbitrariness or the political agenda of the day .
For this , we need firm , sound rules through which we can protect the rights of Parliament in practice rather than just simply taking note of them in theory .
Thank you , Mr Szájer .
It was an excellent collaboration and I hope that we can also use it to achieve what we need to achieve for our fellow Members .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the rapporteur is right to refer to the democratic deficit .
The elitist construct that is the EU has a democratic deficit that has increased , is increasing and , after the Lisbon Treaty , will increase still further .
I have to say that I am bemused that the rapporteur , despite his eloquence , sees Article 290 as a solution .
Our interpretation of Article 290 is that this gives the Commission the opportunity to supplement or amend legislation .
Such an opportunity is far-ranging and wide-sweeping and is open to almost unlimited interpretation .
We would argue that the safeguards against the inappropriate use of the powers thereby delegated to the Commission are clearly insufficient .
Perhaps the rapporteur will comment in his response as to why they are sufficient .
This therefore amounts to a further transfer of power from the elected Parliament to the unelected Commission , whatever the Lisbon Treaty purports to say .
We have always maintained , and continue to maintain , that the Lisbon Treaty lacks democratic legitimacy largely because a referendum was promised in the UK by all three establishment political parties , and all three establishment political parties spectacularly reneged on that promise .
Article 290 is therefore a product of the illegitimate Lisbon Treaty .
It increases the democratic deficit - I would be interested to hear from the rapporteur why it does not - and it should therefore be opposed .
( DE ) Madam President , as a fervent pro-European , I was against the Treaty of Lisbon , precisely because it makes possible the kind of arguments that we have just heard , and precisely because it has not created the clarity and explicitness that I would want above all else for future generations .
I am a realist , however , and I would say that now we have to live with it .
It is very important to say once more explicitly that this article , Article 290 , can be interpreted as saying that not just the Council , but also Parliament can repeal the relevant delegation single-handedly and in a relatively simple way .
We will need to remind ourselves of this again and again .
Of course , what Mr Leinen has said is also true , namely that we now already have thousands of legislative acts which occupy a grey area in terms of comprehensibility , and which , in turn , continually provides grist to the mill of the anti-Europeans , the opponents of a European project , an EU which should function in those areas where we desperately need it .
Once again , this has a lot to do with transparency .
It therefore seems to me to be very important that in paragraph 10 , it is proposed that the arrangements for the transmission of documents , among other things , need to be clarified explicitly .
Quite a few of us know the Freedom of Information Act , and quite a few of us have experience of the way in which things are done in the USA .
Why then do we not simply do a ' copy and paste ' and make it possible for citizens , and also for us in Parliament , to obtain the relevant documents independently , and not by act of grace and through massive amounts of intervention by political groups ?
Why do we not make this into a right , given that we are already taking the great risk of having thousands of delegated legislative acts ?
On that note , I would say keep up the good work .
We will be constructive partners on the road to revolutionising democracy .
( RO ) Madam President , Commissioner , with regard to the process for delegating executive power to the Commission , the Treaty of Lisbon has something new to say on this .
In fact , Article 290 refers precisely to this matter .
Indeed , delegated acts are general acts which may modify unnecessary aspects of a basic legislative act , providing a mandate for delegating executive power to the Commission .
In practice , this allows for a mandate to be defined , along with the duration of delegation , the timeframe within which Parliament and the Council can lodge objections , as well the conditions for revoking the mandate .
Parliament and the Council exercise control , but only after the adoption of the delegated acts .
Delegated acts can also be published during the timeframe within which the European Parliament and Council can raise objections .
However , I ask you , Commissioner , to guarantee greater transparency too during the process of drawing up the delegated acts .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , allow me to react to the comments of the honourable Members .
I absolutely agree with Mr Leinen that the Lisbon Treaty brought in enormous changes .
This was underlined by the rapporteur , Mr Szájer .
I would like to assure you that we are fully aware of it and that we would use the procedure with the utmost respect for the legislator , because this is very important for our mutual relationship and for our good cooperative work .
With regard to urgency and to urgent procedures , I would like to assure all of you that we will use it only in extreme , exceptional cases .
We know that , if we abused this instrument , we would have a very difficult relationship , and it is definitely not our intention to do that .
Concerning the comments by Mr Coelho and Ms Lichtenberger , I would like to assure you as well that we will do our utmost to guarantee and to provide you with an early transcription of all documents at the same time as the Council , and with all the necessary translations .
We know the Lisbon Treaty introduced this very important change , that , when it comes to the legislative or financial matters , the European Parliament is on absolutely the same footing as the Council .
Moreover , we are planning to develop a new type of cooperation whereby the European Parliament would be involved in the preparatory work of delegated acts , and we would like to do this on very solid ground .
You will therefore also find the expression of this new relationship in the framework agreement that we are currently negotiating between the Commission and the European Parliament .
Moving to the comments by the Earl of Dartmouth and Mr Martin concerning the unlimited powers which this Article 290 should bring to the Commission , I do not think this is really the case , because it is you , the legislator , who will decide ( or not ) to delegate the power to the Commission .
It is you , the legislator , who will have the chance to revoke this power or to object to the proposals the Commission will make .
So I cannot accept that we are entering a grey zone , because I think the powers of the legislator are very clearly set out in the treaty , and the Commission will , of course , respect that .
I wish to thank my fellow Members for this debate , since the drafting of this report was made possible by the very close cooperation between the committees - and I would make special mention of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which will have many such tasks in the coming period - and the political parties .
I would also add , my fellow Members , that this is a struggle .
A struggle with the Commission , a struggle with the Council , since it is a struggle for our rights .
This report is about affirming clearly that these are our rights and we insist on them .
It is much easier to do this in a situation in which the committees as well as fellow Members of other parties stand behind me , so that we make it clear to our partner institutions that Parliament insists most decidedly on these issues .
At the same time , in order that we may be able to exercise this right effectively , I take the words of Mr Šefčovič as encouragement that the general alignment can speed up in the coming months and that we may indeed extend these rights as broadly as possible .
We consider it important primarily for those areas where codecision did not previously exist .
Another very significant aspect , which fellow Members have also mentioned here , is that access to information is important .
This access must be set out in an interinstitutional agreement , and discussions are under way with the Commission and with the Council in this regard .
However , we would like to know what the Council is doing ; what sort of consultation it is conducting on these matters .
As far as whether our rights have been expanded or reduced , ladies and gentlemen , please read the report and look at the legislation .
I cannot interpret the latter any other way than that our rights have expanded .
Until now , we had no say in what happens to the powers that we had previously delegated .
In practice , Parliament was not assigned any role in this process .
They listened to us out of politeness , but the deadlines were so short that Parliament did not even sit during that period .
Now , on the other hand , we can veto or withdraw these decisions and are not even required to give our reasons - in other words , this is most definitely an expansion of rights .
We are the ones with the legislative power and we delegate these powers to the Commission .
Therefore , I cannot see this as anything other than an expansion of our rights .
Fellow Members , it is now up to us alone to decide whether to exercise these rights in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next plenary sitting in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Firstly , I would like to thank Mr Szájer for the outstanding work delivered in so little time .
The delegated acts will be of paramount importance for Union law and the interinstitutional balance in the EU .
Therefore , it is fundamental that they are developed and decided upon in a fully transparent manner which effectively enables the Parliament and the Council to democratically control the exercise of the power delegated to the Commission .
To this extent , as advocated by the Szájer report , some issues will be of utmost importance and require our stronger commitment .
These include , inter alia , the possibility for the European Parliament to revoke the delegation at any time and to make sure that Parliament and Council are conferred the same rights concerning their involvement in the process of delegation .
Finally , I would like to stress that it should be a priority for the Commission to present all legislative proposals needed to adapt the acquis to the provisions of Articles 290 and 291 , including the acquis in policy areas which , pursuant to the Lisbon Treaty , are now subject to the codecision procedure .
in writing . - I warmly welcome the outcome of the report by Mr Szájer .
Defining the new legislative system is a difficult and complex issue .
I am convinced that the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and , in particular , Articles 290 and 291 thereof , reinforces the democratic character of the Union and rationalises its legal order .
The introduction of the novel concept of legislative acts has far-reaching consequences .
The report emphasises the slight differences among the key colegislators , the competences and the detailed agenda of how they work with each other .
The real question is : in case the EC gets more legislative competences and wider legislative authorities , which means an immediate increase in Community interests , what kind of control methods should be introduced on behalf of the Council and the EP ?
The new legislative framework of the TFEU set up the tools but there has not been any practical experience of their adaptation at Community level .
Finally , I urge the colegislators to have an interinstitutional agreement as soon as possible between the Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the implementation of Article 290 , as there is an urgent need for greater transparency .
The delegation procedure , although it remains in the background , is a very important transition in quality introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It should be treated as a fulfilment of the treaty , without which the position of Parliament will not be fully consolidated in relation to the other institutions in the decision-making process .
For it is only by this procedure that we will gain full legislative power and a role in the implementation process of any piece of legislation .
We well know the frustration associated with the laborious process of negotiating with the Council in the codecision procedure and in the case of decisions where implementation contravenes the interinstitutional agreement .
Hitherto , ' comitology ' was an expression of Member States ' lack of trust towards the Commission , whereas now , the role of Parliament in the implementation of a legal act gives the process greater legitimacy .
Parliament , and , indirectly , EU citizens , will find themselves closer to the process of enacting EU law , and this is how we should view the delegation procedure .
However , for this to make sense , Parliament must be given full access to information and , in this , I am in full agreement with the other participants in this debate .
Introducing the possibility of legislative delegation is intended to ensure that legislation , and especially legislation of a technical nature , will be completed and updated more efficiently without the need to institute a full legislative procedure each time .
Delegation should , therefore , be seen as a tool for improving the process of law making at EU level .
At the same time , it is essential to ensure appropriate control over the use of regulatory powers conferred on the Commission .
Parliament and the Council must , among other things , have sufficient time available to exercise the right to object to planned regulations .
Above all , however , they must have adequate access to documents , analyses and contributions prepared during preparatory work on drafts of delegated acts .
Only in this way will the powers of the Commission to publish delegated acts be of real service in improving the legislative process in the Union while , at the same time , retaining essential control over and transparency of the Commission 's activities .
It is also essential to develop suitable mechanisms of cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , so that Parliament will be kept informed about preparatory work which is in progress and be able to gain a good knowledge of the nature of the issues under consideration .
The resolution on the power of legislative delegation , which is the result of a compromise agreed between all the political groups , presents the above matters properly and deserves Parliament 's support .
Air safety : EU airline blacklist ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the subject of air safety : the EU airline blacklist - B7-0205 / 2010 ) .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , the question was submitted by Brian Simpson , on behalf of Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism , following the Commission 's report looking into the effectiveness of the EU blacklist .
The EU blacklist was established in 2006 to name , shame and ban airlines which are not complying with international safety rules .
It was established in response to concerns over the level of enforcement of international safety standards and on the back of several fatal air crashes over a short space of time in 2004 and 2005 .
Four years on , we know that the blacklist has proved an effective and valuable tool in promoting enforcement of ICAO safety standards and in protecting EU citizens .
How we can now build on this is the question facing us today .
In other words , how can we extend the protection beyond our own borders and further work towards the goal of improving global aviation security ?
The blacklist has a responsibility not only to identify where the safety risks lie but also to ensure that this information is effectively communicated to EU citizens .
In line with this , how can we ensure that EU citizens taking flights outside Europe are aware of banned air carriers that continue operating in other regions of the world ?
In cases where the air carrier 's licence has been revoked , and therefore the air carrier does not appear on the blacklist , how can we be sure that passengers are aware of this situation ?
We have seen how effective the bringing together of different national blacklists into one comprehensive EU-wide list has been .
However , the blacklist is only as good as the access we have to information relating to the safety of air carriers .
How can we build on the information which forms the basis of the blacklist by improving the access to verifiable and reliable information ?
This means not only looking at strengthening the checks made in EU Member States but also approving the data information received from non-EU Member States .
Would the Commission consider establishing harmonised and standardised ramp checks and reporting ?
In terms of improving the data information received from third countries , would the Commission consider establishing an effective system of international exchange of reliable data , bringing us closer to a kind of worldwide blacklist which I know has been mooted in the past ?
Furthermore , it is worth pointing out that the blacklist has proved an effective tool in incentivising airlines to meet international safety standards .
But how can we work more proactively towards the ultimate goal of improving global aviation safety ?
By this I mean , how does the Commission intend to support national civil aviation authorities in meeting safety deficits based on ICAO audits and improving their oversight capability ?
It is crucial that we ensure effective communication channels with the public , but it is also vitally important that , in the long term , we continue to work on promoting the enforcement of international aviation safety standards around the world .
This will ultimately be the most effective way of improving safety for all passengers .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism of the European Parliament looks forward to working with the Commission to try and build on the EU 's blacklist achievements .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I thank Mrs Ţicău for her very positive evaluation of the approach to the blacklist .
The Commission is convinced that the existing measures already provide for a very high level of information and rights to the public for flights within and outside the European Union .
The list of airlines banned within the European Union is made widely available to the public on the Internet and by targeted information actions .
The Commission liaises closely with European and international travel agent associations each time the list is updated .
This allows them to be in the best possible position to aid the passengers .
National civil aviation authorities and airports in the territory of Member States are obliged to bring the EU list to the attention of passengers , both via their websites and , where relevant , on their premises as well .
The list provides useful information to people wishing to travel outside the European Union in order for them to avoid travelling with these airlines .
The list has no extra-territorial effect - it does not apply outside the European Union .
Hence , the Regulation establishes passengers ' rights to know the identity of every airline they fly with throughout their trip .
The contracting carrier - or travel agent or tour operator - is required to inform passengers when making a reservation of the identity of the air carrier or carriers effectively operating the flight .
The passenger must also be kept informed of any change of operating carrier , either at check-in or , at the latest , when boarding .
The Regulation also gives passengers the right to reimbursement or re-routing if a carrier with which a booking has been made is subsequently added to the list , resulting in cancellation of the flight concerned .
Different sources of information are used to monitor and assess the compliance of operators with international safety standards ; namely , the safety audits carried out by the International Civil Aviation Organisation , the information provided by competent authorities of third countries , the information provided by the European Aviation Safety Agency in the framework of its inspections and investigations within the European Union or technical missions outside the European Union , the results of the ramp checks carried out on aircraft or air carriers at EU airports in the framework of the Safety Assessment of Foreign Aircraft Programme , according to the requirements of the relevant EU rules , and , finally , substantiated accident-related information stemming from accident or serious incident investigation reports .
I should also mention that the European Commission does not , at this stage , have a comprehensive list of the countries which have similar legislation but several states - the Republic of Korea , Bahrain and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia - apply the same restrictions as those defined in the European list .
I can confirm that the Commission is ready to work with Parliament to really improve this blacklist legislation , but it provides for much-needed safety in the air .
Madam President , as I was rapporteur for this regulation almost five years ago , I am delighted to see that we have put in place a mechanism that works and that has even been extended over the years .
The Commission 's report on the application of the ' blacklist ' regulation seems comprehensive and offers interesting food for thought .
In particular , I endorse the idea of an international blacklist , the sole guarantee of a global harmonised level of aircraft safety .
Nevertheless , I would like to put some questions to the Commission .
Firstly , I would like to know how the right to defence is exercised when it is not just one air carrier that is banned , but all the air carriers of a state .
Do all of these air carriers state their case , or just the civil aviation authority of the country concerned , and , in this regard , how can certain safe air carriers avoid being included on the blacklist ?
Moreover , another very important point in my opinion is aeroplane monitoring .
Does the Commission specifically monitor all the aircraft of an air carrier which has been included on the list or whose licence has been revoked , so as to ensure that these aircraft do not take to the skies again under a different name ?
In this respect , has the Commission identified states believed to be used as flags of convenience , accepting banned air carriers which then change their name and state of registration ?
Furthermore , in the event that an air carrier is on the blacklist , does the Commission have any information about how travel agencies and ticket sellers have notified and compensated travellers , or offered them alternatives ?
Lastly , before I conclude , I have a question regarding a specific matter : a number of MEPs have received messages , which could be described as insistent , about Indonesia , all air carriers of which have been banned , requesting that we ask the Commission to take Indonesia off the blacklist .
I find this pressure to be inappropriate since commercial reasons do not justify endangering passengers ' lives .
I would like to know the current situation in that country , and whether , having been on the blacklist for several years , Indonesia has taken steps to remedy the safety deficiencies of which it was accused .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is obviously a bit surreal having a debate about the blacklist at a time when the whole of aviation in Europe is in chaos , but I understand that we will have the opportunity tomorrow for a topical and urgent debate and that is exactly what we will have .
The blacklist itself is an important topic and we can say that it has been a success thanks to , amongst other things , the impetus of Madam de Veyrac , who indeed worked hard a few years ago to make it a reality .
We must build on and learn from the experience we have gained .
There are some areas where further action is necessary .
First of all , in the area of communication with passengers .
It is right that passengers need to be informed if they are booking a blacklisted plane somewhere , at a travel agency , for example , but it is often the case that passengers decide to take a domestic flight only when they are already in a particular place .
My proposal therefore is that we explore whether it would be possible for travel agents and airlines which book flights to countries with unsafe airlines or unsafe aeroplanes to inform passengers automatically of this even though they themselves , of course , are not on the blacklist .
We need to think that one through .
A second aspect here is helping passengers avoid aeroplanes , airlines and countries which have been placed on the blacklist .
When it comes to capacity-building assistance for third countries , and certainly in the poorest countries , the European Union could provide much more help and know-how and ensure that the aviation authorities also have the necessary capacity to resolve the issues they have .
One point mentioned by Madam de Veyrac is , of course , people being misled .
Do we really have a watertight system ?
Are we sure there are no loopholes here and there through which airlines from a country which is on the blacklist might actually operate via other countries or islands ?
We have seen some examples of that .
To conclude , I also think that we should work towards a worldwide blacklist .
I would like to know what efforts you have made with your colleagues from other countries , for example , at ICAO level , to make such a list become a reality .

Madam President , at the moment , our airspace is at a standstill - we know this ; it has already been mentioned .
We will soon be discussing how we can remedy this situation .
We may actually have to fear , as regards economic questions in particular , that the airlines will soon face even bigger problems .
Of course , this does not need to influence safety .
This is about aviation safety for European passengers .
For us in Europe , it is a great achievement that people are able to move about freely , and that consumers can decide freely how they want to travel , which air carriers to book flights with and which not .
In order to be able to decide freely , it is , of course , necessary to actually receive the relevant information as well .
Now we have just heard that we have already had this blacklist since 2006 , and that in principle , people should be informed as to whether they can arrive safely or not .
For me , the question is really - just as Mrs De Veyrac and Mr El Khadraoui have already said - whether there are actually holes in the system , and whether people really always get all the information on safety that they need .
We simply want everyone who flies here in Europe to be transported safely and to arrive safely .
Finally , another thing that plays a role with regard to safety is to know whether an airline is financially strong .
Airlines must regularly apply to their national authorities to make sure that they are actually allowed to fly in European airspace , and this process involves not just checking whether they actually observe all of their safety obligations , carry out all the required checks and are able to transport people safely , but also checking whether they are financially strong enough to be able to stay in the transportation business in the long term .
As far as I know , to date we have not had a European airline on a blacklist .
Despite this , though , we have actually had the SkyEurope incident just in the last year .
What happened then was that European citizens had booked with a European airline , but had no information on the fact that this company was on the brink of bankruptcy .
They took the flight and were stranded , and so they had no information that would have protected them .
This actually makes me wonder - even if the Commission has said that it has the information and is publishing it , that there is an obligation to publish it - why this , for example , was not known .
Do we actually have a guarantee that everything that passengers need to know , everything that is required , is always passed on ?
I would like to have an answer to this generally in the debate .
Madam President , Commissioner , Parliament showed a lot of initiative when it came to drawing up this blacklist .
This was done in a responsible manner too , which means that it provides the highest possible level of safety for consumers .
However - and this is also an issue now - we need to check whether it has really worked well enough in the current situation .
The first question that I would like to ask about this is as follows .
It is possible to access information over the Internet , but it is not always very easy with the different airlines .
I have tried this out for myself .
You cannot always immediately find information , for example , on connecting flights which require you to land in a third country .
So here we have a problem then .
The second open question , and this would be of interest to me : what experiences have people had with wet leasing ?
Here , there have been serious concerns that it could become a loophole for enterprises which are not very reputable .
Have there been any positive or negative developments with regard to this ?
Third , and this is a very important point : has this way of regulating companies through the blacklist had a preventative effect on airlines , so that they - non-European ones in particular - have followed safety regulations more closely ?
How does the selective authorisation of a few aircraft belonging to certain airlines work , where we only allow them to use certain aircraft to come to Europe ?

Madam President , Mr Piebalgs , I hope , but am by no means sure , that the effects of the volcanic eruption in Iceland will not , by any chance , be shifted onto European passengers , if we are talking about ticket prices .
For you are , indeed , right that these stoppages in air transport will probably be offset by higher ticket prices .
It is worth saying this , in defence of the interests of the European consumer .
The European Parliament is speaking on this matter yet again .
This shows what importance we attach to the matter .
I spoke about this a couple of months ago .
Many of you also spoke then , and I remember the previous parliamentary term , when we spoke very openly about this , too .
After everything that has been said , I have a personal reflection .
A journalist from the most influential newspaper in Poland asked me , ' What do you people do in the European Parliament ?
After all , it is such an unimportant issue . '
Only now have the media begun to be aware that it is a very important question , a question of security and an absolutely fundamental question from the point of view of the interests of European citizens , taxpayers , voters and consumers .
It is not normal that we know what the blacklist in the European Union is like , but we do not know what it is like outside the European Union .
This is a completely schizophrenic situation .
Now to the final and very important matter : it must not be that European passengers pay extra for security - this is , after all , a matter for states and governments .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , seen in this way , the blacklist was an interesting achievement of this Parliament under the leadership of Mrs De Veyrac and her colleagues from the previous legislative term .
The blacklist can affect companies , countries or aircraft , and I believe that in connection with this , the Commission should provide somewhat more detailed answers to the questions that have been raised , particularly as regards the extent to which companies have a say in decision making in different countries , and why this procedure takes place in connection with individual aircraft .
Further development is also important for us .
We have already explained in the debate a few years ago that it remains important to us for the Commission to improve follow-up on these acts and measures in communications , at least with Parliament .
This is because there are certain questions which remain open for us , not least the monitoring of the airlines , as well as the question of aircraft which could suddenly fly under a different name at some point , and regarding the fact that today , a certain level of transparency is required for those decisions in particular which could be taken at the last minute .
With that , I come to the point which is most important for me : information .
All in all , we are of the opinion - and I think that this is true across the groups - that citizens and passengers have the right , and there should accordingly be an obligation , for the companies to inform them systematically that information regarding the blacklist can be obtained at airports without any problems , as well as at travel agencies , and that , especially when flying to ' certain countries ' which are already known for problems today , travel agencies indicate which companies are problematic when rebookings are being made .
For us , the aim is that this measure , which has now essentially already improved safety , is not just extended to Europe and European passengers , but is adopted worldwide .
Madam President , I would like to raise an issue which is closely linked to aviation safety and which underlines the need to make the operation of the EU blacklist as effective as possible .
In December 2008 , the Council finally adopted the EU Code of Conduct on arms transfers .
This code controls the export from the EU of military technology and equipment .
However , a concern persists that not all EU arms-exporting countries are abiding by the code and that European arms are still being supplied to conflict zones .
But one measure has been shown to be very effective in curtailing the illegal supply of arms , and that is the EU aviation blacklist .
A Swedish study in 2008 showed that the air cargo operators who are involved in arms transfers to conflict zones are the same operators who habitually violate air safety standards .
Maybe it is not surprising that dodgy operators with a lax approach to safety should also be revealed as dodgy operators as far as the cargoes they carry are concerned .
But the happy consequence of this link is that the measures to ensure strict control of aircraft , measures which are designed to protect European citizens , are also helping to protect the citizens of other continents , especially Africa , from the destruction that takes place when conflicts are fuelled by abundantly available small arms and light weaponry .
So I would ask Commissioner Piebalgs as Development Commissioner if he could add his personal weight to the Commission 's efforts to ensure that the blacklists are implemented effectively and systematically .
( RO ) The blacklist of unsafe air carriers is a measure for protecting European passengers which I very warmly welcome .
The list must be well publicised by both the European Commission and Member States , and especially by tourism agencies .
In actual fact , it all boils down to the good faith and good will of tour operators and travel agents .
On the other hand , a solution needs to be found for the scenario where a particular destination is only served by unsafe air carriers .
A large number of the carriers on the blacklist serve destinations in developing or underdeveloped countries in Africa , South-East Asia and Central Asia .
This begs a valid question : To what extent can fair competition still be guaranteed between large European , US and Far Eastern air carriers and small transport companies that have been set up in these developing countries ?
In this respect , I believe that we need to consider how the European Union could support their development through improving the safety and security of their flights , rather than excluding them from the market via a ban .
This would enable the European Union to fulfil a duty of honour by supporting the sustainable development of the air transport sector in these less advantaged states as well .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to make a general comment and then ask two or three questions , depending on how much time you allow me .
The general comment is as follows .
I find it almost ludicrous that in the present situation , we , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , have received , in three air safety reports , a total of nine minutes of speaking time .
Of course , there is the special session tomorrow , but I believe that it is about time for this House to pay more attention to things that really affect people , and perhaps to cut back somewhat on debates whose value has been artificially inflated .
As for the questions themselves , Commissioner - for me the most important is : what is the situation with regard to code-share flights - these aircraft that are meant to be flown by a European airline , but which can then be operated by some other airline , even one on the blacklist ?
What is happening here to inform people who need to fly ?
This is a real burning issue for me , and I would expect you to answer it .
I will leave it at that one question .
( DE ) Madam President , now that we have addressed aviation safety - and we will also be speaking and voting on the European Aviation Safety Agency the day after tomorrow - I would like to take the opportunity to broach another problematic area .
People taking part in aviation sports in Austria and in other Member States are confronted with the fact that vitally important sets of rules for such sports are only available in English .
The sportspeople concerned often speak excellent English ; however , it is often not easy to understand a subject which is already complex in itself in a subject-specific jargon in another language .
As a result , Member States then try to obtain expert opinions from the EU .
This expenditure of time and effort would be avoidable , in my opinion , if the rules were available in the relevant languages .
I am trying to make vitally important regulations for those taking part in aviation sports available in German and French too - that is , in the two more widely spoken working languages .
( RO ) The blacklist , updated on 30 March this year , features 278 companies from 17 countries .
The EU must develop its technical and administrative capabilities in order to ensure compliance with the necessary civil aviation standards so that only airlines which comply with international security regulations can fly in the European Union .
At the same time , however , we must also help third countries improve their civil aviation safety standards .
Competent third country authorities need to improve their ability to monitor the air carriers they grant licences to .
The flight safety analysis conducted in the European Union for third country operators will also include checks carried out on the ground on these companies ' aircraft , bearing in mind the evidence showing serious incidents and accidents suffered by carriers last year .
However , information must be provided to passengers during their whole itinerary , including about all the companies which they are using to make this trip .
This information should be provided no later than at the time of purchasing the ticket .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank you for the questions .
It has definitely demonstrated that this House is very strongly behind the blacklist approach .
I can promise , on behalf of Vice-President Kallas , that we will improve communication with Parliament on these issues .
I can also promise that all the questions that have been asked will be forwarded for a written answer because if I follow up with answers to the questions , I will definitely not be able to do so in the remaining one and a half minutes .
I will , therefore , cover some of them but not because I would not be able to answer all the questions asked .
Firstly , international aspects : the Commission works in directions such as making every possible effort to strengthen international cooperation with third countries by encouraging States to join the safety assessment of a foreign aircraft programme which encompasses all the 40 states in Europe , but also through technical assistance projects to achieve the worldwide standards .
We also work very much with ICAO .
We participated in the ICAO High-level Safety conference at the end of March in Montreal and also we are currently negotiating a Memorandum of Cooperation allowing further cooperation with ICAO .
You are right ; we need a global approach to this issue , but we should not underestimate the results that a blacklist approach makes on other countries .
I will mention an example from Indonesia that was asked of me .
Indonesia has invested a lot of effort to modernise its aviation system , including its legislation , the organisation of the authority and , by doing so , the procedures for certification , an oversight of the airlines established in this country .
To date , it has demonstrated that it has achieved significant improvement in the case of four air carriers : Garuda , Airfast , Mandala and Premier .
That has been achieved with the help of the Commission and also with the Member States and the industry .
It is a process requiring adequate resources , but the Commission is very closely cooperating with these authorities and carriers in this country to allow further positive developments .
Our approach definitely encourages countries to change their approach to aviation safety , and that is only one example .
I shall end with a particularly important issue raised , that of consumer information .
We require the travel agents to inform orally and / or in writing passengers at the time of reservation .
Also , travel agents often require that if passengers agree to travel with a banned carrier , they renounce any rights to claim compensation later , but I will be happy to answer all the questions also in writing because I see that I am using up your kindness , Madam President .
The debate is closed .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to speak in accordance with Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure because of an incident which took place here a few minutes ago , and indeed during the item of the agenda for one-minute speeches .
At the point when you called on Hans-Peter Martin , while he was actually here , he wandered past us .
In response to our humorous question of whether he had slept through his own speech , Mr Martin adopted a particular stance here , clicked his heels and gave the Hitler salute .
Madam President , this is unacceptable ; this is a serious breach of the customs of the House in accordance with Rule 9 , and I therefore implore you to issue the appropriate call to order against this improper and unacceptable behaviour .
I would also ask you to check whether , in connection with this , this behaviour can be documented in the recording .
This is unacceptable .
Even if it was a supposedly humorous provocation , jokes of this kind have no place in this House .
Many thanks for bringing this to our attention .
We will look into this accordingly and see what happened .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , with reference to the questions asked by Mr Simpson , I would like to ask the Commission to explain what fresh principles and plans it has in connection with ensuring the safety of passengers from Member States who fly with airlines which make internal flights in airspace not subject to European Union jurisdiction and frequently violate regulations , thus endangering passengers .
I suggest the Commission , through the efforts of the High Representative , should develop an international agreement on this matter , which would be a guarantee of our common security .
In addition , I would like the blacklist to make available precise information on the air carrier , which would contain comprehensive data and statistics and would show the risks , both in terms of safety and of comfort , to which passengers are exposed .
Today 's discussion is unquestionably a crucial one for the safety of passengers who travel by air in the European Union .
I am pleased with the fact that EU Member States are observing ICAO standards in the area of the principles and techniques of international air traffic .
It is obvious , however , that air transport is not restricted exclusively to European Union air space .
A question , therefore , arises : how can we ensure the safety of EU citizens outside EU territory ?
In my opinion , the European Commission should stimulate countries which do not belong to the Community to work together to create a blacklist based on EU standards , or should also play a leading role in creating a global blacklist .
In addition , I would like to draw attention to a possible problem : when the Commission monitors an air carrier which is on the blacklist , does it also monitor in detail the whole fleet which belongs to the carrier ?
For it may happen that an aeroplane will not be used by an air carrier which is on the blacklist , but it will be used , for example , by another company under different livery which charters individual aircraft .
Aviation security charges ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Leichtfried , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on aviation security charges - C7-0038 / 2009 - .
Madam President , at the moment , in the area of European aviation security and aviation security charges , we have a situation in which everyone does what they want .
No one really does it properly .
However , we will have to pay for this .
This is something that we really should not take lying down , and this report aims to change things .
What specifically will it change , and what does it aim to change ?
I would just like to say in advance that on almost all points - and I would like to thank my fellow Member - there is a unanimous perception that the report could bring more transparency .
Transparency means that on the one hand , airlines will , in future , be able to obtain information allowing them to understand what security charges will be applied to them by airports , what they are for , whether they are too much - which still sometimes happens at the moment - and , as the next step , that passengers too , of course , will be able to understand what airlines require from them .
Here too , I have the suspicion that the transparency of the airlines is sometimes intentionally restricted , even when , as they say , they make a great effort to be transparent .
One point which is very important in this regard is the fact that , across Europe , there are various different systems for financing security facilities .
There are states which have financed them purely through taxation .
There are states in which only the end-user pays , and there are others which have a mixed system .
Our intention was to ensure that these systems could be retained .
We do not want to prescribe to any Member State how security charges should be financed ; we only want to ensure that whoever pays ultimately knows what he has paid .
There are , or were , different ideas about which airports should be included , and we have decided that it is a question of security .
It is not about earnings and not about profits ; it is about security .
Therefore , we have decided that all airports that are commercially run must be included , and I think that that was the correct decision too .
Finally , we have reached a point where we have a great deal of unanimity here in plenary , namely on the point that we should make a distinction between charges for security facilities , security measures included in the EU rules , and charges for security measures which go beyond that - what are referred to as the ' more stringent measures ' .
We say that everything that falls within the EU context will stay as it is ; each Member State can do what it considers right .
If , however , security measures going above and beyond that are taken , then those Member States have to finance this themselves .
On the one hand , this should ensure that it will be dealt with carefully , that security measures will not just be taken immediately without considering whether they are really necessary and that it will also be taken into consideration what this means for passengers and what it means for airlines and airports .
On the other hand , it should also be ensured that , in this regard , we also apply the principle that security is a public duty as well .
Attacks on airlines are , as a rule , not directed at airlines , but at the states from which these airlines come , and therefore we also think that , in principle , security is still a public duty , and therefore must also be financed publicly .
I would briefly like to say something more on the amendments , which have reached an unbelievably high number - three in total .
I think that they are all very justified and well-founded .
I would say , particularly concerning the two amendments by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , that they are very much worth supporting , not because Mrs Lichtenberger is sitting next to me , but because they contain social requirements for employees at airports .
I think that that is very important , particularly at times when airlines and airports are under pressure .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the proposal for a directive on aviation security charges is the result of the debate on financing aviation security which has been on the table since 2001 .
It follows on from the rising security costs observed subsequent to the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 , and from the establishment of an EU regulatory framework for aviation security .
By its legislative proposal , the Commission intends to set up a transparent and non-discriminatory framework for levying aviation security charges in Europe .
Furthermore , the Commission considers that aviation security charges should be set in consultation with airport users and should be cost-related .
I would like to congratulate Mr Leichtfried for his fantastic work on this report and also to thank the Members of the TRAN Committee who also contributed to this report .
I believe that the report goes precisely in the direction of the Commission 's intended goals , and I welcome the support it gives to the Commission 's proposal in those regards .
I would just like to emphasise two specific issues which are dealt with in the report .
Firstly , the report introduces what is really a new element , namely the important and sometimes very controversial question of who pays for aviation security .
Well , the Commission 's proposals did not address this issue , and the reason is that nearly all Member States insist that they are not in a position to take commitments in that regard , even though they acknowledge that public financing of aviation security should be permitted .
The choice , in our view , should therefore be left to the individual Member States , and thus be dealt with through subsidiarity .
With this in mind , and with respect to the position outlined in the report up for adoption , the Commission would like to note that Amendment 32 , which would oblige Member States to finance more stringent measures , will give rise to intense discussions with the Council on this proposed directive .
However , I am confident that the rapporteur knew all this , and expected this fight with the Council .
The second issue is more for clarification , and relates to the impact assessment to be undertaken in advance of any further aviation security measures being taken under the framework regulation .
This is definitely a very justified measure , but I would like you to know that we already have some mechanisms in place and we should not overburden ourselves .
First , there is the Stakeholders ' Advisory Group on Aviation Security which consists of air transport industry representatives among others , and it is fully involved in the conception of any proposed measures on aviation security .
Secondly , the regulatory procedure with scrutiny ensures that Parliament can exercise its right of veto if it deems appropriate .
Thank you very much for this excellent report .
We look forward very much to working with the rapporteur and the Parliament and to further progress on this issue .
( DE ) Madam President , I am sorry that I must burden the plenary session , but in accordance with Rule 151 , I feel forced to make a personal remark .
I was targeted a moment ago .
This is typical if you live in Austria .
There is a group there which , by international standards , is classified as far-right .
They have party leaders who make certain gestures in the air and think nothing of it .
These are also people that cannot bear to be beaten in democratic elections , and then refuse any form of handshake or contact .
If you wave at them , they only see one thing : the thing that they have real experience of , the Hitler salute .
Of course , these are problems which simply show that my home country has unfortunately not succeeded in coming to terms with the past , that we will not just be dealing with one far-right party which is represented here , but soon with two .
I would simply like to make it clear once again : we are the democrats .
The far-right wingers sit over there .
I am proud to belong to a political group that has managed to make a decisive contribution to the fact that we no longer have a far-right group in this Parliament and hopefully will never get one .
The answer is thus to have more democracy and not more far-right politics , hostility towards people and cynical contempt for people .
Those are the men who have already said that I should seek psychiatric help because they could not bear to lose elections in a democratic manner .
Blue card questions on a personal comment under Rule 151 are not permitted .
Your request to speak on this point therefore cannot be accepted .
( HU ) This is a blue card question addressed to the previous speaker .
I would like half a minute to ask a question .
Madam President , this intervention - which is totally acceptable - is interfering with a debate on a subject .
I would suggest that you place this sort of thing in between the reports .
Many thanks .
We will now continue with the debate .
I allowed the personal explanation because the previous point of order referred directly to Mr Martin .
We will now go on with the debate and also devote our full attention to it .

Madam President , at the outset , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , for a splendid report and for ideal cooperation during our work on this document .
We had to answer four questions , but first we had to state the task , which was protection of the interests of airline passengers , and this was the most important part of our work .
However , the four questions we asked ourselves were a matter of answering a question about transparency , or which groups might be admitted to participate in the procedure .
It was a question about the scope of the directive , or at which airports the directive can be applied .
There was one very important question , about financing , which the Commission was not able to answer .
However , together with Mr Leichtfried , we did manage to find a solution , and I thank him especially for this .
I am talking about the more stringent measures , which should be financed by the Member States .
Another matter concerned the competence of the independent supervisory authority in establishing charges connected with air traffic security .
During our work , we developed a common position , which I consider a very ambitious one .
It is , today , a challenge for the Council and the Commission .
I think that we , as airline passengers , and in contradistinction to the passengers of ships , cars and railways , should not have to pay for this kind of security .
This is a gesture to the Council , it is a compromise position and I expect , today , an equally ambitious position from the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , to begin with , I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent piece of work , some would even say a fantastic piece of work .
Thank you , therefore , and thanks to those who have contributed to it .
Might I just remind you that the issue of funding is not a new one .
This dossier has actually been in the making since the moment we adopted a European regulation on the application of security measures at European level in the wake of the attacks of 11 September 2001 .
Right from the outset , the European Parliament has always stressed that the funding issue is a serious one and that we have to find a European solution to it .
However , the Council has always obstructed this .
As a follow-up to this debate , we should again call on the Council to honour the agreements it has made with us in the past , particularly the one that would allow us to draft a separate proposal on this issue , and to commit itself to working with us towards a solution .
Obviously , we need to bear in mind a few considerations .
The first and the most essential one is transparency .
At the moment , we are not looking into exactly who in each of the Member States should foot the bill .
However , one thing we certainly do want is to organise a consultation on this issue , to reach agreements and then to stick to those agreements .
In other words , what we want to see is the revenue generated by security charges actually being ploughed back into financing security measures and not , for example , into some sort of parking .
That is essential and it should be clear that we must not budge on this issue .
A second important consideration is that we need to make a distinction between security measures which we all have agreed jointly at a European level , and other additional measures being taken individually by Member States .
As far as the first consideration is concerned , the transparency rules are clear and they have to be applied .
As far as the second one is concerned , we have to make it clear that the financial responsibility lies with Member States and that they are the ones that have to foot the bill for additional security measures .
Coordinating security measures at a European level would also be a bonus and if Member States decide on their own to introduce body scans or whatever , well , they will also have to bear the financial consequences of that .

Madam President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , also on behalf of Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert .
She cannot be here today .
She arranged everything together with you , and was also completely satisfied .
We can also say that another thing that shows how good the report is is that there has been pretty unanimous voting in the Committee .
This is also - just like the question for oral answer which was just raised - a question of protecting consumers , and it is also a question of aviation security .
We want security to be in place ; however , we also want consumers to know how much they are paying for what .
It has already been pointed out that the systems in different Member States are very different , and we do not want to change that in general either .
We do not want to impose anything .
We do , however , want there to be transparency on how the costs are put together and on the proportion that is to be paid by the consumer .
This is not always provided at the moment .
That is , we want to know what proportion of the ticket price - at the moment it is just a proportion of the ticket price that is paid for security - is really relevant to security .
Then we also want a guarantee that what is paid for security is also actually used for security , and that no one profits from it .
I think that the approach that we have developed on this is also a completely logical one .
There is a critical sticking point between what Parliament would like and what the Member States think is good , and this is the question of who will pay for additional security measures taken which go beyond what we want in Europe for passengers .
Here , we have said that actually , the Member States should do this .
It is a question of national security in which the national states , too , must take a strong interest .
Of course , the states do not want to pay for it .
As has already been noted , with regard to the question of whether we want body scanners or not , we will undoubtedly also have to consider whether we want to have them throughout Europe or not , and who will eventually pay for them .
Of course , we will also have to ask whether they really provide more security .
So , aviation security charges of this kind must be administered transparently .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , once upon a time , an airport was a place where you bought a ticket for a flight , checked in your baggage , showed your passport and took off or landed .
Today , airports are more like a small town , offering all kinds of facilities - but with security measures that have made them something of a Fort Knox , and things are only moving in one direction : towards more and more of them .
Certainly , aircraft crashed in the old days , and unfortunately they still do .
That is why it is important that the same rules apply both within and outside of the EU .
In this context , the EU is too small to be an isolated island .
This is an area where we can see the benefits of having the same rules , the same transparent rules , for aircraft from every country .
That also applies to charges .
Everyone - both passengers and airlines - needs to be clear as to what is covered by an aviation security charge .
Nobody should be lost in a jungle of unclear charges and levies .
Passengers need to know exactly what the charge covers , nor should they have to pay special national charges or pay extra for airlines .
I wholeheartedly support the report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , first , I would like to thank the rapporteur , as well as the other groups , for their work .
We had an interesting discussion in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I am , however , of the opinion that we have already made many compromises with the Council , which has shown itself to be very unwilling to compromise here , just as it has in the past .
For when we start to talk about implementation , that is when the discussion gets going .
Here , we as Parliament should also expect the support of the Commission for the idea that security charges will apply to all airports .
We should not repeat what we have already done in other areas - whether ground handling or aviation charges - that is , to allow for exceptions affecting two or five million passengers .
The second thing , and this is even more important for me , is , of course , to ensure transparency for passengers - who pays how much for what - and that is unequivocally a duty for the airports as well as the airlines .
This is quite an important consideration in my view .
With that , I come to the third point , payment - an area in which there are always sticking points , of course .
With regard to financing , personally , I am of the opinion that public security should be paid for with public funds .
We are already compromising by leaving some things to so-called subsidiarity .
This is always an effective trick here in the House , and also together with the Commission : if you cannot get a solution with the Council , then you simply call it a question of subsidiarity .
Personally , I am not very happy about that , but there we are .
Therefore , I think we should at least stick to what we have said here , namely that special measures , stricter measures , must definitely be paid for from the public purse .
Security charges and security overall have increased significantly in recent years .
Therefore , this dossier also has an economic aspect .
We are now talking about around 30 % of the costs .
If we are talking about security and who pays for it , that will have an economic aspect tomorrow as well .
Therefore , these three points are crucial for me .
I hope that , at least with the current requests , we will get a positive result with the Council and the Commission .
( RO ) The legislation being tabled offers a framework for setting aviation security charges which is transparent , non-discriminatory and allows the right of appeal .
Airport security is the responsibility of Member States .
Passengers are the ones , however , who ultimately pay for security measures through the price of their ticket .
This is why passengers are entitled to be told separately how much of the final ticket price is to pay for security .
The directive on aviation security charges and the directive on airport charges should be harmonised .
Parliament has asked on repeated occasions for the aviation security charges specified in this directive to be used by companies and airport operators only for implementing aviation security measures .
Parliament has also asked for transparency and a correlation of the security taxes and charges with the objectives being pursued .
Member States can also apply tighter security measures , the cost of which , however , will be borne entirely by Member States .
These security measures should not , all the same , impede the smooth flow of passenger traffic at airports .
Unfortunately , here in Brussels in particular , we encounter endless queues which passengers stand in to be able to travel .
I would also like to mention the ban on bringing liquids on board .
This means that various items can be confiscated .
Unfortunately , at Brussels airport , for example , there is a long-winded procedure involving both additional charges and the confiscation of items .
Regrettably , this procedure does not include the option of receiving the item later at the addressee 's address .
( SK ) The introduction of security charges has brought a new financial cost to the aviation market , which airport operators and airlines will immediately and adroitly pass on to passengers .
It is therefore right to look for mechanisms to protect passengers in order to prevent fictitious amounts concealed as security charges being added in a non-transparent way as well-hidden items , with the aim of generating unjustified profits for crafty entrepreneurs in the aviation sector .
The level of these charges should correspond only to costs demonstrably incurred in securing the safety of passengers .
Our duty , Commissioner , is therefore to define clear and transparent rules - rules which will eliminate the current anarchy in this sector and prevent operators in future from exploiting mandatory measures for the protection of passengers in order to make unjustified profits .
It is necessary to define rules , and not to establish more institutions and authorities which will burden passengers , airline operators and also taxpayers with yet more additional costs .
Commissioner , if we want to help Europe become competitive , we must forget about setting up new authorities .
Authorities do not create the added value which can raise living standards for our citizens .
Thank you for your attention .
We had a technical problem here , so it was somewhat longer than a minute .
However , the clock is now working again , and hopefully everything should now go according to the set timetable .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the effects of the volcano ash cloud on Europe 's airspace , which , as is well known , caused many thousands of flights to be cancelled , are a good example of why aviation security is important .
There is already a big argument over who should cover the costs arising from this - who should pay for the natural disaster , so to speak - and to what extent the restrictions are justified .
While transport ministers are agonising over this , we must decide which costs relating to anti-terror security regulations , which are becoming more and more restrictive , can be passed on to passengers .
In the end , the costs of a task to be undertaken by the state , namely the maintenance of public safety , cannot simply be shifted on to the citizens like this .
Only if countries themselves have to take financial responsibility for the strict security measures which have been prescribed can we prevent the possibility of a wild increase in the number of body scanners and other rather ridiculous security measures .
While we are still struggling with the SWIFT agreement , the US is concluding agreements , in the name of fighting terror , to exchange passenger data with the European Commission and the various aviation organisations .
Furthermore , the fact that the lack of air traffic controllers and their growing workload could have fatal effects on aviation safety was pushed into the background in the discussion .
Since the liberalisation of the 1990s and the vision of a unified European airspace , it has mainly been costs , and not so much safety , that seem to be at the forefront of consideration .
What is clear is that the ash cloud has only delayed the pilots ' strike which has been announced .
So one might take an ironic view of this : hopefully , we will not go from one chaotic aviation situation to another .

( FR ) Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , on his text and his spirit of cooperation on this matter , and I particularly support his proposals on the financing of aviation security , since we are discussing aviation security here , and not air safety .
Our committee has been fighting for many years to gain acceptance for the principle that the most stringent security measures should be funded by the Member States , and I fully support our rapporteur on this point .
In fact , security does not concern only travellers , but all citizens , and it is the states ' responsibility to take counterterrorism measures .
It is therefore not justifiable to make air passengers alone bear the cost of security measures in airports and on board aeroplanes , all the more so since , on means of transport such as trains and ships , security measures are financed by the states , either partly or fully , as appropriate .
I therefore think that we need to stand up to the Council and defend to the bitter end Amendment 32 of the report adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I would like to quickly raise another point .
While I support the progress that the text will bring in the field of non-discrimination and transparency , I do not believe that the objective of this directive is to put in place a single and identical system for security charges in Europe .
While respecting the common rules , the Member States must be allowed to keep their current systems for levying charges .
Thus , in states such as Spain , Italy or France , the charges are approved by their parliament and , in these cases , it is the authority responsible for investigating appeals to laws which must act as the independent supervisory authority .
This is the subject of Amendment 40 which , I hope , a great number of you will support when we vote on it .
( ES ) Madam President , despite the difficulties that have become cruelly obvious this week associated with the current lack of a single European sky and , more importantly , of a genuine single authority to control and manage that single sky , little by little , we are moving closer to the target that we set ourselves , and this text should be one more tool to help us along that road .
I am aware of the tenacity of the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , whom I congratulate on his work and also on his particular sensitivity to air transport and social issues .
In this case , however , I feel that we might be falling prey to a degree of naivety and maximalism , and that by seeking perfection , we are running the risk of not achieving the best outcome .
While I am entirely in agreement with creating a common system , including an independent supervisory body with the ability to establish fair and transparent powers in relation to charges , and with taking into account environmental and social criteria and passenger protection , etc . , I still think that some aspects are missing , which I would like the Commission to clarify .
For example , I refer to what Mrs De Veyrac just said : I do not see a clear acknowledgement of the system by which a national parliament votes on charges by parliamentary agreement , as it is the body that has to apply them .
I am also finding it difficult to see - and I would like the Commission to clarify this - how viable this text can be given the differences with the Council and , more importantly , the consistency , or lack of it , in my view , between this text and the general directive on airport charges .
Given the major uncertainty and disagreement over who is going to pay for this security - which I admit is public security - I think we need to make it clear that , when we talk about the Member States paying , it is the public in general who are going to pay .
When we talk about Member States , it sounds like an abstract person , but it is not : it is every one of us citizens who travels , as well .
I therefore fear that we will ultimately see very little progress .
I would therefore like the Commission to give its opinion on how it sees the future of this text .
( RO ) It is true that air transport is the safest out of every form of transport .
However , aviation incidents with global ramifications , like the one which took place 10 days ago , or the chaos created by a volcanic eruption , make us face up to the issue of the whole safety and security chain in the aviation sector : airports , airlines , control towers , aircraft , crew and passengers .
There needs to be a particularly close bond between all these links , along with open communication .
Passengers concerned about their own journey and comfort cannot understand the need for security measures , no matter how lax or tight they might be , and even the costs they incur , unless they are aware of the significance of such dramatic or tragic events as those of 11 September 2001 .
A terrorist threat , pilot error , technical defects , a misunderstanding between the pilot and control tower and unforeseen atmospheric conditions are all factors which must be predicted and stringent measures must be taken to apply the regulations both in spirit and according to the letter .
I agree with adopting exceptional measures in the scenarios already mentioned .
However , these measures must be transparent .
Passengers are entitled to and must enjoy a safe journey to the same extent as they are entitled to know the truth .
Unfortunately , communication and transparency are features of the aviation security sector which need to be improved urgently .
This is the task of airports and airlines which must become more open and transparent .
On the other hand , passengers need to realise that they must be aware that the security measures applied at airports and onboard aircraft , no matter how stringent they might be , are ultimately for their benefit and their benefit alone .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank Mr Leichtfried for an excellent report which contains good , sustainable proposals .
What , in the end , is the issue here ?
It is about strengthening transparency , consumer protection , security and coordination , as well as quality control .
I would , however , advise against creating a new authority to deal with these questions .
I take a positive view of the subsidiarity in the report , and it should definitely be retained .
It is also very important for me that there should be a clear separation between taxes and charges , and all government tasks - whether fingerprinting and photographing , police tasks , fighting terrorism or something similar - must clearly be financed through taxation and not through consumer charges .
If individual states then have a vital interest in taking security measures that go beyond this , then I think that , in this area , they also have the duty to bear the costs .
Whoever orders government-related security measures also pays for them .
I think it is different in the case of technical or personal security , which can certainly be passed on to the passenger , as long as its purpose is clearly declared .
It is worth noting , though , that in the impact assessment that the Commission has put before us , we are talking about a sum of around 0.1 % of the total fare for these measures .
We should therefore not start too high .
I believe that we are bringing about a sustainable compromise , including with the Federal Republic of Germany , which has considerable reservations here in the area of subsidiarity .
I would hope that the end result is very close to our proposal .
( CS ) Although I fully support this proposal , because it greatly increases the transparency of rates and the calculation of security charges for all European consumers who use air transport , I am amazed that there is not more harmonisation in this important area .
I am concerned that , because of the dominant position of certain airports , passengers will pay excessively high security charges with no direct impact on the level , speed or quality of security measures at check-in .
In its evaluation report for the two years after this directive entered into effect , the Commission should have been much more courageous and should have proposed a unified and binding method for calculating security charges throughout the EU .
I fully agree with the demand for more stringent measures , such as body scanners , to be financed by the state and not by passengers , especially as the debate is still continuing over the need for them and the associated health risks .
Last but not least , I am concerned about the interpretation of the provisions on charging for the cost of security measures implemented not by airports but by the airline companies directly , as these costs may , on the contrary , be charged to passengers , and this , in my view , means there is a potential risk of abuse in the form of over-charging .
Madam President , Mr Leichtfried is right .
The cost for extra security should , in the end , be covered by the Member States .
After all , the passengers , and every citizen , are already paying the Member States for their security in general .
The state cannot simply say to its citizens , ' you get exactly what you pay for ' .
Its obligations go beyond that , because the state is not simply another service provider motivated exclusively by profit .
I am reminding you of this simple truth because , in spite of this principle , the passengers and not their states are footing the bill for extra air security in the end , as the rapporteur rightly notes .
Moreover , many times the extra security that passengers are getting by paying extra charges is not even provided by the state , but by subcontracted private companies , often disregarding the passengers and their rights under the general shelter provided by the secrecy covering security matters in general .
That simply should stop .
( DE ) Madam President , given that aviation security charges within the EU have been dealt with in very different ways , I think it is important to apply an objective measure here .
It would make a lot of sense to take a combination of the number of passengers and also maximum take-off weight as the basis for assessment .
It is important , however , that there is a clear connection between the security charge levied and the services which are actually provided .
It is important to define aviation security itself , and we must also know exactly what we are paying for .
The exact way in which the security charges will be calculated must be comprehensible .
Information on the size of the charges , and what they consist of , must be provided openly .
Transparency is imperative here .
For this , however , we need independent regulatory authorities in order to be able to counteract any distortion of competition quickly and efficiently .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this debate on aviation security has been a fascinating one , and shows that we all have our own experiences in this field .
In my case , I lost all the cheese I wanted to bring because it was tartinable !
I thought that excessive , but nevertheless believe that we have provided improvements throughout the system .
The Commission proposal goes one step further because where there is security , there are also charges , and the first rule is transparency .
The report and the Commission proposal strengthen each other .
On the question of who should collect the charges , my view is that subsidiarity is still the best way because , after all , it is not Member States , but citizens , that pay .
The only question is whether it should be all taxpayers that pay or just those who are passengers .
That is not a simple question to answer , but I consider the subsidiarity aspect to our proposal to be in keeping with today 's aviation security arrangements .
Parliament is going one step further , in looking at the whole of the aviation security sector .
We will see where that debate leads .
I believe the Commission has made a very decent proposal and am very glad that Parliament has broadly accepted it and is , as usual , going a little further than does the Commission proposal .
I believe that the timing and scope of the proposal are correct .
Madam President , I am somewhat embarrassed after so much praise , and so I will keep it short .
I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity to thank the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs , who have worked hard together : Mr Zasada , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , Mrs Lichtenberger and Mr Kohlíček .
We have worked hard on this matter for nearly a year now .
This is how I see European politics , not as a forum for bickering to provide a spectacle , as perhaps other fellow Members are doing .
Second , I would like to address the Council and make an appeal to them .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is actually a very amicable committee , a committee which works and argues in a businesslike manner , and in this spirit , we have very much met the Council half way on this law .
From the start , we have been very willing to compromise .
However , I would like to warn the Council to let sleeping dogs lie .
If you are willing to compromise , then you must also be able to expect compromises from your opponents or partners .
If the Council is not at all willing to meet the European Parliament half way now , then the attitude of this committee will also change .
This is not only my opinion .
I have already heard from some colleagues that if the Council is not willing to meet us half way , then we will also discuss body scanners in quite a different light and perhaps also not be willing to meet the Council half way .
This is something which is not in the interests of the matter as a whole and which absolutely must not happen .
This is why I am appealing to the Council and the Member States to move on this .
We now have the Treaty of Lisbon .
Both the Council and the Member States must keep moving on this , otherwise we might once again hear : Come on , let 's SWIFT again !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next plenary sitting in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Mr Leichtfried should be commended for a thorough and conclusive report , which had dealt effectively with many of the issues left open by the Commission paper .
However , there are some questions which remain unresolved and these issues should be viewed in a new context following the prolonged closure of European airspace .
With the aviation industry set to lose upward of € 1 billion as a result of the volcanic ash cloud , the EU must act quickly and decisively to ease the financial blow on the aviation industry .
Though Commissioner Almunia must be applauded for his favourable comments on the crisis today , we as MEPs also have the opportunity through this report to aid an industry which has just been brought to its knees for the third time in the last ten years .
This house and our colleagues in the European Council and Commission should begin to consider state funding to cover the proposed security costs , particularly in the event of a low passenger threshold not being passed .
While these measures were not popular before the eruption last week , we are currently at the point where any missed opportunity to provide assistance to the aviation industry could prove to be fatal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Leichtfried for his excellent work on the report on aviation security charges , which considers , among its various aspects , one important point : consumer protection and passengers ' rights .
There have to be clear and transparent rules because , if airlines charge passengers extra for security measures , this information should be made available , in my view , to ensure that passengers are not out of pocket .
I believe that it is only right that consumer protection organisations should take part in the consultations and thus gain an insight into the pricing of security measures , which they can then check against the ticket price .
Only in this way will it be possible to guarantee greater transparency and information for passengers .
Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network ( recast ) - C7-0111 / 2009 - .

As Mr Simpson cannot be here , Mr El Khadraoui will speak on his behalf .

deputising for the rapporteur . - Madam President , the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Simpson , is not able to join us today and has asked me to read out his statement .
The recast on the development of the guidelines of the TEN-T network seeks to bring together the various amendments adopted over the years to the guidelines and to incorporate amendments that take account of the enlargement of the EU to 27 Member States .
To give a bit of background to the report , the guidelines give direction to the development of the Trans-European transport network .
The objective is to establish the network gradually by 2020 by integrating land , sea and air transport infrastructure networks throughout the Union .
Turning back to the report at hand , it is , strictly speaking , a codification of the legislative text , but , because the Commission made some minor changes to the annex , they were forced to do it via the recast procedure .
The changes to the annex are to correct initial mistakes that were made during the accession of the 10 new Member States that joined in 2004 .
The changes are not about updating the maps or making any substantive changes .
The two changes the rapporteur has introduced to the report involve minor modifications in the recitals and some technical corrections to the maps .
These are in line with the changes made by the Council and in line with correcting the guidelines .
Following the Commission 's advice , the decision was taken , both by Council and by Mr Simpson as rapporteur with the backing of the Transport Committee , not to make any substantive changes to the guidelines .
The rapporteur is , however , aware that the Greens have retabled their own amendments seeking to update the line between Munich city and Munich airport , but the rapporteur would like to reiterate the point that the changes we are making in this report are about correcting the text , not updating it .
The point of this recast is to bring everything into order ahead of the real revision of the guidelines during early 2011 .
It is important to ensure the clarity of the guidelines in preparation for the more substantial changes that will take place next year .
We are all eagerly awaiting the real revision of the guidelines and the chance to further develop the TEN-T network but , in order to get to that stage , we need to get the current legislation right , and that is what we have done here .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very grateful to the speaker and rapporteur .
This is exactly what we have been looking for , so that is why I have on this point nothing to add because I think it describes exactly what is at issue .
I will just concentrate on this measure revision , where we stand on it , because it is important to see it being the process .
Based on the Green Paper of April 2009 , the Commission has launched a public consultation with more than 300 answers and set up six expert groups , which help to work on the results of consultation in a new policy proposal .
In a very short time , there will be a proposal to the college , a document that will outline the methodology for establishing the new trans-European transport network .
So we foresee that this could be presented to the college on 5 May .
Then this methodology will definitely be presented to this House and the Council .
The Commission will then engage in the preparation of the proposals for the new TEN-T and its financing .
So , our expectation is that we will be able to adopt this in the college in the first semester in 2011 .
I am very grateful to Parliament for understanding the necessity for minor changes and I am looking forward to our having a very broad and strong debate on new outlines for the trans-European transport network in the months to come .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank those Members who , following the information imparted by the rapporteur and also by the shadow rapporteurs , have allowed the swift conclusion of the parliamentary process concerning this matter .
They have desisted from tabling amendments which , although acceptable in terms of their content , would have been an obstacle to the adoption of this codifying text .
We are now in a position to give the Commission the basis for the programming of the TEN-T of the next decade .
In a specific effort to make the timescales shorter , from the moment the rapporteurs took up this matter , they reached an agreement not to table amendments that were not agreed on with the Council .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism has approved the technical modifications examined by the legal services of Parliament and of the Council , and the Council has stated that it can conclude at first reading if we vote along these lines , which is entirely acceptable .
The few changes made by the Committee on Transport and Tourism are consistent with this objective , and I regard them as appropriate and useful for presenting a coherent and accurate final text .
Therefore , I support the amendments tabled , although I do not consider appropriate at this time the amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which has already been rejected in the vote within the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Although the content of the amendment - namely the modification of a map relating to Munich Airport - is acceptable , there will be an opportunity to table it again during the review of the TEN-T , which could even take place by summer , since the work in the European Commission is progressing quickly .
This technical document allows Annex I to be updated by including the maps of all Member States and the target deadline to be changed to 2020 .
The in-depth debate on updating the list of TEN-T projects is planned for the end of the year .
This list should include the development of Black Sea maritime corridors , road links with the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine , as well as the extension of the current priority projects 6 and 17 so that the high-speed railway line can reach Bucharest and Constanţa .
The eruption of the volcano in Iceland has highlighted to us the weakness of the European transport system .
The European Union ought to have had an efficient system for redirecting passengers to other forms of transport .
It is becoming absolutely vital for a trans-European transport network to be developed so that high-speed railway lines can serve not only all the Member States ' capitals but other large European cities as well .
Another increasingly important aspect is the development of transport along inland waterways and the European maritime corridors .
Madam President , the trans-European networks are a topic which is keeping us busy in this plenary session , and which should keep us even more busy .
We now have a recast , and some people - Mr Silvestris , for example - have been surprised that the Greens have put forward amendments proposing changes to the list of the trans-European networks , or what is considered to form part of this .
They must not forget that what we have suggested involves a special case : namely where the Member State itself has said that this part of the trans-European networks is only a feeder and will therefore no longer be relevant for us ; this famous flight path - now I am talking like Mr Stoiber ; I think this is contagious , and quite dangerous - is something we do not want to build any more ; one would , so to speak , have built a feeder to Munich Airport .
This is the reason for our amendment , therefore .

I also generally think , however , that we should apply ourselves with particular care to revising the trans-European networks , and we should consider a point which is particularly important to me .
There is a study by a Dutch person - I will gladly pass it on to the Commissioner , when he is here - which , for me , is very relevant for the coming debate , and which shows that the costs of a large project - and it very often involves large projects - are , as a rule , underestimated by an average of 45 % , and their benefit is always overestimated , since that is needed in order to implement the project .
That means that we must completely rethink the cost estimate for trans-European projects , and I would call on you to do that .
It is our responsibility to give our citizens good , clear information .
The definition of trans-European transport networks is a fundamental step towards improving transport connections for residential and industrial areas across Europe .
While in the North , West and South of Europe , railways and roads terminate at sea ports , roads and railways in the East have the enormous potential to continue eastwards across the whole of Asia to the shores of the Pacific .
Asian countries such as China , Japan and India are experiencing significant economic growth and are becoming major trading partners for European companies .
It is therefore necessary , along with the construction of an internal European transport structure , to also open up transport routes to the East .
The broad-gauge railway line from Vladivostok reaches the border of the EU at Čierna nad Tisou .
A project has been drawn up for this line to be continued to Vienna , linking it to the Danube , to the ports and , of course , to the European network .
In my opinion , projects such as this should also receive very significant support in the future . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , yes , I rather prefer ' non-attached ' .
Even though , at this point , we are only talking about a recasting of the guidelines , I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity to mention a project that is particularly problematic for Austria .
The Brenner Base Tunnel is part of the high-speed rail axis from Berlin to Palermo and the trans-European transport network programme and it is intended to cross under the Innsbruck to Bozen axis .
The current situation is that the EU has left Austria , Tyrol , northern Italy and also southern Germany in a state of uncertainty and there is a risk of the tunnel becoming a black hole for billions of euros .
The original cost estimate of EUR 4.5 billion from 2002 has long since been exceeded and experts expect higher construction costs in the region of EUR 16 billion .
Moreover , the financing has still not been clarified .
In principle , the project is supposed to be financed partly by the Member States concerned and partly by the EU .
However , the EU refuses to make a legally binding promise for the period after 2013 and , as a result , is leaving the aforementioned countries in a state of uncertainty .
That is not all , however .
Of course , in order to ensure that the tunnel is fully utilised , appropriate feeder lines also need to be established .
The catchment area concerned stretches from Munich in the north to Verona in the south and , in this regard , the financing is totally unclear , including on the Italian side .
My request is therefore that , when the TEN projects are launched , they must not be subject to insufficient planning by one party , leaving the Member States concerned to foot the bill .
The EU must accept at least 50 % of the costs , and the planning and the promises must be forthcoming with due speed .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport networks initially sound very technical .
However , the rapporteur , Mr Simpson , has already pointed out that they are , of course , vital from the point of view of future economic development in Europe .
Roads are the arteries of our economy .
That is something on which we all agree .
We also have to acknowledge time and again that , as an economic and trading centre , Europe is in competition with the large economic and trading centres of America and South-East Asia .
It is therefore necessary for us to develop our inland transport systems for the domestic market while , on the other hand , of course also linking Europe 's export capacity with the development of the trans-European networks and continuing to strengthen them further .
The purpose of traffic arteries is to take up originating traffic and turn it into terminating traffic and ultimately , to take it to where the customers are .
The big issue in this regard is , of course , that the development of major traffic axes is also intended to provide access to the area and thus has an economic development role - we really must not forget that .
Europe is a continent that has very many coastlines and very large ports and these ports need to be linked together - in this regard , mobility is essential .
However , we must not simply take a ' just-in-time ' approach .
We also need to work in a cost-effective , environmentally sound and environmentally friendly way .
This will be particularly important in future .
An absolutely crucial question will be : can we turn the north-south and east-west links that we currently have in terms of rail , road and inland waterway systems into a real network , because we have to acknowledge that there are bottlenecks here that we need to get round .
In this regard , there are , of course , certain things that need to be taken into account .
When it comes to the longest trans-European axis - from Palermo to Berlin - this should be extended further via Rostock in the direction of Scandinavia .
These are things that we will need to take into account in future .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Madam President , the text that we are concerned with today updates and consolidates the procedure for establishing trans-European networks , to prepare us for the definitive launch of the penultimate and final phases of the review , now in a Europe of 27 that is richer and more spatially complex and which has new , innovative mobility needs .
The Trans-European Transport Network Executive Agency is now almost fully up and running , we have almost all the coordinators for the corridors , and we hope that soon , we will have the remaining ones so that they can promote the corridors that we need .
Our neighbours , especially in the Mediterranean , also have enormous expectations regarding these networks and their own networks , and we are looking forward to receiving the communication that the Commission has promised us on the methodology , which will complement the consultation and the debates , before starting work on one of the most exciting exercises for our Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The mobility and cohesion network is becoming a reality and , for the first time , it will connect the EU-27 common area in an integrated and dynamic way .
It will identify the essential hubs - ports , airports and logistical hubs - overcoming the border barriers .
It will include , among other things - if you will allow me to mention it -breaking through the centre of the historical barrier of the Pyrenees with a low-level tunnel .
It will thus achieve a plan for the future of 21st-century Europe that has such strength of conviction that it will secure the necessary funding .
That is our challenge , but for now , we will be more humble and limit ourselves to approving this first legislative polishing exercise , for which I would like to congratulate our Chair , Mr Simpson .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Transrapid system should not be included in these guidelines .
It does not fit into the European landscape .
It does not reduce the differences between the systems that we currently have ; it increases them .
We have paid out billions to create a uniform system , and here billions are being paid out at national level to counteract that .
That cannot be allowed to happen !
Although the European Parliament had previously come out against the Transrapid system , it suddenly reappeared in 1996 as a project between Berlin and Hamburg .
It then suddenly disappeared again - and no one knows why .
In 2004 , the Transrapid link between Munich airport and Munich Central Station appeared just as suddenly .
That was then halted in Germany , with the additional support of the State Government of Bavaria .
There was agreement about scrapping this project - no one wanted it any more .
That is why it must no longer be included in these guidelines .
After leaving office , the former Minister-President of Bavaria , Edmund Stoiber , was appointed to campaign for a reduction in bureaucracy here in Europe .
That is his responsibility .
He is also the one who now has to take the decision that this Transrapid system does not belong in these guidelines .
That is something that we should all take note of .
We must get rid of this Transrapid system .
It was a nice model from a scientific perspective , but it has no place in Europe .
It does not belong here and , as such , does not belong in these guidelines .

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Simpson , and , at the same time , express my regret that he cannot be with us here today .
We will manage , nevertheless .
I would particularly like to express my congratulations for taking the approach of essentially leaving things as they are in these guidelines , because there is one principle that is very important , namely reliability and calculability on the part of the European legislator .
That is certainly fulfilled with this report .
Secondly , I would like to mention that we also need a proposal for the future when we can once again decide what is really part of the TEN system and what is not .
We could conduct the debate in the way that it is , to a certain extent , already being conducted .
Some people are arguing charismatically in favour of linking a boot with an island and the others say that that absolutely must not be included .
However , that is the wrong way to go about it .
We need to look at what adds value for the European Union and European taxpayers .
Moreover , support should clearly be provided in places where the Member States are already doing something , where something is happening , because then , something really will happen and we will not have a situation where TEN plans are made that are then never implemented .
European citizens and passengers will benefit , as will those Member States that commit themselves ultimately to moving traffic away from the roads and on to the rail system .
( DE ) Madam President , as a result of the fall of the Iron Curtain and of Central European integration , the Baltic-Adriatic Corridor is , as we know , currently regaining the importance that it had before the collapse of the Danube Monarchy .
The EU has , of course , already confirmed the importance of the Baltic-Adriatic Corridor by giving priority status to the northern part from Gdańsk to the Czech Republic .
However , it would be even more important to also give the development of the southern part via the Austrian Southern Railway to Italy the same level of priority .
In this network , in particular , which carries half of all goods and passengers , we need to neutralise a dangerous bottleneck situation .
Only the Koralm Tunnel will be able to permanently eliminate the barrier posed by this bottleneck .
The people living along the transit routes are , as we all know , paying a high , and rising , price for the increasing volume of traffic .
Only the complete development of this southern corridor will lead to the sort of switch from the road to the rail system that could not be expected to be achieved by any other infrastructure measures in Austria .
( RO ) At the moment when all the air traffic throughout Europe is experiencing severe disruption due to the volcanic eruption in Iceland , the need to develop pan-European transport networks is even more obvious than ever .
The European Union should be giving particular support to the development of the transport infrastructure and its interconnection with the main European transport routes in the countries which have joined the EU in recent years .
Romania has three pan-European corridors crossing its territory , 4 , 7 and 9 , which are all closely linked to the Black Sea port city of Constanţa .
I feel that particular attention must be focused on corridor 7 .
The Danube is part of the main trans-European Rhine-Main-Danube transport waterway , which links the North Sea and Black Sea via the ports of Rotterdam and Constanţa .
It could provide Europe with a proper transport backbone .
However , cooperation must be established in order to raise the profile of these transport corridors as soon as possible .
( DE ) Madam President , the trans-European networks are indeed utilised for regular traffic in Europe .
We could even say that the traffic is the absolute backbone of the entire European internal market , which is , of course , one of our main aims in Europe .
Therefore , we absolutely must take care to ensure that all corridors are indeed developed and to discover where there is a need for financing and where the EU should concentrate its efforts .
Of course , it is clear that there are always national interests .
We have seen it already today : some people talked about the Danube , others talked , in particular , about southern Europe and others still talked about the Brenner Base Tunnel .
These traffic corridors are found all over Europe .
The aim is for them to be generally continuous throughout Europe so that not only goods , but also people , can be transported from A to B. That is the task facing us .
As I said before , it is natural for each of us to attach importance to our own regional requirements .
We need to make sure that we avoid bottlenecks and , above all , that we have a truly functional network for all means of transport .
That is what it is all about , and that is also what we will debate accordingly .
( DE ) Madam President , during this debate , the Brenner Base Tunnel and the new rail route from Munich to Verona have also been mentioned .
Currently , around 50 million tonnes of goods are transported by road on this route and so this tunnel is urgently needed .
However , it has also been said today in this Chamber that on both sides of the Brenner - in both Austria and Italy - it is difficult to finance the project .
Financing on the Italian side would easily be possible by reallocating the revenue from the road tolls , from the Brenner motorway , to fund the rail route .
For this to happen , however , it would be necessary for the concession for the Brenner motorway not to be put out to tender - as is the current intention as a result of pressure from Europe - but for the Italian State to be given the opportunity to extend this concession for at least another 50 years instead of it being awarded to private tenderers .
Otherwise , there will be no cross-financing , which would mean that it would be extremely unlikely for the TEN route to be developed on the Italian side .
( ES ) Madam President , Parliament is going to adopt this recast on the trans-European networks , and I would like the Commission to tell me as specifically as possible when we are going to be able to have access to the communication on the methodology .
As you know , Commissioner , this is one of the Spanish Presidency 's priorities , and we are now crossing the half-way mark .
I would therefore like to know as specifically as possible when we will be able to have this text , as Parliament is going to adopt the recast now and will therefore be free to examine this new text .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , again I would like to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism for its support for this technical recast and I hope that the vote in plenary will confirm it .
Today 's debate was on a broader scale and it will help to propose a methodology .
Commission Vice-President Kallas will send the proposal to the college on 5 May .
It took a bit of time because this new Commission has not been in place for long , and it takes some time for the new college to prepare proposals .
What I take away from this debate is that this House very strongly supports trans-European network policy .
I believe that without a well-interconnected infrastructure , in transport or in energy or in telecommunications , it is very difficult to speak about Europe .
I believe this debate will help us to shape our proposal for methodology , which basically means that the Committee on Transport will have a chance to speak about it if everything goes well in May .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Madam President , I would just like to thank the colleagues who have contributed to the debate today and reiterate my point that we are looking at correcting mistakes made in the past and not at making any substantive changes .
That will come later on with the real revision of the guidelines and , of course , we are looking forward to that debate .
For this reason , the rapporteur , Mr Simpson , and myself , as coordinator for my group , will be instructing my own political group to vote against the amendment put forward by the Greens .
We hope that the other political groups will be able to support us on this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next plenary sitting in Brussels .
Strategic goals and recommendations for the EU 's maritime transport policy until 2018 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr van Dalen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on strategic goals and recommendations for the EU 's maritime transport policy until 2018 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , one could talk at length about the European maritime transport policy .
I am not going to do that and will concentrate instead on a couple of key points and core themes .
The first key point is the importance of the sector .
Eighty per cent of world trade takes place via the sea and the European fleet accounts for 41 % of that global market .
Within the European market , 40 % of all goods are transported by seagoing ships .
This makes shipping a crucial economic sector and one that has to compete in the global market .
When you understand this , the second key point follows automatically , and that is competition .
We know that many countries the world over support their maritime fleets in very diverse ways .
If we were to allow this in Europe , then it would only take a few years before all our ships flagged out to countries such as Hong Kong or Singapore .
That would not only be to the detriment of the fleet , but more than that , it would deal a blow to the entire maritime cluster .
On-shore employment , in banks , shipyards , insurance companies , logistics companies , training and education institutions and in companies actively working on innovations and improvements to the fleets ' environmental performance , would be dealt an insurmountable blow if our fleet were to leave us .
Because of these two key points , my report calls on Member States to continue to boost their flags .
We are talking here about providing tax breaks , such as the tonnage tax system for ships and tax breaks for seafarers and shipowners .
That is the only way we will be able to ensure that both the sector and the maritime clusters remain relevant in Europe in the long term .
I have a question in this connection for the Commissioner : when is the European Commission going to come up with rules for State aid to sea ports ?
That proposal is supposed to come in the autumn , but I do not know in the autumn of which year .
What is important for me is that State aid is granted transparently and that there is good accountability .
We should not embark on this by supporting stationary terminals any more than ports which are geographically very close to third countries .
In both cases , that would be tantamount to flogging a dead horse .
In this connection , I have a comment on paragraph 5 of the draft resolution , the English-language version of which talks about ' flags of convenience ' .
For me , that is a misnomer and I would have preferred something like ' substandard ' ships .
After all , what we do not want are flags and ships that circumvent minimum requirements for safety and social standards .
We are talking about the quality of the flag and what we in Dutch call ' goedkope vlag ' is certainly not automatically synonymous with a ' flag of convenience ' .
To conclude , I would like to mention another key point and that is making the maritime sector attractive to young people .
The population of Europe is increasingly an ageing one and so we need to do a lot more for our youth .
It is never too early to start informing them about the maritime sector and sea shipping and I was pleased to hear that shipowners are even visiting primary schools to inform young people about working at sea .
Those were some of the key points I wanted to make thus far and I will be happy to respond to any comments by members and the Commissioner when I wrap up the debate .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on this politically very important issue .
The Maritime Transport Strategy until 2018 has been very much used in preparing the Commission 's Europe 2020 strategy , and the process for a new White Paper on Transport is on its way .
We can see that this transport strategy is at the forefront of major strategic developments in Europe .
Shipping is one of Europe 's strengths , and it is only natural that we should capitalise on what we have built in the past , but it is important to also look into the future .
Our main aim is to ensure and further increase the long-term sustainability and performance of European shipping .
This means efficient , safe , secure and environmentally friendly maritime transport services .
Maritime transport provides for high-quality jobs in Europe and fuels research and European industrial innovation .
We also have ambitious environmental goals , and the Commission has always emphasised the need for global solutions , especially on the reduction of greenhouse gases .
The main work on the strategy was carried out before the economic crisis .
In view of the economic downturn , the strategy is still valid .
In this context , an emphasis must lie on the maintenance and improvement of the international order .
We are faced with threats like protectionism , unfair competition , substandard shipping or piracy .
We must find better responses to these issues , namely through dialogue with major trading partners .
I welcome the conclusions reached by the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the report presented and can assure you that many of the issues are already being addressed by the Commission in various activities to implement the strategy , such as the proposal on reporting formalities for ships , an important element of the Common maritime transport space without barriers .
The Commission services have also started working on a Social Agenda for maritime transport as well as on the EU e-Maritime initiative , both of which the Commission intends to present in 2011 .
I would also like to answer the point on State aid guidelines for shipping in 2010 .
On the one hand , the 2004 guidelines will not ' expire ' in 2011 , even if the Commission said that they ' will be reviewed within seven years ' .
On the other hand , the current crisis , with its severe consequences for shipping , calls for a very cautious approach .
With regard to the specific measures , we are currently preparing a detailed roadmap for implementation of this strategy , which we plan to publish this summer .
Mr President , the Commissioner 's statement evinced a very positive response from me and I listened to it with a great deal of interest , because shipping is indeed a very important - I would say vital - sector for the European economy .
The European Union has every reason to safeguard the leading role which it plays in this economic sector and to maintain a high standard of maritime transport .
This is the challenge : to maintain our leading role in the global shipping market , which is why we need an effective and coordinated maritime transport strategy .
The report we are debating today , which was adopted by an overwhelming majority in the competent committee , is a detailed report which moves in the right direction , and I consider that , even as it now stands , without changes and amendments , the text responds fully to the need for us to move along a specific fixed line in the direction I referred to earlier .
Of course , European shipping faces huge challenges at present , as well as an exogenous challenge .
The first challenge is the need to increase competition .
It is a fact that free competition is the life blood of shipping .
At the same time , however , State aid is often needed , because we frequently have to cope with unfair competition from third countries .
So the conclusion is this : State aid must be kept , because it has helped to maintain the competitiveness of European shipping and of the economy of the Member States .
The second challenge we face is the need to strengthen and improve vocational training of human resources in the shipping sector , because there has been a spectacular reduction in the number of young people entering the profession and there is a lack of trained seafarers .
We therefore need a dynamic policy .
We must , without fail , address these two sectors and I believe that the report moves in the right direction .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , we very much welcome the fact that , in future , we will have a maritime strategy in the EU , even if we will have to wait a little longer for the vote .
We assume that this report will be incorporated into the Future of Transport report and then into the White Paper .
Through the European Maritime Transport Strategy 2018 , we are creating the framework to make the European maritime economy more competitive at international level , and in this strategy we have determined , firstly , that we want this framework to be set up on the basis of ecological standards and , secondly , that we want sensible global social standards for high quality shipping .
Let me briefly address three points .
Firstly , shipping is an environmentally friendly transport sector and therefore , one of our aims was for this branch of the economy to play its part in combating climate change in future , too .
I am very much in favour of us creating incentives like the green ports , even if we do not make any decisions today but rather assign the Commission and the Council the task of finding out what is possible in this regard .
I believe it is just as important to maintain international competitiveness - including in respect of other modes of transport .
It is therefore also right for the Commission , on the basis of our proposal , to once again carry out an impact assessment in respect of the sulphur emission control areas in the North Sea and the Baltic Sea because , if we want higher requirements here than elsewhere , we need to take international competition into account and ensure that , if possible , we do not cause the transport of containers to move back to the roads , which would be counterproductive .
Allow me to mention one last thing that I feel is particularly important , namely the inclusion of the major European ports in the planning of the TEN networks .
This is of such enormous importance to us because the ports are important intersections in the transport chains and they can only perform their role effectively if intermodality is facilitated and reinforced .
There are numerous other points that I could mention here .
Mr van Dalen , congratulations on this excellent report .
We have all contributed a little to it and I would ask for your understanding for the fact that we do not want to spoil this excellent report by accepting your amendments .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance fully supports Mr van Dalen 's report and recommendations .
He offers us a balanced text which is the result of the close collaboration he managed to establish with the other political groups .
We endorse this report because it clearly sets out the challenges facing the EU 's maritime policy , namely a significant increase in maritime traffic , both inside and outside the Union , without sacrificing the environment or social issues .
This text is consistent with a rationale that we wish to see applied in all areas : a policy of sustainable development .
It offers positive paths to allow maritime transport to develop between now and 2018 in the best possible conditions .
In particular , we highlight the fight against abuses of flags of convenience or substandard vessels .
We also highlight protection against piracy .
We highlight having a policy designed within the framework of a single European sea , and the importance ascribed to the multimodal linking of European sea ports with the hinterland .
We highlight the support for simplification of the administrative rules governing entry and exit from European ports .
We highlight the promotion of maritime occupations and continuous training for them .
Lastly , we highlight the priority given to environmental issues .
On the whole , we will always support anything which , in our view , helps to promote a maritime transport sector which can compete with road and air transport .
Mr van Dalen 's report has taken full stock of the global environmental challenge , for which maritime transport is one of the solutions .
In particular , it is a useful tool against global warming .
Our only regret is that the amendment that we tabled in order to integrate the maritime transport sector into the greenhouse gas emission allowance trading system has not been taken up by the rapporteur or by the Commission .
From our point of view , no economic sector should depart from the general rule , and , as with the air and road sectors , maritime transport , even if it is only responsible for low gas emissions , must do its part to reduce them .
We will therefore be retabling our amendment to plenary .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to say that the Union needs a real maritime transport development strategy is putting it mildly , since this is a major issue for the future of our Union in terms of food , economic and political independence , as well as environmental protection .
In order to be effective , this strategy must be comprehensive and cover shipbuilding , ship repair , ports , employment and worker training , as well as safety .
The rejection of the directive on the liberalisation of port services by Parliament in 2006 represents , in my view , the cornerstone of any European maritime transport strategy .
Parliament is calling on the Commission to continue its fight against abuses of flags of convenience .
This is positive , but the fight has yet to really begin .
Ultimately , it is not abuses of flags of convenience that we need to combat , but the very existence of this practice .
Otherwise , all of our good intentions on safety , on job creation , are doomed .
It is a positive step to make State aid for this sector conditional on having to meet quality social and environmental criteria , and on promoting jobs and training for seafarers from EU Member States , since the only true distortions of competition do not result from State aid , but instead from social , wage and environmental dumping .
The best guarantee for the safety of maritime transport lies in having well-paid , well-trained crews who enjoy good social protection and good working conditions .
I am pleased to see that we are finally talking about lifelong training for seafarers and strengthening professional qualifications and skills .
We must now ensure that this is recognised as a right for all seafarers and have employers finance it .
I also support the requirements for shipbuilding and steel quality .
Of course , the text submitted to us takes a certain number of steps forwards , but it also still contains many contradictions .
It remains imprisoned in the shackles of the dogma of free and undistorted competition .
It is still too shaped by pressure from the shippers ' lobby and by the worst ultraliberal utopian scenarios .
For example , how can it support employment for Europe 's seafarers but also call for studies to determine to what extent the new technologies could replace them ?
How can it defend a reduction in dumping practices , while seeking freedom of movement for employees who do not even have identical rights within the Union ?
How can it highlight safety when it is self-declaration that prevails , and when some parties , attracted by the smell of profit , have no hesitation in transporting goods which could turn out to be particularly hazardous for people and the environment , without declaring them ?
There is still much work to be done , but we will do it together because a sound , high-level maritime policy must also and , above all , respect those tenacious men and women who often risk their lives to satisfy the needs of others .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , this is an ambitious strategy document .
I have a couple of comments , however .
More freight on the EU 's major rivers - great , but how do we take into account the fact that in recent years , water levels have often been too low for a fully laden barge to navigate them ?
If they sail only half-full , the freight costs are too high .
Risk-based controls - then how can we tell that a coal barge is smuggling people ?
Risk-based controls alone are not sufficient .
It is naïve to expect all the maritime nations of the world to abide by the EU 's high environmental standards .
On the contrary , many old ships from third countries will take financial advantage of this .
Piracy - why is this problem only mentioned in an African context ?
The problem is far greater in the waters around Indonesia .
That also affects EU shipping companies .
Mandatory discharge - mandatory discharge should be made a statutory requirement in all coastal waters navigated , to avoid environmental disasters .
I also consider it regrettable that we have closed down so many small ports .
We should invest in strengthening coastal maritime transport , not weakening it .
One final point - we are often told how important the shipbuilding industry is for the EU .
Yet where is the debate on the responsible , environmentally sound scrapping of ships ?
Do we want to continue sending our ships for irresponsible scrapping on Indian beaches when we have finished with them ?
( RO ) Europe 's maritime matters cannot be viewed separately from international maritime matters .
Europe is a major competitor on the maritime transport market , especially in terms of transporting passengers and containers .
The European Union 's position in the global market in this sector must be enhanced .
Improving the quality of training given to sailors , as well as their working and living conditions , both on board and when in port and roadsteads , can go a long way to meeting this requirement .
There is a shortage of highly qualified workers right across the European maritime sector , from shipbuilders right down to pleasure boats .
Companies in the US , Asia and the Middle East offer far more facilities than their European counterparts .
In these conditions , European professionals in this sector prefer to be employed by maritime companies or shipowners in Dubai or China , while European ships are crewed by Filipino and Indian seafarers .
This situation must be ended .
Maritime institutions in Member States must work together much more closely in order to harmonise their training programmes , as well as offer opportunities for paid work placements and exchanges of experience with European maritime companies .
I also wish to raise another point relating to security , which is extremely important and continues to hamper the smooth flow of global maritime traffic .
I am referring to the situation in the Horn of Africa .
I welcome the actions of the NAVFOR Atalanta operation , which is completely fulfilling its duty in the region .
However , we must recognise that specific investment is required in the defence industry in order to be able to supply the military with ships and other intervention resources which are much more effective than those which the European navy currently deploys .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I agree to a large extent with the comments made by my colleague Fleckenstein and would , first of all , like to thank the rapporteur , Mr van Dalen , for his excellent report .
He hones in on a number of important issues , the importance of shipping for our economy , to begin with .
He also points to the fact that we have to compete in a global market , and that we therefore have to pay attention to the competitiveness of our maritime sector while , at the same time , strive for more sustainable transport .
In other words , we must counteract the risk of deflagging .
At the same time , we must also play on a level playing field .
It is therefore important that the State aid rules which have been in the pipeline for quite some time actually begin to apply to our ports .
I am sure we will have to come back to this at a later stage .
There are three important areas for consideration .
First of all , employment and working conditions .
The shipping profession has to be made attractive to young people again , and these days , that is an extremely difficult thing to achieve .
We have to make more effort to spread information about career opportunities , whether on shore or elsewhere .
These are the things we need to build on .
Working conditions also need to be improved by ratifying International Labour Organisation legislation and by performing checks at a global level , not just within Europe , obviously .
The second important point - and many of you have already mentioned it - is the impact of shipping on the environment .
In itself , shipping is a sustainable mode of transportation , but there is still a lot of room for progress .
On that score , Europe must play a pioneering role , including in the negotiations within the International Maritime Organisation .
Finally , it goes without saying that safety is essential .
You can only create a thriving profession if it can be undertaken safely .
We have to make the extended Third Maritime Safety Package a reality and continue to give support to the Atalanta mission off the coast of Somalia .
( DE ) Mr President , since I am the first speaker from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would like to start by offering my sincere thanks to Mr van Dalen .
We have all seen that he is wholeheartedly committed to maritime transport .
That has become abundantly clear .
We all know how important this area is .
In recent years , before the crisis , the maritime economy as a whole was growing considerably more than other areas of the economy .
Of course , maritime transport plays a major role in this , and it is possible to say that maritime clusters will be absolutely crucial to the further development of Europe .
There are also forecasts that predict that , now we are through the worst of the crisis , the transport sector will start to grow once again and that maritime transport will then gain in importance .
Ninety per cent of our exports and imports are transported via the ports .
Of course , in this regard it is important - as has already been said - for ports and hinterland connections to be given due consideration in connection with corridors and trans-European networks .
We need new blood .
If we have more transport in the maritime sector , we will , of course , also need people who want to work in this area .
For this , we need high quality training that is also harmonised throughout Europe and , at the same time , we need to advertise for this area .
Young people simply need to see what future prospects they would have in maritime transport .
We want good working conditions - that is also something that we can , and want to , harmonise throughout Europe .
The environmental aspect has already been mentioned .
Shipping is very environmentally friendly , particularly where CO2 emissions are concerned .
There is still considerable room for improvement with regard to nitrogen oxides and sulphur emissions .
Work needs to be done here , both in the sector itself and also in Europe in general , because , as has already been said , this is extremely important on account of there being strong international competition in maritime transport .
In Europe , we play a fairly leading role in this , but we need to ensure that we also retain this leading role .
In individual cases , we may also need State aid for this .
We need to ensure that we work together to develop this sector further .
To sum up , maritime transport is a definite area for the future and therefore , it is good that we are developing a long-term strategy .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is vital that we conduct a European maritime transport policy that is ambitious and looks at the long term .
It must take on board factors that are specific to this sector and address the challenges it is facing .
Maritime transport is a strategic sector for the European Union in several respects , primarily because of the role it plays in growth and employment , its international dimension and its environmental and sustainable development aspects .
It has been mentioned that maritime transport is the vehicle for 80 % of the world 's trade .
The European Commission Communication and Mr van Dalen 's report show us the path we need to follow , set strategic goals and identify key action areas for the European Union 's maritime transport policy .
I would personally like to stress certain points that my colleague , Mrs Vlasto , and I have been promoting within the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which are that the European Union needs to act to strengthen the competitiveness of the maritime transport sector , that this involves , in particular , improving working conditions and career opportunities within the sector , without dissociating the aim of competitiveness from those of sustainable development , fair competition and safety .
As regards environmental aspects , EU policy should promote internalisation of external costs and the establishment of maritime emission control areas .
Finally , in anticipation of increasing sea traffic levels , we need to promote investment aimed at modernising and increasing the capacity of our port infrastructures .
It is important for the European Parliament to share its vision for EU maritime transport policy from now until 2018 .
Mr van Dalen 's excellent report , which has been very widely supported within the Commission , will , I hope , receive equally broad support from Parliament , which will give us a strong basis for future negotiations .
( RO ) Maritime transport is becoming extremely important for the European Union .
Bearing in mind that the maritime sector is facing competition not only at Community level , but especially on a global scale , we should emphasise the importance of increasing the proportion of maritime transport as part of our transport activity as a whole , both within the Community and particularly outside it .
However , we should highlight that there are still European Union Member States on the black or grey list of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding .
This is why we are calling on Member States and shipowners to make efforts to obtain a place on the white list of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding .
In addition , given the maritime accidents in recent years , I believe that European maritime accident intervention centres need to be set up in every Member State with access to the sea .
Commissioner , I wish to take advantage of this opportunity and debate to reiterate my request to the Commission to capitalise to the maximum extent on the European Union 's direct access to the Black Sea , a region of particular geostrategic importance .
In this regard , the Commission should launch , as in the case of the other European seas , calls for proposals for developing Black Sea maritime corridors .
The link between the ports of Rotterdam and Constanţa through the Rhine corridor , the Main Canal and River Danube cuts the distance between the North Sea and Black Sea by 4 000 kilometres .
This is why I believe that this is vital and I am asking the Commission and Member States to speed up the implementation of priority project 18 .
Although transport by ship causes less pollution , the European Parliament has asked for ship transport to be included in the emission certificate trading scheme , especially in the case of maritime transport .
Shipyards are facing financial difficulties , especially in the current economic and financial crisis .
At the moment , shipyard representatives cannot envisage a solution for overcoming the current economic crisis .
The European maritime sector is facing an ever-growing shortage of qualified seafarers .
The social aspect and work conditions enjoyed by seafarers in the European Union are closely linked to the European fleet 's competitiveness .
I think that measures are required to facilitate workers ' mobility in this sector without unjustified barriers and restrictions .

( ES ) Mr President , I would especially like to congratulate Mr van Dalen and also my colleague , Mr Fleckenstein , on this brilliant initiative , which moves forward with the European Parliament 's ambition for European Union maritime policy , and I also want to thank them for their generosity in accepting a large proportion of my suggestions .
The completed report includes such important aspects as support for adapting ports and ships to the needs of people with reduced mobility and the requirement for ratification of the ILO 2006 Maritime Labour Convention and , moreover , it asks for the industry to incorporate the Convention into its practices .
Another important aspect is the extension of the proposals for professional training to seafarers at all levels in order to combat their under-valuation and exploitation .
It also proposes leading the way in the fight against pollution in the International Maritime Organisation , in terms of both alternatives to bunker fuel and reducing sulphur in emissions , and proposes doing so by using smart transport systems such as the Galileo satellite system .
The report also proposes acknowledging the stepping up of the European fight against piracy and supporting the growing effectiveness of Operation Atalanta , as well as the need to improve the quality of ship design in order to adapt them to the highest accessibility and safety standards .
Finally , I especially welcome the acknowledgement of the role of the ports in the new trans-European networks , including their crucial connection with dry ports or inland ports and with logistics platforms .

( EL ) Mr President , the strategy we are debating today is extremely ambitious and , as far as the basic direction is concerned , Mr Koumoutsakos , the rapporteur for our political group , has already covered everything I wanted to say .
Allow me , however , to make a comment , as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , in connection with the very interesting and pioneering initiative to create e-maritime , a maritime monitoring network .
I personally agree with the Commission text ; it makes provision for the creation of an integrated information management system to recognise , monitor , locate and report all ships at sea and their cargos .
However , similar - I do not know if they are more or less developed - electronic monitoring actions are also being undertaken by Frontex forces , as part of the fight against illegal immigration .
I therefore wish to ask if we are taking this into account , if the Commission needs to clarify anything in its communication , if there should be specific , different competences for each agency , or if perhaps this information should be combined , so that we have a better outcome in both directions .
Mr President , I would like to address two issues mentioned by the rapporteur , but not elaborated upon .
The first is piracy , on which the recommendations are all good , but inevitably general .
Perhaps our experience on the basis of the lessons learned from the Atalanta operation can be used to contribute more to the self-protection rules recommended by the IMO , given that piracy will probably expand and our Union cannot reproduce that type of operation all over the maritime space used by the EU 's merchant navies .
The second issue is the need for a better-developed link between the maritime and inland waterways sectors , given the complexity of activity in those areas .
This is illustrated , for instance , in the interconnection between economic , social , environmental and political factors in the case of the River Danube and the Black Sea .
( RO ) The first question concerns a report we are asking the European Commission for about the effectiveness of the Marco Polo programme .
The second question relates to the possibility , or rather , the future legislative proposals on increasing the role of the European Union 's maritime ports within global maritime logistics .
( EL ) Mr President , I have asked for the floor in order to clarify that , in my initial report , I overlooked something which my fellow members here have not mentioned either .
I should like , in particular , to refer to the role of the European Maritime Safety Agency or EMSA .
I and a number of other colleagues recently had an opportunity to visit EMSA , which carries out important work crucial to the development of the European Union 's maritime transport strategy .
It needs our support and I believe that the information and technical facilities which it has not only help shipping and maritime transport in the Union , but can also help in the other sectors referred to a moment ago , especially as regards , for example , information which can also be evaluated and used by Frontex .
To be honest , and this is my final comment , EMSA carries out important work which we must recognise and take into account when we discuss the European Union 's maritime strategy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been a fascinating debate and definitely strengthens the excellent report by Mr van Dalen .
I think it is well done because there is nothing more difficult than to write a report on strategy in general , because strategy is an instrument which really has a longer-term vision and , at the same time , it needs to concentrate on main points .
We are working now in the college to prepare a detailed roadmap for implementation .
By the summer , we could come out with this .
I should like to refer to three specific questions .
One concerns State aid guidelines for ports .
This is under discussion in the Commission 's DG on Competition and with a former Commissioner for competition and they really would like us , as a Commission , to work in line together , so it will take some time .
I cannot give any precise timelines but we are working on it .
On the Marco Polo issue , we have discussed the issues relating to the trans-European transport network , so this discussion will be related to this .
On maritime ports , we do not have any legislation at this stage in the pipeline .
Finally , thank you once again , Mr President and honourable Members , for this debate .
It was really very helpful for the Commission .

rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , thank you and thank you to all the members . I think this report is a good example of constructive cooperation between the different groups .
I would like to address three key points which some of you have already mentioned .
First of all , the environment , which is crucial .
The environmental performance of our ships must improve a great deal and , in my report , I set out a number of options in that regard , in particular , levying a charge on bunker fuel which has a poor environmental profile .
I wonder whether the Commission might like to consider that idea again .
Finally , the concept of ' green ports ' , as some members have dubbed it .
In a green port , an environmentally friendly ship would be dealt with more quickly and would also have to pay a lower port duty .
Such a concept is a reward for good environmental behaviour .
That way , you actually combine a system of incentives and disincentives .
If you have a good environmental record , you are rewarded and if you do not make the grade , then you very quickly end up with an empty wallet .
I strongly endorse such a system .
When it comes to safety , one of the members said that Member States need to implement the Third Maritime Package very quickly .
That is necessary .
Mrs Ţicău mentioned the Paris Memorandum of Understanding .
You are quite right ; inspection is now moving towards being inspection based on risks , which is much better than the fixed percentage .
This gives inspection an enormous boost and good behaviour is rewarded .
That is , ships have to behave well .
Slovakia is still not on the white list and must make an extra effort there .
I have placed particular emphasis on shipbuilding and maintenance of ships .
We know that in times of economic downturn , maintenance quickly falls by the wayside .
We clearly cannot allow that to happen , and classification societies , in particular , are currently facing major demands .
We give our full backing to the Atalanta mission against piracy .
It is a good mission and has already proved a success .
Only last week , a frigate of the Dutch Navy helped free a German merchant ship .
Such cooperation seems ideal to me .
In this particular case , all the shipowners had to work together and sail in a convoy as none of them was able to go it alone .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the Commission and we look forward to this report being translated into a roadmap .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , during the part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European maritime transport sector plays a key role within the globalised market .
Its importance is based on one key statistic : 41 % of the global fleet is managed by the countries of the European Union .
However , following the increase in State aid in the maritime transport sectors of third countries , the competitive position of the European fleet is subject to growing pressure .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to quickly present the new rules on State aid , in order to develop fair international maritime trade conditions .
Recent studies estimate that , in 2018 , maritime transport will increase in the Member States from 3.08 billion tonnes in 2006 to 5.3 billion .
I therefore agree with the content of the report in question ; in other words , I agree that developing European port infrastructure capacities , in order to sustain the growth of the maritime transport sector , is a priority .
Lastly , I believe that the maritime professions should be promoted more among young European citizens with the aid of appropriate information , which currently seems to be lacking .
As I see it , in fact , the growing lack of professionals in the European maritime transport sector may serve to weaken it over time .
Ladies and gentlemen , a look at the situation of European Union maritime transport can lead to ambivalent conclusions .
On the one hand , the data which have been presented testify to the fact that the flags of Member States have a huge share of transport globally as well as inside the Union .
This underlines the significance of the Community in the implementation of new technologies and organisational systems , especially those concerning environmental protection and improvements to the living standards of crews .
On the other hand , however , increasingly strong competition from third countries can be observed , and particularly from what are known as flags of convenience .
Also noticeable is the increasing reluctance of young people to take up work in what is , undoubtedly , a difficult sector .
In summary , the present situation of the maritime transport market in the EU is not a bad one , but the prospects do not make us feel optimistic .
However , for me , personally , measures to help inland shipping and ensure optimal connections between maritime and inland transport of goods are a priority .
I represent the region of the upper Odra river basin , and can see what little use is being made of the potential of river ports in this region , especially as a transportation route connecting inland regions of the Czech Republic , Poland and Germany with the sea port in Szczecin .
This aspect , too , should be borne in mind in the context of EU maritime transport , so that measures taken as part of the policy under discussion will contribute to the development of the Community as a whole , and not only of coastal areas .
Mr President , Mr van Dalen , ladies and gentlemen , 41 % of fleets worldwide belong to Europe , yet unfortunately , some other countries give more support to their fleets and shipowners than do the European Union Member States , or impose less stringent requirements on the safety and environmental friendliness of ships .
Europe must guarantee better working conditions for its sailors , the safety of its ships and an improvement in the marine environmental situation .
In order to do this , we should require , or perhaps encourage Member States to support the state 's maritime sector or guarantee that ships appearing on the register of that state observe the convention that has been ratified , as well as international requirements .
Although sea transport is more environmentally friendly than road or air transport , it is possible to reduce pollution still further here .
My hope in presenting this proposal for change is that it will make future docking operations more effective and less polluting , something which will definitely be facilitated by paper-free procedures as well as the wider use of intelligent transport systems .
At the same time , the main goal of intelligent transport systems is not to reduce pollution , but to increase efficiency and guarantee better competition .
The safety of the maritime sector is very important .
We must do everything to guarantee the safety of our sailors , passengers , ships and goods but , at the same time , we cannot solve this problem with our eyes closed .
We must look at the situation more broadly and find a solution to the existing problems in this area .
In a nutshell , I would say that maritime activity is a very important part of the economy and the everyday life of many Europeans .
We must therefore do everything to guarantee the competitiveness and sustainability of this sector , while not forgetting environmental and human factors .
Europeana - the next steps ( short presentation )
The next item is the short presentation of the report by Helga Trüpel , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on Europeana - the next steps - .
Mr President , Commissioner Kroes , Europeana is to be the major digital cultural project of the European Union .
What does Europeana mean ?
It is a digital library , a digital museum and a digital archive for our European cultural heritage .
The intention is to provide access for all citizens to this digital resource , not only within the European Union , but throughout the world .
The Europeana project was started in November 2008 and 1 000 cultural institutions contributed to its establishment .
It has 150 partner organisations .
So far , around 6 million works from our European cultural heritage have been digitised .
By June 2010 , there are expected to be 10 million digitised works and by 2015 , the figure is expected to reach 15 million .
As you can see , this is a very ambitious undertaking , and it is very important for the European Union .
Up to now , it has been funded by the eContentplus programme and by the Member States .
However , so far , the rate of digitisation has varied considerably between the Member States .
France is leading the way with over 40 % , Germany is at around 16 % , but many other Member States are much further behind , and this , remember , is supposed to be our joint flagship of European digital cultural policy .
It is particularly important that we understand that there is a public cultural institution , and this is intended , for understandable reasons , to provide strong competition for the Google Book Search legal case settlement , because we do not want our European heritage simply to be entrusted to a monopoly .
We want a public resource , in the best European sense , for our European cultural heritage .
We also want to retain public influence , because that means that European citizens can also have genuine political influence .
There is no problem in respect of works that are no longer subject to copyright or that are in the public domain .
It is much more complicated when it comes to orphan works , in other words , works that have not been released from copyright , but for which it is very difficult to trace the rightful holders .
It is another matter again when it comes to works protected by copyright .
If Europeana is to one day also hold works protected by copyright , there will need to be a payment for private downloads , because otherwise , we will destroy our cultural added value on the cultural markets .
Therefore , what I want to achieve from a political point of view is , on the one hand , quick and effective digitisation while , at the same time , retaining copyright , because that is the only way that we will be able to maintain the cultural diversity of the European Union .
Thus , we need consensual solutions for orphan works and a very thorough search to find out who the rightful copyright holders are .
From a political perspective , the absolutely key issue for me when we now discuss the post-Lisbon strategy , the EU 2020 strategy , and when it comes to modernising our economy , developing the digital society , the knowledge-based society and cultural diversity , is that Europeana must also be partly financed from this EU 2020 programme , with the involvement of the Member States , of course .
It must be a joint European project .
We therefore also need a ' join Europeana ' campaign to hopefully find additional private sponsors .
We must make it clear , however , that we need to raise awareness among our citizens and , above all , among young people , that this resource exists .
Many people still do not know about this .
That is the huge task that we now have to face together .
( PL ) Mr President , Europeana is an undertaking of crucial importance , which can make the cultural heritage of Europe available to the whole world .
As we all know , it is not only a library , for it is also a virtual museum and archive .
I wish that each one of us in this Chamber could say that the works of great national creators , such as in my case Chopin , Marie Curie née Skłodowska or Słowacki , could be available on the Internet .
I would like to mention three key factors .
Firstly , in the case of Europeana , we cannot allow a reduction in quality .
This is something about which we should be careful during this project .
Secondly , it requires a solution to the matter of copyright in the case of orphan and out-of-print works .
Thirdly , I have a huge request to Mrs Kroes to speed up digitisation in Member States , if we want to be proud of this great flagship project in the future .
I would like to thank Mrs Trüpel for an excellent report .
( RO ) As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the report ' Europeana - the next steps ' , I welcome the fact that this report has been finalised and I hope that its recommendations will be adopted by the Commission .
During the debates on this topic so far , a whole range of subjects have been discussed , such as IT structure , management of the Europeana site , free access to library information , the need to standardise the digitisation process and the problem of media coverage for the website .
Some of these subjects feature in the report .
This fills me with the hope that we have managed to achieve an exhaustive report .
However , I hope that the debate will continue in the future on certain aspects , such as managing the site , funding methods and , above all , organising the site in the form of a single database and not a portal .
I hope that the recommendations specified by the European Parliament , along with the Commission 's reflections on the issues mentioned above , will be turned into a successful project .
Europeana can become a successful project for the European Union as long as it is built on the EU 's values and ideals and provides the focal point for European cultural information .
( FI ) Mr President , to begin with , I would like to thank Mrs Trüpel for this excellent report .
I have known her well from the committee for five years now , and I know that whatever she does , she does with true care and professionalism , and this is one good indication of that .
This is another kind of project that we need in Europe , because the European Union is regarded as a community of values , but it is also a strong cultural community .
We have 27 different Member States which have an extremely rich and varied culture .
If , at a time when information highways are increasing in number , we can make information more easily available to people , then this is the kind of European richness which is worth investing in and seeking resources for .
In this way , all the small countries will also have the opportunity to promote their own unique and special cultures .
Once broadband is extended everywhere through the work of the Commission and the Member States , the principle of equality will be realised in the supply of cultural services , in electronic libraries , museums and archives .
( PL ) My political group , and I personally , are not specially in favour of extensive programmes and institutions or of creating entities which go beyond what is needed .
However , Europeana is not such an entity .
It is , in fact , something very important , especially because we live in times of a visual , and not a written , culture .
This means , as Neil Postman has shown in his superb book Amusing Ourselves to Death , that the visual culture is devaluing public debate and making us poorer citizens .
This means , in turn , that if a project has a chance of improving the habit of reading , it has a chance of improving the mind of the citizen , and in this way , the European Union would contribute to a strengthening of the quality of the education of its citizens and the way they function , and this would mean that in the Member States , those citizens would be more active and wiser and would be better citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are debating an initiative which may prove to be a real treasure for the Union and I should like at this point to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Trüpel , once again for the exceptional report which she has submitted .
We are referring to an electronic cultural depository of the European States which will allow access to primary cultural information , and I should like to emphasise at this point that the success of Europeana will depend on the format which we ultimately decide to give it , by which I mean that we do not want a Europeana which is a copy of electronic platforms that already exist , such as Google or Wikipedia .
We want a serious and reliable source , the information in which is of scientific importance and value , a source in which intellectual property rights are protected and the seriousness of the content of which is safeguarded .
I think this is guaranteed with the amendments tabled and the debate on the subject that we held in the Committee on Culture and Education .
Of course , what it cannot ultimately safeguard is the interest on the part of the Member States in making use of this tool to promote their culture .
This is where we all need to develop our role , to explain how important this project is to our national governments and the citizens of the Member States , so that this project has an impact and we can all make use of it in the best possible way in the medium term .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would once again like to offer my sincere thanks to Mrs Trüpel for the truly excellent report that we are debating today .
I believe that it is a splendid project that will be making Europe 's diverse cultural heritage available to the people of Europe and throughout the world in a digital online library .
However , it still requires further joint efforts on our part to actually make this project a success .
A significant prerequisite for this is , in the view of my group , the free - and that means also , as far as possible , cost-free - access to our cultural heritage via Europeana .
In the joint discussions , we have reached a good compromise , which protects the interests of authors of protected works on the one hand while , at the same time , providing the necessary free accessibility , and I would very much like the Commission to also take account of and adopt these proposals in future .
Another prerequisite is that the Member States become increasingly aware of their responsibility .
For my own country , this means that it is not acceptable for Goethe to be available in Polish and French , but not in the original German .
In this regard , we must all jointly call on the Member States more strongly to once again provide the appropriate financial resources to make Europeana a real success on this level as well .
( RO ) Bearing in mind the benefits offered to the European Union 's citizens through having access to Europeana , I believe that existing digital content must be made available in all the European Union 's official languages .
I also think that it is of paramount importance to offer people with disabilities access to Europeana 's digital content .
With this in mind , not only is a suitable format required , but also access which is adapted to their needs .
We recommend that the European Commission ask digital content providers to certify the security of the websites linked to Europeana .
Last but not least , I believe that it is important to provide a sustainable system with regard to funding and developing the Europeana project .
Commissioner , please also say a few words to us about the revision of the directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , and , of course , especially Mrs Trüpel , we are absolutely fascinated by your report .
We welcome it .
I think that indeed ' Europeana - the next steps ' is just a start of a very challenging adventure and it shows , by the way , the strong political support for the further development of Europeana as a common access point to Europe 's rich and diverse cultural heritage in the digital age .
So I would like to thank Mrs Trüpel , the rapporteur , for the work she has done and also give her my compliments for the branding , since the branding itself is already unique : ' Europeana ' - you do not need to explain what it is all about .
The Commission can also support the alternative motion for a resolution , which has the agreement of the main political groups in Parliament , I have been informed .
It is an ambitious project and again , I repeat , it is the start .
It aims to make digitised books , newspapers , maps , museum objects , audiovisual material and sound archives from across Europe available on the Internet .
That is essential to ensure access to culture in the digital age .
It is not only what Mr Migalski said : something that makes us better citizens .
Well , let us wait and find out , but , anyhow , it gives an opportunity to be more happy , for enjoying culture is , in most cases , enjoying happiness , so to speak .
It is Parliament 's report that rightly underlines that there is also an economic component .
The digitisation and the online accessibility of our cultural heritage will benefit different sectors of activity : think of education , research , tourism and the media .
The Europeana site is the result of an unprecedented collaboration between European libraries , archives and museums .
At present , as was rightly mentioned by Mrs Trüpel , it gives direct access to 7 million digitised objects .
Again , this is just a start and let us go for it .
More can be done and more needs to be done .
The Parliament report highlights different areas for Europeana and for the related policies where progress must be made in the coming years .
The development of the site depends , in the first place , on the input from Member States who should do more to digitise their cultural heritage and to make all digitised objects available through Europeana .
I am glad that Parliament joins the Commission in asking Member States to make fast progress in doing so .
The sooner the better .
Parliament underlines that Europeana should not just give access to public domain works , but should also include material that is still in copyright .
Indeed , there is an urgent need - and that is my answer to Mrs Ţicău - to find workable solutions for bringing out-of-print works online , for dealing with the issue of orphan works ( works for which it is impossible to locate the rights holders ) .
Failing to do so bears the risk that Europe will lag behind within a few years from now , in particular , compared to the US .
At present , the Commission is carrying out an impact assessment on a possible legal solution for orphan works at European level and we are discussing what could be done , but if you do not mind , I will come back to that when we talk of the digital agenda , for that is one of the issues that we have to touch upon .
An enhanced version of Europeana will be launched later this year , and is expected to give , by then , access to more than 10 million digitised objects .
The site will be further developed in the years thereafter .
Parliament rightly points out that for the success of Europeana , it is a must to increase the awareness of the site both among cultural institutions , who could contribute their digitised content , and among the general public .
Special attention should be given to younger people , rightly mentioned by you , an extremely important part of our population , who could be targeted through the schools .
The Commission is fully committed to continuing work on the development of Europeana and the policies related to it and that will be a key area of work in the European Digital Agenda .
It is anyhow worthwhile to fight for it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , at the next part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Europeana , the European Digital Library , faces many challenges today .
The success of this pan-European undertaking is far from being assured .
Firstly , because until now , Europeana has contained , principally , works coming from just a few of the most active countries .
Secondly , these are not contemporary works , which would attract the greatest interest , but older ones which are in the public domain .
I would like to draw particular attention to one aspect of the Europeana project which , in my opinion , is of crucial significance for its success - financing .
The process of extending digital collections is very expensive and will take many more years .
Meanwhile , Europeana is only guaranteed financial resources up until 2013 , as part of a project financed partly by the European Commission and Member States , and also by private sponsors .
I think it is essential to ensure stable sources of finance as part of the new Financial Perspective for 2014-2020 .
European funds in the form of grants made to individual cultural institutions in Member States should encourage them to be more effective in the digitisation of collections .
At the same time , compulsory digitisation targets should be introduced , which Member States would have to meet in a specified time .
Only consistent realisation of a ' carrot and stick ' approach will ensure that Europeana becomes an attractive portal of great interest to readers and researchers , and not a digital attic used for the sentimental storage of old junk .
Our intention is for Europeana to be a brand new project devoted to European cultural values and not an alternative to Google 's book digitising project .
Europeana , which is a library , museum and digital archive rolled into one , must promote a single European heritage , offer a credible source of information and enable Member States to add content in a formal , structured manner .
Europeana must not turn into a portal like Wikipedia where anyone can input text without it being verified beforehand .
This practice obviously produces numerous mistakes in the content posted there .
In this regard , we could create a special section on this site specifically where users can have discussions with each other , without offering them the chance to amend the cultural content posted on the site .
It is important for us to focus attention on the Europeana site 's graphical presentation , on raising its profile and making it accessible at a time when its current design is not very user-friendly and may contribute to a loss of public interest .
Based on the considerations mentioned , I support the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) as an alternative to the current option put forward in the report so that we can help create a valuable portal , which is relevant in terms of the information the public will find there .
Ladies and gentlemen , one of our fundamental duties nowadays as politicians and citizens is to preserve our European cultural heritage for future generations .
Europeana is one of the leading projects in this area , helping to speed up the processes for digitising cultural heritage in each individual Member State .
However , cultural and legal problems associated with the mass digitisation of books , including those currently held by European libraries , still remain to be overcome .
Copyright and legislation governing it in Member States pose one of the biggest challenges Europeana faces .
Competition with Google also spotlights numerous issues which will have to be resolved .
In this respect , every possible resource needs to be found to support national libraries , museums and archives so that the Europeana project can become a true reflection of the wealth and diversity of Europe 's cultural heritage .
During the debates in the Committee on Culture and Education , I suggested that the European Parliament should have certain controls over the project , but I realise that , based on current rules , this is not possible .
Nevertheless , I want the European Parliament , as the only EU institution whose members are directly elected , to be able one day to exercise its control over European initiatives . Thank you for your attention .
Evaluation and assessment of the Animal Welfare Action Plan 2006-2010 ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Marit Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the evaluation and assessment of the Animal Welfare Action Plan 2006-2010 .
Mr President , animal welfare is , in fact , something that most of the citizens of Europe care about .
Animal welfare is not just about animals .
It also concerns our own identity , what we think we represent and what we think Europe represents , what we consider to be the hallmarks of civilisation ; it is about respect and how we treat these , our fellow travellers in the journey through life .
In my assessment , which is supported by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the vast majority of the five year plan adopted by Parliament in 2006 - for which Mrs Jeggle was rapporteur - has been implemented fairly reasonably .
One very important piece of the puzzle is missing , and that is compliance .
Consequently , when I outlined the coming five year plan - which both I and the Committee very much hope will come about this year - I focused on tightening up compliance with the existing legislation .
At present , this means , in particular , the directive on the life , welfare and management of pigs .
It also concerns the recurrent problem of the long-distance transport of animals , sometimes in grim conditions .
In other words , it is about compliance with , control of and the sanctions contained in the laws , directives and regulations that have already been passed .
Furthermore , I should like to see a slightly new approach - and in particular a more holistic approach .
I would like to see a general act on the protection of animals that sets a basic standard for Europe , the EU and the internal market , with minimum levels laid down .
This is important for two reasons .
Firstly , because of competition within the Union in the internal market ; in other words , it must not be possible for one country to derive a competitive advantage as a result of the neglect of animals .
The second and perhaps most important reason is that we make great demands of European farmers and producers .
They therefore need to be protected from unfair competition from third countries .
It is unreasonable to make such great demands of them if we are not prepared to ensure fair trade .
Moreover - and this may not be so popular - somehow or other , we have to pay for animal welfare .
Whether this is at the point of sale or via taxes is a debate for another occasion .
We also need to establish a permanent , well-organised network - and note here what I am saying : not a new authority , but rather coordinating functions for the extremely good scientific institutions that we already have in Europe .
Last but not least , we need to get to grips with the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry .
I am not talking now about the risk of antibiotic residues in foods , but rather about the resistance to antibiotics - particularly among zoonotic bacteria - which poses a considerable threat to public health .
Mr President , I want to refer to a piece of legislation with which the Commissioner - who was Energy Commissioner for five years - will be closely acquainted .
That is the Laying Hens Directive , which requires the animal welfare standards of the cages in which egg-laying hens are kept to be upgraded by the end of next year .
I thought this would cost thousands .
In fact , in many commercial centres , it costs millions , as large-scale industrial equipment is involved .
Many countries have complied with the directive .
Many farmers have invested money to ensure that animal welfare standards are raised to the required level , but I do not think we are likely to get compliance across the entire European Union by the end of next year .
I want to know what action the Commission will take , and what action it is initiating , to try and get compliance .
The rapporteur has called for a ban on trade in eggs which do not comply with the legislation .
I am not sure that one can do that .
However , I want to know that the Commission is being proactive in trying to ensure that Member States and their farmers keep to raising these animal welfare standards and that there is a level playing field for all .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Paulsen , thank you for your report .
I would like to applaud the work that has been done by the various shadow rapporteurs as part of the preparation for this dossier and , in particular , the rapporteur for my group , Mrs Jeggle .
This issue resonates differently in the various European countries .
Not all producers or consumers perceive the issue in the same way .
In spite of this , European legislation is gradually succeeding in creating a very strict standard , which I feel we should make much better use of in international negotiations and , in particular , in the control of imported products .
However , as has already been said , these rules carry a cost , and every day we are seeing this cost rise for farmers and other operators , at the very time when the profitability of farming is being hit hard .
This is , therefore , a clear justification for the common agricultural policy .
If we spend EUR 100 per head per year to finance a common agricultural policy , animal welfare is one good reason why this funding is needed .
( RO ) I wish to congratulate Mrs Paulsen for this report , which offers solutions concerning animal welfare and the problems which this subject raises within European policies .
It is well known that animal health comprises their well-being and a certain , minimum biological comfort , without which it is not possible for them to fully express their vitality , including their natural behaviour , depending on the changes which occur in their living environment .
This is why I believe that the improvement and increase in competitiveness in the agricultural sector must be maintained at European Union level by promoting and observing the current regulations governing animal welfare , which must also comply with the requirements for their protection .
This entails Member States considering a review of their livestock rearing technologies and replacing old technologies with other , state-of-the-art and high-performance technologies , which take into account the animals ' physiological needs and allow their productive biological potential to be utilised in ideal conditions , also resulting in much better food safety .
This obviously envisages both the allocation of appropriate funds to this area and the efficient use of the support opportunities offered by them so that Member States can invest in modern , innovative solutions intended for the benefit of the animals ' welfare .
I believe that , in order to find the best solutions , an important role can be given to the involvement of ordinary citizens and civil society in drafting and implementing programmes in this area , tailored to the actual situations in each Member State .
( FI ) Mr President , animal welfare is also a measure of how civilised we , the European people , are .
The European Union must ensure that legislation is up to date and that supervision is in operation . At the moment , there are shortcomings in both of these areas .
The question of transporting animals has been raised here .
We have seen some cruel and harsh films on the television and , in this matter , as well as in every matter associated with animal welfare , we would expect swift action from the Commission so that we can be sure that animals are treated in a decent manner .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament and , in particular , Mrs Paulsen , for the own-initiative report on the EU Animal Welfare Action Plan .
The report is not only a reflection of what has passed , but also contains important and useful ideas for a future strategy on animal welfare .
The Action Plan , adopted in 2006 , has basically been a success .
It has brought together separate EU initiatives into a single vision on animal welfare , and its implementation has been broadly satisfactory .
That said , the Commission shares the view expressed during this catch-the-eye session that enforcement remains a serious issue and efforts need to be maintained and enhanced to ensure proper implementation .
Regarding the question from Chris Davies , we will provide a written answer on that particular question but , basically , the Commission is focused on implementation .
The rules adopted should be implemented .
It is not only about the rule of law , but also about fair competition .
We also agree on the need to promote fair competition between EU and non-EU producers .
Animal welfare is also a ' non-trade concern ' that has to be defended and explained during the WTO negotiations .
Our future strategy will have to make that clear .
I note the call for a new action plan for 2011-15 , and am pleased to inform you that the Commission has already started work in that direction .
Our ambition is to establish a new strategy for animal welfare that will adopt a holistic approach , taking into account the overall costs for EU producers and the effects of welfare measures on their competitiveness .
As mentioned in the report , Article 13 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union underlines the need for consideration for all animals .
The idea of a general European animal welfare law , encompassing all animals , is also a very interesting one .
Such a general law could be the basis for future initiatives , including legislation , but also information to the consumer , education , research and promotion of higher standards .
I also note and appreciate the support for the establishment of a European network of reference centres for animal welfare .
This would assist EU institutions , Member States and stakeholders in their actions to promote animal welfare initiatives .
I share your opinion that the future strategy should carefully look at costs and competitiveness .
We must ensure consistency between our policies , keeping in mind the overall sustainability of our proposals from a global perspective .
The report also stressed that the EU budget should correspond to our ambitions - in particular , by providing sufficient resources for research , new technologies and techniques in the field of animal welfare .
It also stressed the need for sufficient resources for proper monitoring and support to EU producers .
As I have said , the Commission welcomes all these ideas - which collectively show that animal welfare is high on the EU 's agenda .
The Commission plans to present a new EU strategy for animal welfare in 2011 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , during the part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Animal welfare is an important issue .
European legislation on this matter must be rigorously applied , as Mrs Paulsen 's report recommends .
We must also ensure that the animal welfare standards imposed in the EU are applied reciprocally to goods entering European territory .
Indeed , our farmers and the European agri-food industry must not be penalised at a time when they are incurring additional costs to meet EU requirements .
Animal welfare standards must go hand in hand with European trade policy , with the protection of our jobs and with hunting practices for fauna management , which are crucial to the balance of biodiversity .
Moreover , I would express my reservations about the creation of a European Network of Reference Centres for the protection and welfare of animals .
As rapporteur for the 2008 discharge to be granted to the decentralised agencies of the EU , I am well aware of the problem of setting up agencies which , unfortunately , have no overall coherence .
This issue , which the interinstitutional working group on the agencies is looking into , must be resolved before the establishment of any new agencies is considered .
EU agriculture and climate change ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Stéphane Le Foll , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on EU agriculture and climate change ( SEC ( 2009 ) 0417 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report I am presenting to Parliament sets out to explain that the agricultural sector has a place and a role to play in the fight against global warming .
This week , nature has reminded us - this time in the shape of volcanoes - that it can have a major impact on human activities and on the climate .
However , this means that , in spite of everything , human beings and Europe in particular must take responsibility for combating what we refer to as global warming .
My report aims to show that the agricultural sector can continue to reduce both its carbon emissions and its fossil fuel consumption and , above all , at the same time , can make a very active contribution to carbon fixation so that , at world level , we can achieve lower carbon emissions and ensure that a greater proportion of carbon is stored and captured .
The report attempts to illustrate the need for agriculture to move away from a compartmentalised approach , which consists of introducing a new directive on soil , water , pesticides and so on , whenever there is a problem , towards trying to tackle the agricultural issue in a more comprehensive and systematic way .
Within this type of approach , we will need to identify avenues which ensure , as I mentioned earlier , that the agricultural sector not only reduces its energy consumption but , at the same time , actively participates in carbon fixation .
This role relates , in particular , to photosynthesis and biomass , and especially to an area that is close to my heart , which is soil and the capacity of European soils to store organic carbon .
I believe that this approach , which I discuss in this report and which I hope will be endorsed during the vote that is due to take place in the Brussels part-session , will enable agriculture in Europe to enter a new phase of sustainability and to make the transition to a more environmentally aware state which would place it ahead of a number of other continents and other agricultural systems .
In doing so , it would have a more positive impact both economically and environmentally and , as a result , a more positive impact in social terms .
This report deals , therefore , with the specific issue of agriculture in relation to the fight against global warming , but it also claims - in any case I hope it does - to explore other ways of sustaining , in particular , the debate that will be taking place on the future of agricultural policy post-2013 .
I am addressing the Commission ; I will be addressing the agricultural committees , as I have frequently done , and I will also be addressing the various ministers when I have the opportunity .
I believe we need to change direction .
The 2013 CAP needs to be ambitious .
It must be based on goals that will help citizens to understand why we need a common agricultural policy .
We need a common agricultural policy because Europe 's agricultural community needs both to ensure food security and to embark on the path of sustainability .
In any case , this is the direction I propose in my report and the one in which I hope a large majority of Parliament will follow me .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks to the rapporteur for his report .
Agriculture is the economic sector that is already doing , and can still do , the most to protect the environment .
Thus , we have already succeeded in reducing emissions of greenhouse gases in agriculture by 20 % .
In addition , agricultural soils and plants draw large quantities of CO2 from the atmosphere .
Agriculture is therefore part of the solution to the problem of climate change .
On the other hand , food production for 500 million EU citizens must take priority while , at the same time , using resources as efficiently as possible and providing the highest possible level of protection for the environment and biodiversity .
Farmers cannot manage this alone .
They need a strong European agriculture policy to support them .
Only in this way can we succeed in producing sufficient food for a growing world population and , at the same time , protect the environment in order to combat climate change .
( FI ) Mr President , Mr Le Foll 's report is extremely important , because European food production and agriculture are important issues .
Europe must be self-sufficient .
This is also important for preventing climate change , because short transportation distances and local food are the best way of preventing climate change .
Agriculture must be ecologically sustainable and , in this regard , we have much work to do .
The European Union Member States can play a pioneering role on this issue , and in this sense , Europe and the Member States are in a good position in that we have the opportunity to invest in research .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Le Foll most sincerely for his report .
It contains very important points that we will need to take heed of in future .
Climate protection must also be part of the new agricultural reform ; it needs to be incorporated into this reform .
In future , we will need sustainable and ecologically sound procedures which ensure that the environment is protected .
Agriculture is not only a victim in relation to climate protection ; it is also a significant part of the cause .
Ten per cent of greenhouse gases still originate from agriculture .
There needs to be a reduction here , too .
We also need to take note of a subject that is mentioned in the Le Foll report , namely , the fact that we import a great deal of soya from Brazil , for example .
European agriculture is also partly responsible for the fact that areas of primary forest in other countries are being turned into very intensively farmed agricultural land , which then ultimately has an impact back here , too .
That it something that we need to consider in future .
In future , we will also need to endeavour to re-establish our own protein supply in Europe .
That is also part of the solution to the environmental problems relating to climate protection .
( HU ) An extremely important aspect of the Le Foll report is that without agriculture , we would not even have a chance to take action against global climate change .
At the same time , I am thinking here of forestry , in particular , which , to this day , does not get adequate support .
I completely agree that in future , agriculture must be greener and more environmentally friendly .
On the one hand , this is very important ; on the other hand , agriculture produces numerous environmental public goods - biodiversity , protection of the countryside , water purity and so on - which the market does not sufficiently reward , and neither does the common agricultural policy .
Therefore , our common agricultural policy must , from 2013 onwards , create a market for environmental public goods so that farmers may receive additional services and compensation for these additional services which they perform .
( FI ) Mr President , this own-initiative report concerns an extremely important area , because the role played by agriculture will only increase in the future .
Demand for food is increasing rapidly worldwide at the same time as climate change is reducing the area of land available for farming across the globe .
In addition , the demands of consumers regarding the quality of food are increasing .
As well as reliably providing for its own food security , Europe must also play a role in maintaining the food supply in other continents .
Investment in sustainable forestry and the better exploitation of forests must also be seen as an important part of EU climate policy .
Because of this , I was also a little disappointed that in the EU 's 2020 strategy , a minuscule amount was invested in agriculture and forestry .
After all , agriculture and forestry play a very vital role in ensuring the safety of European food , more effective bioenergy production and the viability of rural areas .
( SV ) Mr President , if I may , I would like to thank the rapporteur for a very refreshing new approach .
Personally , I am convinced that farming and forestry are easily the most important factors in our efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions , particularly if we are to bind carbon in trees , plants and roots and fix it in the soil .
This does not involve mastering new technology or carrying out research projects , because we already have the knowledge and instruments required .
Since I have just been speaking on the protection of animals and animal welfare , I would like to ask a radical question : is it not the common agricultural policy itself that we need to change ?
If we paid farmers for all the benefits that they produce which are vital to life - as in this case - for all of society , then , rather than paying for what people own , we would be paying them for what they do .
( RO ) First of all , I want to congratulate the rapporteur for the comprehensive approach he has adopted in dealing with one of the most urgent problems of the moment .
Climate change poses one of the most serious threats not only to the environment , but to the economy and society as well .
Crop yields fluctuate from one year to the next , heavily influenced by the variation in extreme climate conditions , which has an implicit impact on every sector of the economy , although agriculture remains the most vulnerable .
Against this background , the European Commission 's strategies must consider both the prevention and mitigation of the adverse consequences for agriculture in the European Union by implementing an action plan in the most affected areas .
I am referring at this point to adapting agricultural activities to the new conditions : forestation , the management of water resources for agriculture and making polluted land environmentally friendly .
The other measure must be a plan for the future aimed at eliminating the causes of climate change by promoting a global low carbon economy , combined with the promotion of energy security .
The European Union must maintain its leading position in the battle against climate change , which must not slip to number two as a result of the current economic difficulties .
( PL ) Mr President , I am impressed by this report 's comprehensive approach .
I do have , however , a simple question : what is the real responsibility , influence and impact of agriculture on climate change ?
I am thinking of beneficial effects as well as adverse ones .
Can it be said that the position of science and the results of our research are sufficiently strong arguments to expect such a large increase in expenditure on combating warming which has not been fully defined ?
After all , there is such an urgent need to combat the effects of the economic crisis , unemployment and other difficult problems arising from the socio-economic situation in the Union .
To what extent is the common agricultural policy already implementing the requirements of climate protection , and what instruments can be applied in the CAP in this area in the future ?
Mr President , I just want to mention my home .
I am lucky enough to live on the edge of the Saddleworth Moorlands , between the cities of Manchester and Leeds .
It is the southern end of an area of peatland that stretches straight up from England into Scotland .
It is a very rare habitat across Europe , but it is also a habitat that has been much denuded by 250 years of industrial pollution which have devastated the variety of species that it can support .
That has been complemented by overgrazing , perhaps by sheep , and by fires .
Of course , as the peatland dries out , it releases global warming gases .
A huge potential supply of global warming gas is being released from what should be a wonderful area .
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds is now trying to restore that habitat and to get the sphagnum moss that created the peatland to grow once again .
The funding they require is not in the millions - it is in the tens of thousands or perhaps the hundreds of thousands .
It is a small element that can contribute both to the restoration and encouragement of biodiversity and also the protection of this moorland habitat which ensures that these global warming gases are contained within it .
As we look at the reform of the common agricultural policy , this is something we must very much bear in mind .
( RO ) Agriculture generates a significant proportion of the total volume of carbon dioxide emissions .
This is why we are highlighting the need to improve energy efficiency in this sector .
I urge the Commission to constantly examine the link between high food prices and rising energy prices , especially for the fuels being used .
I would like to remind you that the incentives to encourage sustainable cultivation of energy crops should not jeopardise food production .
For this reason , we are calling on the Commission to monitor the effects of increased biofuel production in the European Union and in third countries in terms of changes in land use , food product prices and access to food .
We call on the Commission and Member States to promote research and development in order to prevent and enable us to adapt to climate change .
I am referring here , in particular , to research into the future generation of biofuels .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Le Foll , for this very important report on agriculture and climate change .
The fight against climate change is an absolute priority globally .
The EU is also making a huge contribution and also the agricultural sector already contributes in the fight against climate change .
We have a policy that limits greenhouse gas emissions .
Agriculture also provides renewable energy sources in better using the whole cycle and all the products that come from agriculture .
Also , EU agriculture policy is working to optimise a carbon sink function of agricultural soils .
Since the 1992 reform , significant progress has been made in integration of all environmental considerations into the common agriculture policy .
The recent ' health check ' reform represented a further step in this direction with specific emphasis on climate change mitigation and adaptation .
The current common agriculture policy framework provides a balanced approach between binding requirements enforced through cross-compliance , which sets the limits on some farming practices , and positive incentives for climate-friendly farming practices provided by rural development .
The Commission fully shares the view that climate change now needs to be addressed globally and it is important that others follow our example also .
We need , on the one hand , to further help EU agriculture to contribute to mitigating climate change by reducing its own greenhouse gas emissions , enhancing CO2 sequestration in soils and making use of renewable energies from other sources and , on the other , to be more productive , to be more efficient at providing food supplies , in this way demonstrating that one can achieve both goals : food security on the one side , environmental sustainability on the other side .
In the preparation now of the common agricultural policy for post 2013 , and in the light of the results of the ongoing negotiations on climate change , the Commission will examine ways to further and better integrate adaptation and mitigation objectives in the common agriculture policy instruments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , at the next part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Agriculture is , and will continue to be , directly affected by climate change , because it involves living organisms and its outcomes are influenced , above all , by the quality of the soil , water and air .
Unfortunately , agriculture also currently has a share ( of almost 10 % ) in the creation of greenhouse gases .
Nitrous oxide is released from nitrogenous fertilisers and methane is created through the digestive processes of livestock .
It is precisely agriculture , of course , which can help in the fight against global warming , especially through new methods of tillage aimed at conserving soil and reducing storage of CO2 , through support for forestry and agro forestry and through support for organic farming .
I welcome and I fully endorse the opinion of the rapporteur concerning the introduction of a genuine European forestry policy , in which it would be possible to support the administration and subsequent output of forests , and not to exploit forests mainly for economic activities focused chiefly on generating financial profits , whether for semi-nationalised or private entities .
Scientific research shows that this sector is uniquely capable of capturing carbon in a natural and non-polluting form .
Forests also help to solve problems of soil erosion and degradation , water shortages and pollution , and to preserve the biological diversity of plant and animal species .
For all of the above reasons , I fully support the adoption of the report .
in writing . - I welcome this timely report which addresses the role agriculture can play in mitigating the impact of climate change .
The FAO report ' The State of Food and Agriculture 2009 ' underlines the necessity of livestock in food production worldwide .
In order to meet the global demand for food , it is essential to maintain our current production levels .
We will , however , need to find a balance between providing sufficient food for the world 's population , while producing this food in a way that does not lead to increased negative impacts on the world 's climate .
The part that European farmers can play in this will come into clearer focus in the ongoing debate on the future shape of the CAP post-2013 and it is essential that the EU assists our farmers in striking this balance .
I fully support this EP report 's call to compensate farmers for their efforts in reducing emissions and to provide support in adapting to climate mitigation measures .
The report 's proposal for the development of a strategy at EU level to address the impact of adverse weather conditions on EU agriculture is very welcome and indeed very pertinent , considering the exceptionally harsh climatic conditions experienced by farmers over the past months .
Climate change has a direct influence on agriculture .
Its most severe effects are particularly evident among the population in rural areas , who are dependent on making a living from agriculture .
Women are among the most vulnerable to the impact of climate change .
The reasons for this are that , on the one hand , they account for the majority of the agricultural workforce in many countries while , on the other , they do not enjoy access to the same opportunities as men for earning an income .
The method of agriculture deployed in the millennium we have just entered requires human effort which needs to satisfy major demands : ensuring food security and safety for the world 's population ( expected to grow to 9 billion by 2050 ) , harmonising measures supporting the quantitative and qualitative rise in agricultural production aimed at producing food with the development demands imposed by the production of biofuels , along with protecting ecosystems and breaking the link between economic growth and environmental degradation .
I believe that a new strategy needs to be adopted , based on a new approach focusing on sustainable agricultural production models , requiring compensatory aid to cover the additional costs linked to these objectives ( e.g. local eco-certification contracts ) , as well as on the creation of ' green jobs ' and the integration of women into the labour market ( preservation of rural areas , biodiversity conservation , greenhouses for vegetables and flowers ) .
Agriculture in areas with natural handicaps : A special health check ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Herbert Dorfmann , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on agriculture in areas with natural handicaps : a special health check - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this report , we are concerned with a communication from the Commission regarding agriculture in areas with natural handicaps .
Specifically , it is about delimiting disadvantaged areas and , in particular , about finding new ways of delimiting them .
They are currently defined on the basis of mainly or exclusively national criteria .
There are over 100 of these criteria , and they are completely different in the different Member States of our Union .
This does not ensure uniformity , a state of affairs that the Court of Auditors has criticised on a number of occasions .
In its communication , the Commission is now proposing a new way of delimiting these areas using eight different criteria , which are intended to lead to a complete re-definition of these areas .
Parliament does not know what impact these criteria will have because the area simulations that the Commission asked for from the Member States were not available when we were working on this report , nor did we get to look at these simulations .
I would like to summarise what we are now proposing in this report .
We think that , in principle , a uniform method of delimitation is sensible and possibly also necessary to ensure uniformity within the European Union .
We also believe that the compensatory allowance - which you could say is the most important result of this delimiting process , as this is primarily carried out so that these areas can receive compensatory payments - is an extremely important element of agricultural policy and , above all , makes agriculture possible where it would otherwise be very difficult , in other words , in disadvantaged areas , especially in mountainous areas .
However , we are unable to carry out an assessment of the quality of these criteria , that is to say , whether or not these criteria now work , because we currently have no access to any area simulations .
There are nonetheless very specific doubts as to whether the proposed criteria will be sufficiently precise .
It also still needs to be clarified whether the criteria that the Commission is now proposing should actually be dealt with in this way , in other words separately , criterion by criterion , or whether , under certain circumstances , an accumulation of these criteria needs to be taken into account .
The handicap is often associated with several factors at the same time and it seems perfectly sensible to us to consider whether it would not be absolutely essential to take an accumulation of these criteria into account .
We also need to consider whether the principle of subsidiarity should be taken into account in this regard , in other words , whether , in this case too , it would be necessary for us to draw up a rough framework using the new criteria and then give the Member States and the regions the opportunity to fine tune it .
Finally , I believe that it is essential to also consider having transitional periods .
This delimitation will result in some areas being removed from the delimited areas and these areas need a sufficiently long transitional period .
In summary , I would like to say - and I believe that the report also reflects this opinion - that the current communication from the Commission still requires further refinement and that , before it is implemented , it needs to be given very careful consideration , because it will have far-reaching consequences for the farmers affected .
Finally , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to my fellow Members here in Parliament and also to the Commission staff who , over the last few months , have helped to put together this report .
( DE ) Mr President , many thanks to the rapporteur for his excellent report .
Subsidising disadvantaged areas is a core element of the common agricultural policy , with the aim of maintaining the universal spread of agriculture throughout Europe .
The Commission 's approach to develop a system that can be used EU-wide for delimiting these areas is therefore to be welcomed .
The crucial point , however , is whether the eight criteria that have been developed to do this will actually be sufficient .
I am not convinced that these are really the right criteria to use .
I cannot understand - and I think the same can be said of the rapporteur and the entire Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - why the Commission has not made the simulation results for the effects of these eight criteria available to us .
I therefore appeal to the Commission : this really should not happen as often as it does .
When we want and need to evaluate something , we naturally also need to know the results .
I view this to a certain extent as a lack of trust in Parliament .
That means that , for this particular proposed regulation , there is still much to be done .
I hope that the Commission will look closely at the Dorfmann report that we have made into our own report .
Personally , I hope that Mr Dorfmann will be able to continue to have political input on this matter .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , would like to thank Mr Dorfmann for his report .
What he has presented clearly shows that there are still a few things that need to be clarified with regard to this matter .
Like the speakers before me , I , too , think that the current framework for delimiting these areas is too rough and ready .
Many parts of it do not meet the needs of disadvantaged regions .
I question whether we will be able to manage with these natural criteria alone .
We also need to look closely at the social situation , which plays a major role in disadvantaged regions .
As the payments for disadvantaged regions are vital for the survival of many holdings , the Commission needs to think once again about refining the current framework in order to give many regions a chance of survival .
I fear that implementation of the current system would lead to very large shifts which are not always comprehensible and will lead to a large amount of disquiet and uncertainty within agriculture .
We ought to look at this again .
( HU ) It is very important that on the basis of the Dorfmann report , the common agricultural policy 's budget continue to give priority to supporting agricultural areas with natural handicaps , since without such support , there would be serious ecological damage and social problems in these areas .
It is gratifying that the Commission - and here the Commission deserves praise - leaves the identification of the eligible areas , based on the eight criteria , up to the Member States .
At the same time , I would like to call attention to the fact that to this day , there are differences and discrimination between the Member States , not only as regards direct payments , which are imposed on new Member States , in particular , the Commissioner 's own county , Latvia , and on other new Member States as well .
In my country , supplying water to the sand dunes region ( Homokhátság ) is a concern , since the groundwater level has fallen by 4-5 metres over four decades , and the area has become a semi-desert .
The same problem also arises in Southern Europe , and therefore finding a solution to the question of water management in the future common agricultural policy is of particular importance .

( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank our colleague , Mr Dorfmann , for his excellent work on this report .
I think it sums up perfectly the issue as it stands today in terms of the Commission 's proposals .
It is the Commissioner whom I would like to address in particular .
This work has been going on for several months now .
It is creating great agitation within several of our countries ' industries , which are threatened with reclassification , and this reclassification is happening or may happen at a time when - and this will be the subject of tomorrow evening 's oral question - many production sectors are experiencing particular difficulties .
We therefore need to move forward and move forward quickly .
I do not think we can wait three years to come up with a clear answer for the farmers who are affected by this delimitation exercise .
( FI ) Mr President , it is extremely good that less-favoured regions have been particularly highlighted in this report .
The really central idea , which probably everyone here supports , is that the preconditions for profitable agricultural production must be safeguarded everywhere in the EU , both now and in the future .
There seems to be a lot of confusion arising from the criteria for defining less favourable regions .
We must focus particular attention on agriculture in less favourable regions , because previous reforms to the common agricultural policy have very often been carried out from the point of view of favourable regions .
In order that we can continue to grow in less favourable regions , it is extremely important to use proportional regulation mechanisms .
The cancellation of some of the previous agricultural regulation mechanisms by the EU has not been successful .
For example , the withdrawal of milk quotas and the abolition of the set-aside scheme have been unsuccessful decisions as far as less favourable regions are concerned .
( PL ) Mr President , the subsidising of European agriculture cannot be called into question .
The reasons for the subsidies include a variety of conditions of production , such as climate , soil quality , the problem of access to water , the situation of the land and social and historical conditions .
Most of these have a significant influence on the results of production and economic performance , and have influenced the current constituent elements of the common agricultural policy .
I share the views and fears of the author concerning the lack of expected effects of the new approach .
Can it be that the criteria used up till now have been so inappropriate ?
We expect calculations and a more profound analysis of the effects .
An important question is how to maintain agricultural production in less favoured areas .
In my opinion , support for these areas still needs to be continued at a suitable level as part of the common agricultural policy in the future Financial Framework .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Dorfmann for an excellent report on the Commission communication entitled ' Towards a better targeting of the aid to farmers in areas with natural handicaps ' .
I would like to address a couple of issues .
The overall objective of the natural handicap payments is to ensure continued land use and , through agricultural land management , maintain the countryside as well as to promote sustainable farming systems .
The payments to farmers in these areas compensate farmers ' additional costs and income forgone , which occur due to the existing natural handicap .
The Council has decided to remove the socio-economic criteria from the objectives of natural handicap payments .
The removal of socio-economic criteria should be seen in the context of the whole suite of measures available to Member States in the Rural Development Regulation - the diversification into non-agricultural activities , the development of micro- and small and medium-sized enterprises and tourism activities , as well as the provision of basic services .
So , the natural handicap payments are not the intervention lever that aims to tackle this issue of depopulation .
Compensating farmers in areas where production is not hampered by natural handicaps and where there is no additional cost or income forgone would distort competition with farmers in other areas .
Furthermore , socio-economic indicators change over time and would , therefore , require a continual follow-up and revision process of each area concerned .
The proposal to take remoteness into account is not practical against the agreed framework set down by the Council , which relates to natural handicaps .
In terms of their peripherality , there are other levels of delimitation possible , for example , the specific handicap article of the Regulation .
At the different stages of the process , the Commission invited Member States to submit alternative proposals for biophysical criteria and their thresholds .
These proposals will be analysed by scientists for their validity and , above all , for their transparency and possible Community-wide applicability .
The alternative thresholds , however , must lead to the conclusion that an area in question is affected by a significant handicap , as desired by the Council .
Once the exercise of testing a delimitation based on biophysical criteria is completed , the Commission proposal for the common agricultural policy after 2013 will take the results of this exercise into account .
Any legal proposal will also aim for a smooth transition for those areas which may lose their status of areas with a natural handicap .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , at the next part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
Maintaining diverse and active rural areas is important for several reasons , not least because of growing global demand for food products and environmentally sustainable tourism .
Additionally , it would be a serious setback in many areas to stop to cultivate the land , both in terms of vital rural income and the loss of landscape , which might have been formed during several centuries .
The aid scheme for areas affected by natural handicaps has effectively helped the farming of agricultural land to continue in these regions .
The importance of granting appropriate compensatory payments for less favoured areas is indisputable .
The process for delimiting and classifying these areas has been carried out by Member States based on a number of criteria , according to their own set of indicators .
However , it is extremely difficult even to compare these sets of indicators as they use different methods for classifying and weighting the regions .
Establishing a common set of classification criteria would increase the scheme 's transparency , reliability and efficiency across the whole of Europe .
In this regard , I support the need to review the aid scheme for farmers in areas with natural handicaps and devise a global strategy for the less favoured areas , thereby reducing the disparities which have appeared between Member States in terms of allocating financial support .
in writing . - We should remember that 54 % of farmed land in the EU currently falls into a LFA classification .
The continuation of the LFA scheme is vital if we are to compensate farmers for providing public goods , avoiding land abandonment , assisting in promoting biodiversity and helping to support rural communities .
The market neither rewards nor compensates farmers for these achievements in areas where farming is at a natural disadvantage .
We must , therefore , ensure that further reform of the LFA system is adequately financed within the overall budget for CAP and that the system used for classification is fair and non-discriminatory .
In its initial communication , the eight biophysical criteria proposed by the Commission to assess the classification of areas with significant natural handicaps were undoubtedly biased towards the warmer and drier climates of continental Europe .
Therefore , I was glad to see that amendments that mention ' soil moisture balance ' and ' field capacity days ' were passed at committee level .
This is a first step in ensuring that countries in Northern Europe , such as the UK and Ireland , are not discriminated against in the framework of a new classification system .
Simplification of the CAP ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Richard Ashworth , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on simplification of the CAP - .
rapporteur . - Mr President , Commissioner , we are at the very early stages of the debate , which leads up to the common agricultural policy reform post 2012 .
In this report , I suggested some of the principles which should underlie the reformed common agricultural policy .
It is clear that the agricultural industry needs to change .
It will need to change in order to reflect both the challenges of the times in which we now live but more the times which are to come .
Those will be issues such as food security , market volatility , climate change , and the need to adequately meet the expectations for the delivery of public goods .
It is clear , therefore , that the common agricultural policy has to change in order to reflect those challenges , but it is also clear that the way we apply the common agricultural policy needs to change .
In setting out these principles that should underlie the reformed common agricultural policy , I have deliberately not gone into detail ; that will come in later reports .
But what I have developed is two main themes .
Firstly , that the common agricultural policy needs to be simpler , fairer and more transparent and that , secondly , the culture of the common agricultural policy needs to change , that a future reformed common agricultural policy ought to be more outcome-driven and less burdened with excessive regulation .
I have highlighted four ways in which we can reduce the bureaucratic burden on farm businesses .
Firstly , we should ensure that the requirements made of the industry are proportionate to the risk assessed .
Secondly , we could harmonise inspections standards and we should cut out the duplication of inspection standards and procedures required of the industry .
Thirdly , there could or should be greater scope for self-certification within the industry and , fourthly , we need to ensure that the penalties imposed on farm businesses are commensurate to the scale of the infringement rather than the current inappropriate flat-rate penalties , especially in those cases where infringements were not the fault of the farmer .
In my view , one objective of the common agricultural policy should be to help and encourage the industry to adapt to these new challenges .
To do that , there is a need for a change of culture in the common agricultural policy .
It does need to adopt a more flexible , lighter-touch approach .
There needs to be greater consultation with the stakeholders of the industry and , in particular , in order to better assess the impact of proposed regulation .
It also needs to be easier to interpret .
The reformed common agricultural policy must be able to publicly demonstrate the industry 's delivery of public goods .
It must find ways to reduce the cost to the industry of complying with its requirements and , finally , it must effectively and efficiently and fairly manage the industry .
This report sets out a number of ways that that can be achieved .
( FI ) Mr President , the burden of managing agriculture must definitely be reduced as far as farmers are concerned , and these methods highlighted by the rapporteur are very welcome .
Some farmers have said that they feel like criminals when trying to battle with the various administrative documents and regulations .
The common agricultural policy needs to be simpler .
It also needs to be said that when more and more changes take place in the markets and EU import protection decreases , administrative and regulatory mechanisms for the market will be needed in the future as well .
For example , stock-taking systems and possibly promotional activity for exports will also be necessary in the future .
It is clear that there can be no simple way of maintaining these systems .
Particularly in the case of delicate products such as milk , we should create a system of regulation similar to a quota system ; otherwise , production in less favourable regions will become impossible .
( HU ) I congratulate the rapporteur , since not only his specific proposals but the entire philosophy is excellent .
Excellent because it seeks to give support in future to those who are actively farming , in other words , those who are , in fact , cultivating the land .
I also consider excellent the point that it would be important to put an end to sectoral and other distortions in the future common agricultural policy and here , I would once again like to emphasise the discrimination against the new Member States .
Similarly , it is very important not only that Community regulations be simplified , but much depends on implementation by Member States .
Let me quote a typical example : two years ago , the Council adopted a regulation introducing the requirement for the compulsory individual electronic identification of each individual ovine and caprine animal intended for slaughter under the age of 12 months .
In the case of the poorer Member States , where the State is unable to provide support , this rule impoverished the sector and placed it in a hopeless situation .
This is another illustration of the way in which excessive regulation and excessive bureaucracy can often cause serious harm under the common agricultural policy , and constitutes yet another reason why Mr Ashworth 's report is important , as are those of Mr Dorfmann and Mr Le Foll .


( DE ) Mr President , thank you , Mr Ashworth , for this excellent report .
The common agricultural policy is a successful policy , but we sometimes cloud this success in excessive bureaucracy .
That is just as true of the first pillar of the agricultural policy as it is of the second .
However , it is particularly the case for small holdings , where the input of bureaucracy is sometimes quite simply disproportionate to the output represented by the money received .
In the course of reforming our agricultural policy , we need to consider having a regulation for small producers and how we can find a much simpler method for such holdings which , from various budget chapters , we often give a total of just a few hundred to a few thousand euro in premiums , without losing sight of our objectives and producing a lack of clarity in the granting of subsidies .
That must be possible and we must endeavour to achieve it .
( HU ) Richard Ashworth 's report on simplification of the common agricultural policy sets out excellent proposals .
Its great merit is that it examines the question from the perspective of farmers .
Naturally it is also important for taxpayers ' money to be used in the most legitimate way possible .
This , however , is only a means , not an end .
The goal is to fulfil all the tasks of the sectoral policy .
The Boards of Agriculture often confuse these two things , to the detriment of the achievement of the goal .
A radical change in perspective is needed .
Instead of what we might describe as a culture of subordination among clients , farmers and officials , we need a culture of cooperation .
The Commission should also draw up a regulation that imposes on the Boards of Agriculture an obligation to provide compensation and metes out sanctions on them if farmer 's interests are harmed through their own fault .
We must ensure that those with entitlements also have the right to turn to an independent court for remedy .
In Hungary , this is not yet possible .
( PL ) Mr President , simplification of the common agricultural policy is a beautiful idea , and it is hard to imagine that someone would oppose it .
Simplification means a reduction in the number of inspections , a restriction of administration costs and a saving of time for the farmer .
It is , indeed , wonderful .
However , I want to point to two cases which require a somewhat different approach .
Firstly , there are special areas of production where it is difficult to simplify support instruments .
I am thinking here of tobacco , hop and other specialist production of this kind .
The second case is that of maintaining production in less favoured areas , where it is necessary to use very specific instruments for the support of production , which a previous speaker mentioned .
I share the view of the author that the common agricultural policy , the policy of the future , should be clear and transparent , but it should also be effective , and effectiveness is something which does not always go hand-in-hand with simplicity .
( DE ) Mr President , European agricultural policy must be made simpler , more transparent and easier to understand .
That is the message conveyed by the rapporteur , Mr Ashworth , and it is a good message and the right one .
Our report is intended to encourage the Commission to intensify its efforts to simplify the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) in a tangible way .
Doing so would save our farmers a lot of time and money and would increase social acceptance of the CAP .
Our farmers would also be able to concentrate on their real job again , namely producing food .
I would therefore like to see the simplification of the common agricultural policy made a long-term task here in Parliament and in the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , simplification and better regulation are priorities for the Commission .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ashworth , for an excellent report in this rather complicated and challenging area .
The Commission fully agrees that simplification and reduction of administrative burden should be of particular benefit for farmers .
This will enable the farmers to spend more time on their core agricultural activities .
The Commission welcomes the report presented ; it generally tackles the main areas of concern of European farmers and provides the Commission with new ideas and observations with regard to simplifying the common agricultural policy .
During the past years , the Commission has made substantial progress in simplifying the common agricultural policy .
I would like to give just one proof of this : the Stoiber Group , which advises the Commission on the topic of administrative burden , has clearly indicated that the level of red tape for farmers has been reduced considerably as a result of simplification activities carried out by the Commission .
But simplification is an ongoing process ; work will continue in 2010 .
Moreover , there is an overall reflection process on the future of the common agricultural policy .
We have already launched a public debate , and that means that we will have to all work together to find efficient ways to reduce the administrative burden while maintaining a high level of protection of the European Union 's financial interest and , at the same time , a very efficient agriculture .
In this process , I would also warn about one desire , and will just mention one example of it .
Sometimes , simplification should not be made at the expense of the challenge that we could face .
Take as an example traceability .
We have , in recent years , had a peaceful situation , with no major scandals or outbreaks of epidemics , but , at the same time , traceability is the key .
We should not just abolish it because we have not had any crises .
So I believe that in the whole process , we should be very careful when we simplify ; we should not forget the lessons of the past and the reasons why we introduced particular rules .
So the Commission will continue to work on this process and we will be very careful not to forget the lessons learned .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place in two weeks ' time , at the next part-session in Brussels .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The new system must be based on objective and fair criteria .
Reducing differences in payments in different Member States is essential to achieving this objective .
Prices for the transportation of goods , agricultural machines and fertilisers and the costs of work have a similar ceiling in many countries .
For the conditions of competition in the single market to be the same , the level of basic direct payments must be the same or comparable throughout the Union .
The time has come for principles which are in force in other areas of the economy to take effect in agriculture , too .
It should also be remembered that the new Member States need significant means to support the modernisation and reconstruction of agriculture and to catch up with the countries of the ' old fifteen ' .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Agenda
In view of recent developments in the situation and by agreement with the political groups , I would like to propose the following changes to the order of business on Wednesday .
They are new changes in relation to those we adopted yesterday at 17.30 .
They are additional changes .
Firstly , we are withdrawing Question Time with the Council from the order of business .
The Council has informed me that in connection with the transport difficulties being experienced this week , Mr López Garrido will have to leave Strasbourg on Wednesday at 18.00 , so we will not be able to have Question Time in the evening .
Secondly , we are withdrawing from the order of business Mrs Ţicãu 's report on the energy performance of buildings , because it was not adopted in committee on Monday .
Thirdly , we are entering an oral question on the ban on the use of cyanide mining technologies as the third item on the agenda in the afternoon immediately after the debates on SWIFT and PNR ( this is about passenger name records ) .
In this way , the sitting on Wednesday will close at 19.00 .
I will say this again , very briefly : we have withdrawn those items which are not possible and , as a result , we will end Wednesday 's sitting not at 24.00 , but at 19.00 .
I repeat that these matters have been consulted with the chairs of the political groups .
( DE ) Mr President , I simply want to ask whether sittings will still be taking place in the House on Thursday , whether committees such as Scientific Technology Options Assessment ( STOA ) and others will be meeting , whether interpreters will be available for the sittings , and whether groups of visitors will be admitted to the House on Thursday .
Disruption of air traffic in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on disruption of air traffic in Europe .
As we all know , decisions for the next few days must be made by the executive arm of the European institutions .
This will be , of course , the task of the Commission and the Council of Ministers .
As we know , both the Commission and the Council have been working on this at least since Sunday , but we , as MEPs , have our duties , too .
These concern longer-term answers to the present crisis .
We are going to want to get our parliamentary committees involved in this .
We must also think about how to respond to the present situation at the part-session in Brussels .
It may be that we will respond with a resolution .
I am talking about different ways of reacting .
I would like to ask you all to give attention in your speeches , too , to how Parliament can contribute to solving the present problems . They are , first and foremost , the problems of our citizens , the residents of Europe .
We do , of course , have a problem with getting to Strasbourg and Brussels , but that is our problem and we should definitely not make a point of this .
We should prepare ourselves to discuss how to solve the problems of Europeans in a situation in which air traffic is paralysed .
The most important matter is what we , MEPs , can do in the next few weeks to improve the situation .
However , since in the first hours and days , the greatest responsibility rests with the executive , I would like to thank the representatives both of the Council and of the Commission for being with us .
I would like to assure the Council of Ministers and the Spanish Presidency , and please tell them about this , that the European Parliament is ready to cooperate at any moment , and that we are open to discussing these matters in committee .
We are open to receiving representatives of the European Commission and the Council and to discussing these problems .
We want to be involved in this .
We are from the different regions of the European Union , we were chosen in direct elections , and are responsible for the residents of the Union , and so our involvement is essential .
We are ready for this .
Of course , we can only do what is possible for a legislative authority to do .
We cannot make executive decisions , but we want to help both the Commission and the Council .
We are open to this . That is why we are having this discussion .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , thank you to the Commission and the Council for the information you have given us about the crisis in European aviation .
What has become clear over the past few days is that , without aviation , not only does our Parliament run into difficulties , but our European cooperation and our economy faces huge problems , too .
That is why it is important that we are having this emergency debate in Parliament today .
Passengers have been stranded , airlines , the travel industry and companies which depend on air travel have all been hit hard , and all this comes on top of the economic crisis .
Safety is paramount .
Let there be no misunderstanding about that .
Passengers have to be transported safely , but it is clear that we were not sufficiently prepared for this exceptional situation .
The closing of airspace on the first day was a swift response to a problem with which we , in Europe , have , until now , been unfamiliar , a volcanic ash cloud .
But what happened in the days following this ?
The computer models showed us that we ought not to fly , but the test flights went ahead without any problems .
Let me reiterate that , while safety must , of course , come first , it is important that we reopen European airspace on the basis of facts and correct assumptions .
It is necessary that we carry out more work , tailored to our specific circumstances .
The good thing is that the first steps towards that were taken yesterday and we have to build on that quickly .
We have to take decisive action .
Safety first , but we also have to make sure that we can again use the safe zones very soon .
In addition , we need structural measures .
The single European sky , which has given rise to so much resistance amongst the Member States , is something which could also help us make aviation more effective .
Airlines have suffered huge economic damage .
High costs were incurred , not only through the grounding of air traffic itself , but also because assistance had to be provided to stranded passengers .
Insurance companies are not providing any cover and it is questionable whether we can justify all the costs falling on the shoulders of the airlines .
I therefore urge you to investigate the scale of the costs incurred , the scale of the damage suffered and what compensation might perhaps be provided .
To give you an example : the costs incurred by the airlines , based on our European directive on passenger rights , and what disaster assistance is payable .
Is it not the obvious step to ascertain whether , in this case of force majeure , we could actually pay that out of the European budget ?
Commissioner Almunia , you have indicated that you would be favourably inclined to the provision of State aid , but I must warn you that we must prevent the Member States sponsoring their national champions .
It is therefore extremely important that we coordinate this at a European level .
Not only the State aid framework , but also the effective provision of State aid .
That is what I call on you to ensure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this crisis has a human dimension which we will definitely have to discuss today .
A lot of people , tens of thousands of them , are stranded all over the world and waiting to come home .
I believe that we should be thinking about these people this morning .
Almost all of us , many of the Members of this House , have had similar experiences in recent weeks .
We are privileged Members of the European Parliament , who can make use of the available infrastructure .
However , many people are stranded in far-flung corners of the world .
They are unable to leave and get back to their jobs , their children cannot go to school , because they have not been able to come back from their holidays , and they are stuck without accommodation and without any money .
I would like to say once again that my sympathy this morning is with these people .
I hope that it will be possible to get them home quickly .
Airlines are a vital part of our transport system , not only for passengers , but also for goods .
The financial losses caused by this volcanic eruption are significantly greater than those resulting from the events of 11 September 2001 .
This is why I am calling on the Commission to take a flexible approach to authorising domestic aid for airlines that are at risk , if aid of this kind really has to be provided .
Finally , we need to be aware that air travel is one part of the very vulnerable infrastructure which we have in Europe .
If air travel is no longer possible , we are not in a position to compensate adequately for its absence .
This is why I believe that the project which we started 20 years ago , the expansion of the trans-European networks and , in particular , the expansion of rail transport , is a credible and significant alternative and , as we are now seeing , an alternative which is vital to our economic survival .
It is important that we now acknowledge this fact once again .
My colleague , Mr El Khadraoui , will be covering other aspects of this issue , but I would just like to say one thing .
We have not yet succeeded in bringing about the interoperability of trains between different countries .
It is not possible for a German intercity express to bring German people back from Spain and , in the same way , a French high-speed train cannot travel as far as Budapest .
This means that we are still not in the position that we should have reached .
Although we have made appropriate resolutions in Parliament , I am of the opinion that we do not need these sudden periodic bursts of action .
Instead , we must adopt a sustained , ongoing approach to putting these new concepts into effect .


Mr President , Mr Kallas , Mr López Garrido , in this case , we have seen that nature really is more powerful than any of the technologies available to us .
To a certain extent , we have been taught a lesson .
However , at the same time , it is important to note that this situation has shown us that we have not made as much progress in Europe as we should have done .
For 20 years , we have been talking about an internal market for transport and a single European sky .
This would , of course , not have prevented the volcanic eruption , but it would perhaps have allowed us to act more effectively and more quickly .
We have been calling for a single European sky , coordinated by Eurocontrol , for a long time , but it is still not in place .
In just the same way , and here I am moving in the same direction as Mr Schulz , we still do not have interoperability on the rail network .
It is still not possible to buy a rail ticket which will take you from northern Europe to the south , travelling right across the continent .
In this case , too , it becomes clear that we have a great deal down on paper and have discussed many of the issues , but in reality , a lot of what is needed is missing .
It is obvious that the response in Europe was unsatisfactory from the point of view of the citizens .
Of course , the situation was difficult and , of course , it was not possible for the ministers from any of the individual countries to open up their airspace when there were warnings coming from an institute in London that it was not safe to fly .
At the same time , it was unsatisfactory that no actual measurements were taken using balloons , for example , but that everyone was working with statistical extrapolations .
Many of the citizens of Europe were annoyed about this .
The position of the airlines is also understandable .
They were suffering financially and would have liked to have seen a quicker response .
The airlines have suffered financial losses and , of course , it is very important that the passengers are brought home as soon as possible .
We must protect their rights .
However , it is important for passengers ' rights in Europe that transport and travel opportunities are available to them .
For this reason , I believe that it is vital for our transport system in Europe to have airlines and other transport options in place which passengers can use .
This means that it is essential for us to consider in more detail how we should deal with this situation , how we can provide support for the airlines during the crisis that the transport sector is already undergoing and how we can maintain and guarantee the mobility of the citizens of Europe , which is a major achievement .
As far as compensation for damages goes , it is no use us approaching the volcano , because , as we already know , that will not get us anywhere .
Nature has its own laws , but we have to try to react to them in the interests of the citizens of Europe .
This is why I think it is a very good thing that a task force is being set up with Mr Kallas as its chair .
This is very important and we will continue to discuss how we can draw conclusions for the future from this crisis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there has been a fundamental change in mobility in Europe over the last six days .
The crucial factor in this case was not a serious accident , measures to combat climate change or the high price of aviation fuel .
On this occasion , nature itself played the decisive role .
The Icelandic volcano has once again shown the human race the true power of nature .
We must take a lesson from this for the future .
The human race is not omnipotent and never will be .
It is right that the response to this volcanic eruption has come from Europe .
As the volcanic ash can cause aircraft engines to cut out and can also obscure visibility through aircraft windows , the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation , Eurocontrol , took a responsible approach and made passenger safety its top priority .
On behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Eurocontrol , to the Transport Ministers who supported Eurocontrol and , in particular , to the German Transport Minister , Peter Ramsauer .
We should also support the German pilots ' union , Cockpit , which has behaved more responsibly than the management of the airlines by refusing to fly under visual flight rules in European airspace , because it believes that this would be irresponsible .
Either the airspace is safe or it is not .
Ultimately , it does not matter under which rules planes are flying or under which rules they are crashing .
Therefore , the Greens would like to denounce in the strongest possible terms the approach of the airlines which wanted to give priority to profit rather than safety .
We are calling for the European airspace to only be opened again when there is no risk at all .
We are calling on all politicians not to give in to the pressure exerted by the airlines and not to hand over responsibility for safety to the pilots , for example .
We have become painfully aware in the last few days of the deficiencies of national and European transport policies over recent decades , which have neglected and , in many cases , are still neglecting , the rail system .
These policies have focused entirely on air transport .
Every year , the airlines in Europe are given EUR 14 billion by European taxpayers , because , in contrast to the fuel used by the railways , kerosene is not subject to taxation .
This puts the airlines ' temporary loss of income into perspective .
However , there is one conclusion which we must draw from all of this .
The railway is not only the safest means of transport ; it is also essential for safeguarding mobility and stopping climate change .
Therefore , I would like to thank all the rail companies in Europe which have helped to get passengers to their destinations .
The volcanic eruption in Iceland should be a warning to all of us .
What we are now experiencing is the reality of the future of transport .
However , transport will only have a successful future if the necessary measures do not have to be taken overnight .
For this reason , we are calling on all the Member States of the European Union to change the priorities of national and international transport policy .
Rail transport must be given priority , not only in words , but also in financial deeds , so that we do not have to experience a situation like this again .
Mr President , the decision made by the aviation safety authorities not to put passenger safety at risk was absolutely right , even if this meant closing European airspace for several days and involved financial losses for the airlines .
In my opinion , it is irresponsible for airlines to ask their pilots to fly at their own risk .
What does ' at their own risk ' actually mean in this case ?
I welcome the fact that the Commission is considering authorising special State aid for the airlines , which would otherwise be in serious financial difficulties as a result of the current situation .
We will be talking later about employment in the European Union .
If the EU and the Member States can at least help to prevent things from getting even worse , this is the right thing to do .
However , in return for the provision of State aid , the airlines must give a binding undertaking not to make staff cuts or salary cuts .
They must also guarantee that they will not reduce holiday allowances or deduct pay for the days on which employees were not able to get to work because of the transport situation .
It is high time that the Commission put in place a permanent common European monitoring system for aviation safety .
This monitoring system should be specifically designed to prevent social dumping .
I would like to remind everyone of the State aid given to the banks , which profited from the aid , but did not take a corresponding social approach .
Competition and the pursuit of profit must not be allowed to take priority over the safety of human lives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , the situation caused by the volcano has been managed in a tardy , inefficient way .
The first real operational meeting took place yesterday , Monday : the volcano started erupting on Thursday morning ; therefore , it has taken four days to reach an operational decision .
It is true that some restrictions have perhaps been excessive , especially where safety is concerned .
Why , though , ban flights in Belgium when the cloud was in Norway ?
Why ban single-engine piston aircraft from flying at an altitude of 500 metres when the ash was above 8 000 metres ?
Perhaps the rule that was applied was the one that we aviators have known about for years , namely , that the safest flight is the one where the pilot is in the bar and the aircraft is in the hangar .
However , that is not the way to tackle emergencies , and so I believe that , in view of the obligation to guarantee the safety of passengers and crew , it was a good idea to adopt these measures , but they were just adopted too long after the situation had occurred .
Therefore , for the future , we will need to take account of safety requirements in the first instance , but also of requirements which , while reconciled precisely with safety , involve not just an indiscriminate ban on flights , but measures that reflect the real situation , not the statistical situation , so that , for the sake of a sector that is vital to the whole economy , we may prevent a repeat of the negative economic consequences and repercussions that we saw when the attack of 11 September 2001 took place , not only for the air transport sector and the tourism sector , but for the economy as a whole .
I therefore call for swift action , serious action , and action in full knowledge of the facts .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , safety has priority over all other considerations .
We cannot take the risk of a plane full of passengers suffering engine failure and perhaps , as a result , crashing in a built-up area .
I would like to remind everyone of the British Airways plane which flew through an ash cloud on its way to New Zealand in 1982 and , in particular , of the serious incident involving a KLM Boeing 747 in 1989 which flew through a thick cloud of volcanic ash .
Both planes narrowly escaped disaster .
Human life is priceless .
I welcome the decision to close the airspace during this crisis and therefore to ensure that pilots do not have to take responsibility for the passengers entrusted to their care .
Test and measurement flights have taken place , but only up to a certain height and under visual flight rules .
These flights were not able to carry out any real analyses or produce any significant results .
One other comment I have on flights under visual flight rules is that in the case of the KLM plane , the ash cloud was not visible .
Nature teaches us respect and , at the same time , makes clear to us the limits of globalisation .
We are all highly aware of the serious financial consequences .
However , a human life is worth much more than goods .
Therefore , taking into account the cases I have mentioned , I would like to call for the greatest possible responsibility and caution , including with regard to the division of the airspace into three zones .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Mr Kallas , this flight ban brings us back to the wide-ranging debate on safety which has often taken place in Parliament and in which we have said that we , by which I mean Parliament , and also , I believe , the Commission , could and should introduce regulations in this area on a European level , if the Member States wanted this to happen .
We have often had this debate not only in relation to air transport but also in the context of the railways and other areas .
Therefore , we should today be asking this question of those bodies that are able to answer it : firstly , the aviation authorities in the relevant countries and , of course , the organisation responsible for coordination at a European level .
This coordination has worked exceptionally well .
In my opinion , the top priority is the safety of passengers .
The financial aspect is less important , although we must not lose sight of it .
The individual countries made the right decision .
I hope that in future , Eurocontrol and the national aviation safety authorities will make the decision and not the individual airlines , because we are once again faced with experts who have differing opinions .
For this reason , we must be extremely cautious .
From an economic perspective , it is , of course , a disaster for an industry which is now suffering its third crisis , following 11 September and the economic crisis .
Therefore , we should take measures at a European and not a national level and provide aid packages which are compatible throughout Europe and do not distort the market , as has happened frequently in the past .
Aid is needed , but not only at a national level .
The passengers are now in a situation in which the law as it stands does not provide them with all the help that they might expect .
Justifiably , we have discussed this subject often in Parliament .
However , I assume that the airlines and the other companies affected will make it possible for the passengers to insist on the rights that still remain to them .
For me , the future lies in the single European sky .
I would like to point out that we will be discussing this subject frequently in the European Parliament over the next two years .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think there are three important elements to this debate .
First of all , the support provided to and the repatriation of stranded passengers ; that has to be the absolutely top priority for all authorities at all levels .
In that connection , we can agree that the European Regulation on Passenger Rights has secured for a great many of them at least a minimum of comfort and support .
However , in practice - as you are well aware - we have , of course , experienced quite a few problems : chaos in the airports , a lack of information , etc .
I therefore advocate that we set up an enquiry at a European level , in cooperation with the airlines and all the other parties involved , so that we can look into how we can help in these kinds of situations .
Moreover , I would also call on you to establish a kind of task force at Commission and Member State level to organise repatriation as effectively as possible .
I know that this is a job for the airlines , but there are certainly people stranded out there in distant locations who will have to wait quite some time for repatriation , even if airspace is reopened .
We need to give our attention to that .
A second important element , a second chapter , if you like , is the procedure for instituting flight bans .
What has happened is that we have again heard pleas for more cooperation and more European-level coordination and the single European sky - something to which references have already been made - will prove helpful in the future .
It is true that the European Union currently has no decision-making powers either over the airspace of the Member States or over Eurocontrol , which makes it very difficult to take effective and coordinated decisions .
However , it is also true that , until yesterday evening , we were actually using a rather conservative mathematical model at a European level .
Basically , this model is based on the worst-case scenario , which means that a little bit of volcanic dust has been flagged up as a massive cloud requiring a flight ban , as it were .
You will be aware that the US is using another model , one which applies a flight ban only to the area directly above the volcano itself and which leaves the operating risks in the hands of the airlines .
That is another model .
The model in between these two extremes that has already been agreed on - the one with the three zones - now , that is a good model .
Let us see how we can really integrate safety and efficiency with that .
My third and last point is about how we are coping with the economic impact .
It is a good idea to list the various possibilities , but we need a European approach .
Finally , let me just add that we should not delude people into thinking that we will be able to compensate everyone for the inconvenience they have suffered .
That is simply not possible .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say something to the minister , that is , to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Not to you personally , but to everyone who has ever held your office , and possibly also to some of those who will hold it in the future .
How have you been able to get away with obstructing a European approach of this kind for so many years now ?
Time and again , the Commission and Parliament have had to push the Council into reaching an agreement and , even then , it always ends up being a weak compromise .
Why is it that the Council always thinks in intergovernmental and national terms and not in European terms ?
That is one of the lessons which we are going to have to take away from this situation .
My fellow member , El Khadraoui , has already said that there is scope for better cooperation , but not just in terms of airspace management .
Coordination between the national authorities could also be improved , but you have made the point yourself , President-in-Office , that Europe does not currently have the powers to make those improvements .
Well , give Europe those powers , at long last !
That would make things a lot simpler .
My second point concerns scientific information .
We have a single centre in London which specialises in certain areas only and which has , in conjunction with Eurocontrol , decided that safety must come first .
That was , indeed , the right decision to make , but does that go far enough ?
Should we not strengthen the European model by bringing a few different specialisms together and creating a real European centre for aviation safety ?
This volcano has not finished erupting yet .
When it last erupted 200 years ago , it remained active for ten years .
So , we need to make preparations for the years to come .
I think we need to strengthen the European model and - and this is an important point for this House - we must also ensure that passenger rights remain intact and that State aid be awarded to everyone on the same footing .
( FR ) Mr President , even though thousands of people find themselves in great difficulties today , I believe that this volcanic eruption sounds like a real call to order : a call to order that urges us to review our relationship with the weather in the transport sector and , above all , our excessive dependence on air transport , which has gradually and , at times , without our knowledge , taken the place of all other means of transport .
That is even more essential given that , today , no one can say , of course , whether this volcanic eruption will stop or how this cloud is going to move in the weeks and months to come .
This means that we must primarily - and I support both the Commission and the Council on this - continue to abide by the precautionary principle and the principle of safety .
I am , moreover , astonished to see that , at one point , in the pharmaceutical sector , the precautionary principle was used to put pressure on the Member States and on Europe to incur expenditure which , in my view , was somewhat ill-considered .
Today , another sector seemingly also wants to question or criticise the precaution being taken by the Member States and the European Council .
I find that extraordinary .
There is no pocket-book precaution .
Safety and the common good are the priority .
As for the rest , I believe that we must , of course , develop rail transport .
That is the main priority and , as my colleague said , it is clear that here , we have a vision of what our transport system should be ; in other words , rail must recapture the market for small and medium distances .
I also believe that diversity of transport and modes of transport is important .
This , incidentally , is the subject of the White Paper on which we will have to work in committee .
In the short term , I consider that the priority is surely to bring people back home , to compensate passengers and , perhaps , to see what needs to be done for the airlines , but in a very targeted way .
I also believe that , structurally speaking , we must provide far greater support for videoconferencing .
Videoconferencing as a medium remains extremely incidental and of little relevance to anyone ; this applies not only in the case of Parliament , of course , but also more generally .
I believe that support for such practices would help us to reduce our dependence on air travel .
Finally , I believe , because the President asked us , that the European Parliament could , perhaps , for its part , review its way of working , by considering , for example , working five days a week for two weeks , rather than three days or three-and-a-half days per week .
This would also be a way of setting an example , in the way that we organise our work , of how to be less dependent on air transport , which is , clearly , extremely fragile and subject , as nature is showing us today , to unknowns over which we have no control .
It is truly a question of reviewing the system as a whole , and there will be an opportunity , within the framework of the White Paper , but also within the European Parliament , to review our own method of supporting other means of transport , including in terms of the way we work .
( PL ) Mr President , I greatly regret the fact that it seems many fellow Members , before making their speeches , did not seek the advice of professionals - people who have spent several thousand hours at the controls of an aircraft .
I have the impression that this is an extremely political discussion , and that charges are being made against the Council , whereas the Council , for the life of me , is not responsible for volcanoes .
It can be said with hand on heart that Eurocontrol 's decision was too hasty , and I say this most emphatically , because everything was lumped together .
The diversification of the situation which arose was not taken into account at all .
We are responsible for the system of permanent air traffic management , and I think there is a lesson here which we can learn from these events .
However , I am absolutely certain that the decisions which have already been made were made for too long a period of time , and it is my conviction that they could definitely have been different .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that at moments like these , we must have words of comfort and sympathy for all those who have been , or still are , victims , in one way or another , of disruption to traffic , just as we must have words of sympathy for airline employees who , with the limited resources at their disposal , have tried to respond to passengers ' needs .
We do not wish to add our voice to those who criticise a great deal but offer few suggestions and still claim to be in possession of the truth once the storm has passed .
We should like to say here that the principle of passenger safety must be reaffirmed as the priority principle .
It is better to have a dissatisfied passenger who is alive than a passenger who , unfortunately , dies on board .
I should like , at the same time , to say that Europe suffers from too little credibility .
Better cooperation and unity would probably have meant better communication , a better explanation to us , and a better attempt at satisfying those who simply wanted information .
In our opinion , it is important to strengthen the powers of the European Safety Agency and to allow it to rely , at all times , on scientific advice , on the basis of which it could justify its decisions in all circumstances .
For the future - and this has already been said , but I believe that it should be re-emphasised - we shall have to do even more work to ensure that the means of transport crossing the territory of Europe complement one another by trying , here too , to ensure greater consistency between them .
Finally , Mr President , if you will allow me , in order to dispel any suspicion that may exist , I should like to propose that a European Parliament committee of inquiry be set up on this matter .
( DA ) Mr President , I have two important points to make .
Firstly , it is unfortunate that Europe is at a standstill and thus unable to compete globally , but that also applies to American and Asian airlines , which are unable to land in the EU .
Secondly , I would like to thank all the parties involved for their efforts .
It remains to be decided whether or not airlines will be financially compensated .
The outcome will be decided by the debates in the days ahead .
It is good to hear that there is now a three-step plan .
I am pleased about that .
The Financial Times criticises the politicians for having ' simply ' shut everything down on safety grounds and suggests that Europe introduce the US strategy of allowing individual airlines to decide themselves whether or not to fly .
I hope that we here in Parliament will immediately reject that model .
It would be disastrous for passengers if an airline threatened with bankruptcy decided to fly simply for the sake of profit .
What we need is a forward-looking strategy : better measuring instruments in the airspace to predict atmospheric changes and the development of aircraft engines that use fuel more efficiently and are less sensitive .
However , aircraft are vulnerable not only to terrorist attacks , but also to extreme weather conditions .
Aircraft are highly energy-intensive and polluting .
It will not be possible to develop solar-powered or electric versions of cargo or passenger aircraft , but what we can do is finally get started on high-speed trains and on establishing direct high-speed rail links between all the major cities of Europe .
Trains can be made much greener than aircraft and are genuinely capable of competing with aircraft for internal European destinations .
Mr President , today we know better than we did a week ago that jet-free skies cost a lot .
The cost to airlines goes beyond their lost revenues . Other industries are affected , though there are also industries benefiting from the situation .
What matters is also the fact that this new disaster has hit the already very fragile European economy facing the need for fiscal consolidation .
I would like to raise two issues .
The first is related to State aid .
Offering airlines State aid in compensation for the losses has a precedent in the bail out offered to American Airlines after 9 / 11 .
The European Commission also offers fast-track procedures to State aid , which is appreciated .
But my question to the Commission is whether we know the expected size of this new burden for national budgets suffering from huge deficits and debts and facing the challenge of fiscal consolidation .
Is State aid through national budgets the best solution ?
Are any other options being considered by the European Commission ?
The second issue is related to the European Union 's capacity to manage crises .
We hear that during the first few days , there was no consultation or coordination amongst relevant national authorities in a situation covering 80 % of European air space .
I can assure you , Commissioner , that you can be totally independent and still coordinate .
We might also hear soon that coordination would have allowed us to design and implement a better solution , so in my view , this is the time to move forward on EU crisis management .
We clearly see that disasters that affect our citizens can also occur outside the EU territory in the European Economic Area , or even outside the EEA .
My question to the Commission is : how will it use this disaster to enhance the European Union crisis management capacity ?
I can assure you that we in the European Parliament will support all your efforts to make us more effective and more efficient in crisis management .
( DE ) Mr President , in the last few days , I have seen and experienced the alternatives to air travel in Europe , on the one hand , during a car journey from Belgrade to Vienna and then on a train journey from Vienna to Strasbourg .
Although there are problems on the roads , the road infrastructure is relatively well developed , even in Europe 's neighbouring regions .
However , the situation on the railways remains appalling .
This is not acceptable .
Where would we be today if we had implemented the provisions of the so-called Delors Plan ?
We would already have the trans-European networks and we would have more high-speed rail lines and high-speed trains .
After only a few hours , the toilets on the train were unusable , although it was a modern carriage , because a lot of people had to stand or sit on the floor for several hours and therefore the trains were overcrowded and the facilities overstretched .
Therefore , I would like to call on Mr Kallas to give a new impetus to the modernisation of the railways in the form of more high-speed trains and the provision of capacity reserves .
We need a certain amount of reserves .
Not only during the disastrous volcanic explosion , but also in winter , we have discovered that we have too few reserves and that focusing on profitability alone is not enough .
We must also put more emphasis on accommodation .


( ES ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Mr Kallas , thank you very much for your explanations and for the work that you have done .
I agree with you that the priority is safety , and that the crisis that has affected us is a complicated one , but we took too long to communicate , because we did so five days after the first attempt .
However , in order to measure up to what people , the European public , expect from us now , the conclusions of this debate need to be clear , simple and , moreover , practical .
They also need to have immediate effects that everyone can see .
Therefore , the taxpayers , who will also have to pay for this crisis , definitely have the right to be guaranteed at least three things : firstly , greater transparency regarding the decisions to close airports and how the situation is developing .
They were informed late when the crisis first began , which I believe helped to increase the problems in many airports , and also made it more difficult for many users to make alternative travel arrangements .
We therefore also need greater transparency now that the three zones have been defined .
We want to know what they are and what they are going to mean .
Secondly , they have the right to be guaranteed total respect for passengers ' rights .
We need clarity , we need to define who is responsible for passengers ' rights , what the scope of those rights is going to be and the deadlines for exercising them .
I agree with Commissioner Kallas that there also needs to be monitoring of the processes that the airlines are going to use in order to allow for these claims .
The final thing that they have a right to be guaranteed is State aid for the airlines .
I ask you to clearly define what this State aid is going to be and what the criteria are going to be for granting it , and that we monitor and control the consequences that this crisis could have for airline workers .
We also need to maximise the control measures in order to prevent airlines from using circumstances like these to make gratuitous or excessive adjustments to their workforce .
What this current crisis has very clearly shown is the need to develop European coordination and interoperability further .
Mr President , as has already been said , no one could have predicted the recent events in Iceland .
The airline industry is having to cope with very unpredictable circumstances , both in terms of the volcanic eruption and , of course , the general economic background .
With this in mind , we should base such an extreme measure of shutting all European airspace on proper scientific evidence and , with the current technology available , make sure that disruption is minimal and information is communicated efficiently .
In this respect , Eurocontrol and national authorities have added to the frustration with their poor management of this crisis .
Continually pushing back the closure of Europe 's airspace every six to eight hours has meant that passengers could not plan journeys by other means and airlines themselves have been kept waiting for progress .
Computer modelling and satellite technology are available to aid these situations but , even with all of this technology , we still seem to have been in a position of almost licking our finger and sticking it in the air to see which way the wind is blowing .
At least , that is the way the public perceives it .
This has been a disaster for all concerned .
Long-term prognosis , not decisions by knee-jerk bulletin , is what is required .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like first of all to emphasise that the application of the precautionary principle by the majority of the European governments when they closed their airspace in a targeted and temporary manner was a wise and prudent decision .
The safety of our fellow citizens must surpass every other consideration and , in these circumstances , the attitude of certain airlines in demanding the complete and immediate opening of the airspace on the strength of one or two test flights seems obscene , to say the least .
I believe that it was Mr Hénin who spoke just now about the complementarity of transport , particularly as regards the railways , and I should like to take this opportunity to say how sorry I am that paralysis in the air has been made worse by the disruption in rail transport caused by strikes that are both irresponsible and incomprehensible in these circumstances .
To return to our subject , I should like to commend the Commission 's decision to authorise the release of public funds to airlines affected by the current disruption .
It is a common sense decision in a context already marked by crisis ; this assistance must , however , be considered as exceptional .
In this connection , I would like the criteria for granting these funds to include the exemplary behaviour that the airlines must demonstrate in compensating their customers who have fallen victim to flight cancellations .
Indeed , it is unacceptable that certain airlines should be abusing the force majeure clause to avoid their obligation under Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 to compensate passengers .
Travellers are victims of the current situation and , where no alternative solution is offered to them , they should not have to bear the financial cost as well .
Moreover , travel agencies are exempt from the obligation to compensate travellers for unused flights .
That is not right , either .
Airlines , like travel agencies , have insurance that covers them in exceptional cases , such as the one that we have been experiencing these last few days , and we must therefore ensure that travellers are properly compensated for flights that have been cancelled .

( RO ) Approximately 2 million passengers in the EU-27 use air transport every year , with 22 % travelling domestically , 44 % inside the EU and 34 % outside the EU .
The eruption of the volcano in Iceland has highlighted to us the weakness of the European transport system .
During the last six days , more than 17 000 flights have been cancelled and millions of passengers have remained stuck in various locations , both inside and outside the EU .
In these circumstances , the rapid provision of accurate information to passengers was an absolute must .
Passenger safety must be our overriding concern .
This is why , particularly within the European Union , there should be an efficient system for redirecting passengers to other forms of transport : rail , waterways or roads .
If such a system had been in operation , 66 % of passengers who were grounded during this period and those travelling within a Member State or the EU itself would have reached their destination using other means of transport .
It is becoming absolutely vital to allocate the necessary funds for a trans-European transport network to be developed so that high-speed railway lines can serve not only all the Member States ' capitals but other large European cities as well .
Another increasingly paramount aspect is the development of transport along inland waterways and of the European maritime corridors .
Let us demonstrate political will and stick to our slogan : ' Keep Europe moving ! ' .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to welcome the efforts Commissioner Kallas and the transport ministers have made to resolve this problem .
Despite the age of technology in which we live today , I think it is a reminder to us that we are in the hands of Mother Nature like never before .
I come from a country - Ireland - where we are two sea crossings from mainland Europe .
I do know that we , and the people that I represent , have felt the effects of this possibly more than any other citizens in other Member States .
After the announcements last night , there was real hope that the situation would ease .
However , overnight it has changed again , and the restrictions in our airspace have been extended until 13.00 today .
Many passengers are stranded in various parts - not just of Europe , but many parts of the world - and our priority must be to try and help those people , to help the many people who have deaths in their families and who cannot get home .
Those people should be given priority by the airlines and not ignored by them and treated the same as any other passenger .
The economic impact is immense and I am pleased that the Commissioner will be heading up a group to establish the economic consequences of this .
Of course , it is essential - and I think this is the real point - that the role of Eurocontrol is strengthened as a result of the crisis , because volcanoes do not respect economic , geographic or political boundaries .
We must deal with this from the centre .
I agree that dealing with it from 27 perspectives , or countries , is not successful .
One of the biggest problems facing the passengers today is the confusion ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the ash cloud has caused stress and trauma for many thousands of travellers and financial loss to many businesses .
Indeed , many of our own colleagues from far-flung corners of Europe have been left stranded this week .
The Presidency should be thanked for agreeing that it would be undemocratic to vote without them - all too often , those of us from further away feel that we are being brushed aside in the interests of central European alliances .
The volcano has also reminded us that we are not masters of this planet and do not have the answers to all the questions .
It is clear that we need a much better understanding both of volcanic ash and of volcanic gases , and research in this area should be encouraged .
It has also reminded us of how addicted we have become to air transportation .
We know we must reduce that dependency in the years to come .
We should welcome investments in advanced communications systems for virtual meetings , as well as investment in high-speed railways .
Finally , plans to reduce unnecessary travel should be welcomed .
That is clearly one area where Parliament could lead by example .
( RO ) Exceptional natural phenomena , such as the eruption in Iceland , cannot yet , unfortunately , be predicted .
An inadequate response may be justified in such cases , but only once .
We must closely analyse what happened and prepare an effective response in the event of such a phenomenon recurring .
The information about the eruption 's consequences was inadequate .
Today , almost a week since the chaos broke out , we still do not know how much longer it is going to last and what the actual risks are .
A centre needs to be set up to carry out suitable monitoring , regardless of the cost , in order to give those involved , companies and passengers the opportunity to take the necessary measures .
The companies ' response was late and disjointed , which created major problems for passengers .
Companies made no attempt to cooperate in order to coordinate the management of the flow of passengers and the maximum possible use of the routes still available .
The only logical response to this shortcoming is to create the single European sky and establish a centralised traffic control system under the responsibility of a single body .
President-in-Office of the Council , last year , I was rapporteur for the single European sky initiative and I found it extremely difficult to reach the current format of the initiative , having conducted extremely tough negotiations with the Council .
This year , the exact same thing is happening with the European freight corridors .
I believe that Member States should understand something about what has happened now .
Member States ' response was inadequate and it failed to provide transport via other means .
Currently in Europe , it is not possible to buy a train ticket in a civilised manner .
The creation of a European centre responsible for intervention and coordination in the event of exceptional natural disasters is an absolute must .
The modernisation of rail transport is also a priority about which a huge amount is said , but too little done .
I hope that Member States have understood one extremely important message : it is not enough to be prepared in your own backyard ; the same conditions must be in place across the whole European Union .
What is needed is coordination , responsibility and a decision-making facility , all at European Union level .
( EL ) Mr President , the skill of the captain shows in the storm .
In the volcanic storm which hit Europe , the Union was slow to foresee , slow to react to and slow to prevent the spread of the problems for European citizens .
Just as we were slow to react to the economic storm , but that is another story .
There are two aspects to today 's debate :
Firstly , as regards the ban on flights and coordination .
Obviously , it cannot be the companies that weigh the risk of life against the cost to them and decide when and where they fly .
That is a matter for the competent national authorities .
The only absolutely positive achievement over the past few days is that there were no victims to mourn ; we did not risk it .
However , in a situation which went beyond the borders of Europe , it should have been the national authorities , from the very first instant , that coordinated with Eurocontrol and with the meteorologists , to see if they could open the corridors , which today we are now saying that we are opening - to my mind unfortunately - following financial pressure from the companies .
That terrifies me .
Secondly , in such a chaotic situation , it is unacceptable that the application of the European Regulation on passenger compensation was contested , a regulation which - in such circumstances - should be activated automatically .
Do you know that few trapped passengers have been assured by their companies that they will be paid for overnight accommodation and that , of them , most obtained payment because they drove a hard bargain with the companies , while the majority received nothing ?
I believe that the European Parliament should investigate how the companies reacted , compared with the regulation , and if passengers ' rights were respected .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , good morning .
We are dealing with exceptional circumstances here , of course .
The current disruption to air traffic is more severe than that around the time of 9 / 11 , but it is clear that we were not as well-prepared as we could have been for such an emergency situation .
Despite all the efforts made by the tour operators and airline staff , many passengers have simply been abandoned to their fate and have had to cobble together a solution on their own .
We clearly have to learn from this situation and take appropriate measures .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , we have no choice but to adopt an emergency plan , a European-coordinated plan .
What is key here is that the plan must provide stranded passengers with not just safety , of course , but information and help , as well , so that those who are affected , at the very least , have someone they can turn to and are guaranteed shelter .
We have to seize on these events in order to substantially improve the fate of any passengers affected in the future .
In the past few days , another thing that has become clear is that we in Europe are going to have to invest an awful lot more in creating a cross-border high-speed rail network , which would provide an environmentally friendly alternative to what is clearly a vulnerable air transport network .
Let us make real efforts , within the framework of EU 2020 , to bring about a compelling investment rail project which will be good for the individual citizen , good for the environment and good for employment .
( DE ) Mr President , as if we had been able to predict what was going to happen , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which is also responsible for civil protection , has an own-initiative report on the community approach to the prevention of natural disasters in the pipeline .
The rapporteur is Mr Ferreira .
We will be voting on this report in the next session and we will discuss our experience of the volcanic ash cloud then .
Plenary will very soon be able to formulate Parliament 's position on these subjects .
I agree with the Members who have said that we are poorly prepared for natural disasters .
Fortunately , Europe has few natural disasters .
However , we also have little experience in this area and it is clear that our crisis management is poor .
In my opinion , it all took too long .
Five days before a test flight took place and real data was collected is simply too long .
We must learn from this .
I do not want to make any accusations , but experience shows that we must do things better the next time around .
If this volcanic ash has made one thing clear , it is the need for more Europe .
Mr Kallas , you have said that the national authorities have responsibilities .
However , this does not help the people who have suffered as a result .
We need more Europe in civil protection and in a common transport policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon opens up more opportunities for us .
In the same way as Mrs Hübner , I would like to ask you how you will make use of the opportunities afforded by the Treaty of Lisbon in crisis management and civil protection .
This situation must improve .
( FR ) Mr President , ' shambles ' , ' chaos ' , ' paralysis ' , ' cacophony ' , ' catastrophe ' , ' disaster ' : the press is not lacking for words to describe the closure of European airspace and its consequences .
I shall not dwell on what has already been said , notably as regards the extent of the huge - unfathomable , one might say - financial impact of this crisis in direct or indirect terms .
While I welcome the possibility of exceptional public aid being granted to the airline sector , which has already suffered a great deal since 11 September 2001 , I am still perplexed about Europe 's management of these events .
Firstly , knowing that 750 000 European passengers have been affected , a good number of whom are still stuck in the four corners of the world , knowing that the economic losses are growing exponentially over time , how can we explain that it has taken not one , not two , three or four , but five days for the European transport ministers to hold a meeting , by teleconferencing , to coordinate their actions and to decide to create traffic-differentiated zones ?
Secondly , no one contests the need , as an absolute priority - and I stress the word ' priority ' - to apply the precautionary principle .
However , today , when traffic is gradually being permitted once again in secure zones , in unchanged weather conditions , and when the volcano is still active , one is entitled to wonder what additional safety guarantees for passengers we could not have provided earlier , sooner .
Thirdly , a model of evolving action has been developed - according to the weather forecast , the evolution and activity of the volcano can change from hour to hour - but who is going to continue to carry out an up-to-date assessment of the safety of air corridors ?
Must these test flights be carried out by civil aviation and the airlines ?
Finally , if this lasts , gets worse or happens again - which is likely - the management method put in place must provide for greater coordination among Member States and special operational procedures based on real data and better coordination of other means of transport in exceptional circumstances .
It must also take account , however , of the need to coordinate assistance so that we can get the tens of thousands of stranded passengers home ; they too are entitled to information and assistance .
So far , however , only isolated and national initiatives have been taken .
( ES ) Mr President , I welcome the opportunity that this debate gives us to face up to our responsibilities .
In response to today 's crises , the national dimension and intergovernmental decisions are not sufficient , nor are simple solutions , even if they are based on statistical models .
It is right to recognise the diligence with which , on the day after airspace was closed , the Spanish Presidency of the Council saw the opportunity for a European approach in order to find a solution to the chaos that was already spreading beyond the national governments and , more importantly , was plunging thousands of travellers within and outside our borders into a desperate situation .
Repatriating them must be our priority .
While the initial measures were adequate , according to the principle of precaution and guaranteeing safety for all citizens - those flying and those under the flight path - the lack of clarity about the future and a growing feeling of unease , as a result of the complexity of the intergovernmental decisions , raised the big question that is always raised : what is Europe doing ?
We have to acknowledge that the joint work by Commissioner Kallas and the Spanish Presidency succeeded in record time - which is never quick enough , but to be honest , given the difficulties , they did it in record time - in changing the approach .
Although this approach is precautionary , as it has to be , it raises important questions .
The conclusions of this choice are : the application of passengers ' rights does not stand up in an exceptional situation .
The work done at European and national level was not sufficient .
In the short term , we need to repatriate and provide urgent solutions , but in the medium term , we need to improve .
The External Action Service should also be able to respond to these emergencies ; in some cases , it cannot close at the weekend .
The air traffic sector , travel agents , the tourism industry , logistics , etc . , which were only just glimpsing an end to the crisis , have taken a real battering , and I welcome the presence of Commissioner Almunia , who will be responsible for managing the solution required for the sector .
Ending the uncertainty as soon as possible will also help us to get out of this crisis .
Finally , we clearly need a replacement system for air travel , even once there is a single European sky .
The railways , the roads and the maritime sector put together have not managed to replace it .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , we are certainly dealing with a crisis situation .
In Europe , air traffic has been reduced by 70 % , and 80 % of airports have been closed .
I do hope , however , that we are able to draw several constructive conclusions .
Firstly , the Commission should do everything to ensure that the eruption of the volcano does not lead to the bankruptcy of European air carriers , which are in a catastrophic financial situation as it is .
I say this in the context of yesterday 's debate on financing the security of air travel and the Council 's resistance to financing stricter measures related to security .
Secondly , experiments with new , unproven technologies such as body and liquid scanners will certainly not improve security , but they undoubtedly will have an effect on the financial condition of European air carriers .
Thirdly , the question of passengers .
I think the decision to halt flights out of concern for passenger safety was a wise one .
However , that concern should not stop there , but should also include help for those who , through no fault of their own , have been stranded at airports .
These matters have already been discussed more than once at sittings of the European Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Paradoxically , however , only the eruption of the volcano in Iceland has made us all aware how essential the aviation industry is to the proper functioning of the European Union economy , and this is true in particular of those representatives of the EU institutions who , for this reason , were not able to attend the funeral in Krakow on Sunday .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the response of the European Union and the Member States to this crisis has been entirely satisfactory and that everything possible has been done .
They have acted according to the principle that safety is paramount .
We can discuss whether the ash cloud should have been investigated more quickly .
I believe that this would have been possible , but in principle , what was done was acceptable .
We now need to discuss and think carefully about what should be done for the people , the European citizens , who are stranded .
I was called yesterday by three people who are in this situation .
One case concerns members of a family who are waiting in an airport in Thailand and have been told that they will probably be able to fly out on 29 April .
They have already spent a whole week at the airport .
The second case involves young people in New York who have been told not to leave their hotel for at least a week , because they could be picked up at any moment .
The third case is a family of pensioners on an island in the Norwegian Sea , who can no longer afford to pay for their accommodation , but are unable to leave .
These are issues which we in the European Parliament need to think about and discuss .
We must offer these people solutions , give them support and make useful proposals .
We cannot abandon the European citizens who are in this situation ; we must help them .
Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
We are now in an extreme situation , because the subject that we are debating is so urgent and so distressing for many people , and in particular for the public , that we have more ' catch-the-eye ' requests than ever .
This is a record , as I think we have 13 or 15 requests , and even though Members are still asking to be included , we obviously cannot have 20 people speaking .
We are nevertheless going to try to enable everyone to speak , among other things , until the President arrives , as he has stepped out for a moment and I am replacing him on an impromptu basis .
As I do not wish to begin the next debate , we are going to be conducting the catch-the-eye procedure until the President 's eye drops out or everyone on the list has spoken .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner and to the Minister of the Spanish Presidency for their speeches and for the work they have done .
I do not think there is any question that the priority in this emergency is to guarantee safety , and safety has been guaranteed , because the outcome of this disaster , of this unexpected , natural event , is that no aircraft have been involved in an accident caused by the cloud .
The safety objective has therefore been achieved , and we can only be pleased about that .
There are still two problems today : the first is that of the timescale .
Could action have been taken sooner ?
Could it have been taken earlier ?
Could steps have been taken to intervene sooner and to reopen the area that was safest for air traffic sooner , given the huge economic effect , the economic impact that this disaster is having on air traffic and on the airlines ?
Could action not have been taken earlier ?
This requires answers .
The second issue : thousands of passengers are still grounded and are having to stay in hotels , to change ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , this debate has given rise to many speeches by transport specialists .
It is true that we have focused strongly on the economic problems that this exceptional and unforeseeable situation has caused .
There are also human aspects , as has been said , and I am looking at the situation more from the point of view of a defender of citizens as consumers , many hundreds of thousands of whom are currently stranded somewhere in the world , unable to return home .
I am thinking more of them , and especially of those who can no longer afford to stay where they are , who are stranded and have no other solution .
As regards these empty skies and these airports full of people in distress , thought may have to be given to recasting the directives on transport , especially air transport .
The directive on package travel will probably be reviewed .
Could we not - and this has not been spoken of so far - think about compulsory insurance to provide cover , in the event of force majeure , for such people , especially so as not to leave them in distress ?
( PL ) Mr President , the current situation makes us realise and testifies to our impotence before the forces of nature .
However , as a serious organisation , the European Union should be better prepared for such situations , and should , in particular , be ready to react efficiently in urgent cases .
It is difficult , of course , to prepare for something which may or may not happen once every 150 years , but we can see at the moment that the European railway infrastructure and network of connections is completely insufficient .
We have to answer the question , here , as to how this should be improved .
Other questions which we ought to discuss are , firstly , what kind of public assistance will be made available to businesses which are under threat ?
We know that huge amounts of money will be needed to repair the financial situation of these businesses .
Another question is how we should develop a strategy which will prepare us in the long term to react and make better improvements ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , the Commissioner talked about the procedures being absurd and obsolete .
Let us therefore be consistent .
We have wasted too many opportunities , too many treaties , when we could have introduced Community powers over European airspace .
Nevertheless , while we were not able to act as we should have done in the air , we can do so on the ground .
For example , we can monitor passengers ' rights and also mediate or ask for a truce in the various land transport industrial disputes .
There should be no minimum services ; there should be maximum services for all .
( PL ) Mr President , I hope the current difficult situation in European transport will not last for too long and will not turn into a real transport crisis .
The experience we are gaining is too expensive , but is very instructive .
We should draw the right conclusions , and here are some which suggest themselves immediately .
Firstly , transport security , both in the area of quality and in the ability of citizens to travel , is a priority obligation which we have in common .
Secondly , there is a need for balanced development of all forms of transport , but in particular , we must not neglect rail transport .
Thirdly , efficient transport is the lifeblood of the economy .
The transportation of goods and the mobility of the workforce are decisive for development , and we should remember this particularly during the economic crisis .
Finally , there is a need for suitable procedures , coordination , separate support for airlines , mutual help and European solidarity for the good of our citizens .

( PL ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , the catastrophe has shown us that we do not have procedures in the European Union for dealing with catastrophes like the one which has arisen as a result of the volcanic eruption .
Firstly , the European Union should coordinate matters relating to safety and decide whether or not aeroplanes can fly .
This must not be exclusively for Member States to decide .
Secondly , we need to think about the question of economic responsibility .
I think a European system of insurance against this type of situation , or perhaps national insurance schemes , should be the solution .
Thirdly , on the matter of the logistics of passengers who were stuck in transit between particular countries , there was a lack of real mobility in the transport and TNT networks and of fast trains .
Finally , I think that in the case of passengers who have been left stranded outside the European Union , the European External Action Service should be ready with definite procedures for helping them .
I hope those rapid procedures will be introduced .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the past few days , we have experienced an unprecedented upheaval in our lives .
Aeroplanes , which we depend on to travel to and from our regions to Brussels and Strasbourg , are no longer available .
The upheaval has been massive ; we have had to take trains , ships and buses , it has all taken much longer and numerous members were barely able to get here .
However , what we have seen over the past few days is that we are absolutely dependent upon aeroplanes ; we have seen that there are alternative means , but that the present rail infrastructure in Europe is inadequate ; it is not state of the art .
Can we perhaps imagine a European Union with a full network of high-speed trains , a Europe in which all journeys less than 1 000 kilometres long are made by train and in which we only use aeroplanes for longer journeys ?
The impact of air travel on the climate in the European Union is huge .
It is greater than that of refineries and steel works ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I believe that the responses that can be given now can only alleviate the current situation , but cannot prevent it from happening again .
In transport , there are no short cuts , there are no short-term solutions , and this should be an opportunity - even more so now that the White Paper is being drawn up - to include , introduce and establish the necessary measures to reduce our excessive dependence on our air transport connections .
We need to balance these connections by facilitating and strengthening the alternatives that are currently severely lacking in comparison , such as railways and sea transport .

I therefore think that both Mr Kallas and Mr Grosch , who is the rapporteur for the report , will have taken note of the requests made by all the Members regarding the need to strengthen the railways and the trans-European networks for this mode of transport .
( DA ) Mr President , a lot of sensible things have been said during the debate this morning , but I think we need to look a bit more to the future .
What we have experienced is something we will experience again .
The experts in Iceland say that it is not a matter of whether there will be further eruptions - the question is merely when they will occur .
That is why we need to look slightly further ahead and work out how to handle such a situation when it occurs again in the future .
As part of this , I believe that we need to start focusing on getting high-speed rail links between the European capitals and how we bring about the interoperability that is needed .
( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , it is , of course , clear to us all that passenger safety must be our top priority and that we are having this discussion today primarily because nature has reminded us of this .
Flights have been grounded across most of Europe , passengers are waiting indefinitely , airlines are sinking into the red , industry workers are afraid for their jobs , the economic damage is immense .
Obviously , airlines are entitled to think that , if farmers can claim damages for natural disasters , they , too , are entitled to an indemnity .
As for the environment , we have certainly done it a huge favour over the past couple of days .
Interconnection - let that be the lesson that Europe needs better integration of air , rail and road traffic , that we need to provide finance for high-speed trains and that we need less pollution .
We need to respond immediately and responsibly and , above all , with passenger safety in mind .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to express my sympathies to everyone who has been affected by this crisis .
Now , ' crisis ' is a word that we have been hearing far too often these days : economic crisis , financial crisis , transport crisis , every other kind of crisis under the sun .
If one thing is clear , it is that our society is extremely vulnerable to crises of this kind .
We need a safety net .
We tend to talk a lot about the green society , but a green society also needs to include green transport and we have clearly not completed our work yet as far as that is concerned .
Many members of my group and others , as well , have said it already : it is a matter of great urgency that we invest in green transport and in better and faster connections within the EU - and , of course , better and faster connections outside the EU , too , if we are able to have any say there - by rail and why not by boat , as well , if it comes to that ?
That would be good for the economy , good for the climate and also good for the stability of this society , because that is what it desperately needs .
( DE ) Mr President , it has become clear that the focus of this whole issue is on the passengers .
We want passengers from Europe to be transported safely .
We want safety , but we also want transport options .
I believe that we need all the means of transport currently available .
We need aircraft , as we cannot replace flying with another solution .
A lot has been said about high-speed trains .
Of course , it would be good to have more of them , but what use is the best high-speed train if it has to stop at the border ?
For this reason , I think we should take one step at a time .
Firstly , we need continuity across the European rail systems , in just the same way that we need the single European sky .
As all the parties have spoken out in favour of more coordination between the Member States , I would like to call on everyone once again to take action , because it is the parties in the Member States who are responsible for blocking progress in this area .
Please make sure that the parties at home in the Member States are genuinely in favour of opening up transport in Europe .
If we are all able to convince our parties , the situation will improve in future .
( RO ) There has been a huge amount of talk in recent days about the financial losses sustained by airlines , which are an actual fact .
It is becoming clear that a mechanism for providing assistance to these companies needs to be adopted , all the more so as this crisis caused by the eruption of the volcano in Iceland may be protracted .
However , I believe that passenger safety and consumer protection must come above everything else .
There has been a huge level of discontent among passengers whose treatment varies from one country or company to another .
It is obvious that practices in this area need to be standardised , which would mark a big step forward for passengers who are currently on the move from place to place , against a backdrop of uncertainty surrounding the reopening of the airspace .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , this crisis that we have been experiencing for some days has also demonstrated - and this has not been said enough - the failure of the Lisbon Strategy , which the European Union was able to put into action in the last decade .
This failure , which stems from deregulation and fierce competition , shows today , with this crisis , that the European Union has been incapable of coordinating the necessary approach that would have made it possible not only to protect those who are trapped in these airports but also to plot the way forward by allowing airlines to make test flights , for example .
I call on the European Union , therefore , to pull itself together .
We are told that we need more Europe .
Indeed , there must be a public service , supported by the European Union , in a sector as prominent as air transport .
( PT ) Mr President , this was , of course , an unforeseen crisis and the precautionary principle must naturally take priority .
There are , however , lessons to be learnt , and the first is that no sufficiently strong and politically responsible European voice has been heard for five days .
Such a voice has been lacking with regard to the protection of passengers ' interests , the clarification of their rights , the search for alternative transport and the coordination of solutions .
A second conclusion is that the way out of the crisis must not look to the ordinary citizen like a power struggle between those who want to avoid economic losses and those who want to uphold the precautionary principle .
There must be clear transparency and clear objectivity as regards the conditions under which we get out of this situation , in which the whole of Europe 's air space has been shut down .
Therefore , improving scientific tests and also coordination at the level ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , the precautionary principle has become a principle of irresponsibility .
In the face of the slightest risk , the precautionary principle has become an invitation to abandon all responsibility .
No so-called ' responsible ' parties dare shoulder their responsibilities any longer .
A potential influenza epidemic ?
Hey presto , thousands of people are invited to be vaccinated .
An erupting volcano ?
Hey presto , the entire European airspace is closed , even though experience has shown that volcanic ash is not really dangerous except for aeroplanes that have to cross a dense cloud .
However , because of the precautionary principle , our companies are subject to the failure of the responsible parties to assume responsibility , to the weakness of experts and to the impotence of politics , which has taken to chattering about the need to reduce our excessive dependence on air transport and to invest more in rail networks , probably by extending them as far as Asia , the Americas , Africa , Oceania and every island in between .
Mr President , I think there has clearly been agreement that first of all , we need to focus on nature .
Mr Cramer said this quite clearly , and I agree with him , because this is an important message for all of us .
We must also , of course , focus on the European Union , on European action , in response to a crisis that has European importance and which has had an extremely serious impact on millions of citizens of Europe and other countries outside the European Union , as well as on the economies of major European sectors .
It was immediately apparent that the events overtook the action of the Member States , who have decision-making powers to open the airports , and therefore , there was immediate intervention from the European Union .
I repeat , Mr Speroni , Mrs Ferreira , the action was immediate .
On Friday , it became apparent that a serious situation was setting in .
As soon as this became apparent , the European Commission , along with the Spanish Presidency of the Council and Eurocontrol , immediately set to work , and on Sunday - as Mr Kallas said earlier - there was a public appearance by the Commission and the Presidency - Mr Kallas and myself - explaining the situation and setting out what was going to be done .
The action to be taken was yesterday 's meeting of Eurocontrol and the decision of the extraordinary Council meeting , called by the Spanish Government and chaired by the Spanish Minister for Public Works , which took place yesterday .
Therefore , action was taken .
Action was taken in order for this to lead to a decision , to action , to an approach , a focus that was European in nature .
Today , yesterday 's decision by the extraordinary Council of Ministers is being implemented .
This morning , at 08.00 , Eurocontrol defined four zones with an extended safety perimeter in which there can be no flights , and other areas in which there can be flights , provided that there are agreements and coordination among the Member States .
Airspace is therefore gradually being opened up , but this will naturally depend on the conditions and on nature .
Naturally , it will depend on these things , but the decision taken yesterday is already in practice today , and this will , of course , always be done on the basis of the precautionary principle and the need to ensure safety .
I believe that what was immediately seen is that in this case , the European approach meant that a much more balanced decision could be adopted .
The European approach meant that various factors could be taken into account that should always be taken into account when something extraordinary happens such as what we are going through at the moment .
Firstly , it means that the risk assessment model is much more precise , much more accurate .
Mr Sterckx , in response to what you said about this , I want to say that Eurocontrol is taking into account the decisions made by the Volcanic Ash Advisory Centre in London , but it is also going to take into account the test flights , the information from the national authorities , the information from the aeroplane manufacturers , and the information from the European Aviation Safety Agency in Cologne , which I agree needs to be strengthened .
All of this will be taken into account in order to draw up a more accurate map , as is happening now , at this moment , through the technical proposal being produced by Eurocontrol , based on scientific data .
The European approach means that safety , which is an essential , fundamental principle , above all other principles , can be taken into account at the same time , and I therefore agree with those who have said this .
It means that the economic consequences can be taken into account , and the Commission has set up a working group - which has also been very well received by you - to present a report next week on aspects relating to the economy .
It also means that citizens ' rights and their mobility can be taken into consideration .
That is why I am again calling on all the European Union governments to help get people home , to make use of every possible means of communication , and to make a special , extraordinary effort to do so , because that is the main right that citizens have : to go home , to go to wherever they want to go .
We are therefore calling for their right to free movement to be respected .
For the future , I believe that this situation opens up a panorama for us for a very thorough debate , and the European Parliament is the right place for that debate to take place .
This debate must look at the problem of passengers ' rights under these exceptional circumstances , and the need for an emergency plan , which also requires transparency - as Mrs Bilbao said - in the European Union 's actions , so that there can be structural reforms , which means strengthening the trans-European rail networks in Europe .
This is becoming an absolutely strategic objective , which , all things considered , is simply the structuring of Europe , because historically , the structuring of the modern state was done on the basis of developing communications , roads , railways , and also maritime connections .
In the future , the structuring of Europe , the Europe of the 21st century , will not be completed if it is not done through the infrastructures of communication , in this case , essentially through the railways .
The two things go hand in hand , and developing these transport infrastructures is a strongly political , symbolic and real issue , which is becoming a central objective for 21st century Europe .
In this respect I believe that this was exactly the right place and time for Mr Swoboda , Mr Schulz and Mrs Álvarez and for other speakers to mention these reforms , because this is undoubtedly an element for the future that the European Union needs to aim towards .
Mr President , could I respectfully ask that this debate be extended , because this exchange is far too polite .
People are being treated like dirt in train stations , by airlines and by authorities in airports .
We are being far too polite .
We should be using the EU 's power in the Council and in the Commission to force people to open information points .
In Brussels Central Station , there are six information points ; four of them are closed .
This debate should be far longer , and more Members should be allowed to participate in it .
I am not at all pleased with the action taken by the Council and the Commission to serve the interests of the travelling public , who are sleeping in train stations .
That has been mentioned several times , today .
Everyone from the European Parliament who spoke before you raised these matters .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for all their remarks .
I have four additional ones to make .
First of all , these events have given us much food for thought as regards our strategic plans .
One of the most interesting and crucial issues is intermodality and flexibility between modes of transport , and the ability of railways to act as some kind of alternative .
We will address this issue soon , with the discussions on the recasting of the first railway package and the White Paper on the future of transport .
This is a very serious issue .
Yesterday , we discussed it with the Council of Ministers as well .
I can promise you that we are taking this issue very seriously - including teleworking and other factors aimed at limiting unnecessary transport and travel .
Concerning the economic impact , we will take all aspects into account and will make proposals .
However , we should be careful .
Money does not come from nowhere , and things must be fair for all the other actors in the economy .
We must be very balanced in our approach .
There can be no miracle .
As regards passengers ' rights , the rules are very clear .
Some Members asked about the rules and whether we should revisit them .
I do not think we should revisit the rules adopted by European decision makers , including the European Parliament .
They are good .
The question is a very different one .
It is that of implementation and enforcement , which is in the hands of Member States .
We have a clear plan on how to proceed with the enforcement of these rules and on how to influence the Member States .
It is clear what must be done concerning passengers ' rights today .
One other matter , which is not such a big issue : many colleagues and the press have said we were too late and were not prepared .
Well , I was active all the time .
I was at Eurocontrol .
I was in contact with ministers .
In this Chamber today , you have the same dilemma as faced by all those experts and decision makers , but this is a matter which is in the hands of experts and the safety authorities , not in the hands of politicians .
It is the same dilemma : safety versus flexibility .
We were prepared for a volcanic eruption but we had different types of evidence regarding the eruption .
This was mentioned here as well .
One British Airways flight and one KLM flight were affected by the volcanic eruption , so rules were established on the basis of there being a serious risk .
The authorities acted in accordance with the assumption that there was a serious risk and that flights should be cancelled .
Now we have a more differentiated approach .
On Sunday , the majority of the test flights were made and information came through to Eurocontrol , where we discussed these issues - the test flights and the definitive results for those flights .
Now we have flexibility and the matter is still in the hands of the Member States .
We are going ahead with the Single Sky , which is a very promising European project , and there is a common understanding among ministers that this is the way forward , with better coordination at Europe level .
This is a big opportunity .
Those are the comments I wanted to make .
I wanted to say that , as regards information , the Commission issued press releases on Thursday and Friday concerning passengers ' rights .
We said that passengers ' rights should be taken very seriously .
The information about passengers ' rights came from the Commission immediately , and as from Sunday , larger coverage began of all the issues which , by yesterday , were very well covered .
That is the picture .
The case is not closed .
We have three or four days at least before the majority of flights resume .
The solution for the economy and for passengers is a resumption of flights , with airlines bringing passengers home or taking them to their final destination .
It is still a difficult situation and we must deal with the consequences .
Thank you for your remarks .
We will have several opportunities to discuss this matter further .
The debate which we are now ending was , certainly , the most important item of our proceedings .
If only because of this debate , it was worth meeting here in Strasbourg .
This discussion is something which our citizens expect - that we should deal with these problems , and it is just this which we have been talking about since the morning .
It is the most important topic .
I would also like to express my thanks for the fact that 14 Commissioners from the European Commission have taken part in our final debate .
It is very important that they have listened to your remarks .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Although thanks to the intervention of the aviation authorities , the volcanic ash cloud fortunately did not cost human lives , the level of information and coordination in Europe gets a failing grade .
The closure of the skies caused difficulties for hundreds of thousands of Europeans , preventing them from reaching their destinations .
Everyone is trying to deal with the unexpected problem , but the inadequate provision of information aggravated the situation .
Often , passengers were not provided with adequate information either by telephone or via the Internet .
Confusion was further caused by the fact that the aviation authorities and airlines issued contradictory information .
There was also a lack of coordination between air and ground transport .
We experienced personally how important it would be to modernise public transport links between Member States and to develop trans-European transport networks .
I welcome the Commission 's decisive crisis management steps .
The working group created to this end ought to reinforce coordination between aviation and air traffic control authorities , and it would be worth examining the continued validity of safety measures introduced in the 1980s as well .
I recommend that in similar crisis situations , the European Parliament should not complicate an already chaotic transport system by commuting between Brussels and Strasbourg .
Instead , it should hold its plenary sessions in Brussels .
Mr President , our debate on the situation of European aviation must not be restricted to the trivial matter of how to get to the part-session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg .
Concentrating too much on this aspect will give the impression of an unjustified egocentricity on the part of Members of the European Parliament .
We should use our imagination .
The social , economic and even political effects of keeping European airspace closed for a longer period may prove to be a colossal challenge for the whole of Europe .
In Poland , some politicians and journalists are asking , for example , why some people could not get to Krakow on Sunday , while others did get there .
They are also asking why it was not possible to get to Krakow by road or rail on Sunday , but it was possible to get to Strasbourg by these means on Monday .
Events which happened as a consequence of the volcanic eruption in Iceland are also going to have a very strong global dimension .
We do not usually think about the huge significance of air transport .
Ethiopia 's losses alone , which result from the fact that it is not possible to export flowers to Europe , amount to EUR 3 million a day .
We must make a very serious analysis of how closing the skies will affect the labour market , our competitiveness and the whole economy , and how it will affect the lives of ordinary people .
Who knows - it may be that this inconspicuous event in Iceland will determine the future of the European Union . Thank you very much .
As a result of the limitations and cancellations of flights for several days on account of the eruption of the volcano in Iceland , thousands of people are stuck at airports under difficult conditions .
Despite considerable flight delays ( in cases of trips under 1500 km , over 2 hours ) , the airlines have provided little or no assistance and did not give accurate information regarding travel options to people 's final destinations .
They did not make arrangements for passengers to have access to free telephone , fax , e-mail or Internet facilities , and did not provide transfer or accommodation , either , even though passengers are entitled to such support under the EU regulations in force .
Passengers living with disabilities , elderly people and families with small children are even more vulnerable in such exceptional situations , and this has been the case now as well .
This unexpected situation has shown that passenger rights that were previously honoured can be wiped out in a matter of minutes , and that the need for the Passengers ' Charter that I , too , had earlier urged is particularly great , to avoid a repetition of the helplessness of the airlines and relevant bodies .
At the same time , I recommend that in the event of any exceptional change , it be automatically mandatory to send information and a message about alternative solutions to every passenger 's mobile phone .
The volcanic cloud caused by the eruption of the Icelandic volcano Eyjafjöll has been effective in disrupting air traffic over Europe in the last few days .
To date , tens of thousands of flights have been cancelled , making it impossible for passengers to travel .
For the whole of Europe , and for national and EU authorities , this is a lesson from which we must draw conclusions for the future , including so that similar events in the future do not paralyse the work of the European Council or of our assembly .
Amongst those affected were also Members of the European Parliament , who were , as I was , unable to come to the Strasbourg part-session this week .
A great deal of controversy has surrounded our meeting in Strasbourg this week , because some Members simply could not get to it from their constituencies .
We did not know until the last minute if the part-session would be held at all .
It would be good for all of us to have procedures in place in future so that we would be ready if faced with similar exceptional situations .
Mr President , the news has accustomed us to scourges , natural or wilfully caused , that bring a nation 's structures and society to its knees , creating transport and supply emergencies .
Funds made available from the European budget and coordination among various civil protection bodies are already in operation , thanks to the experience acquired .
An emergency such as the one caused by the Icelandic volcano was never expected , however .
Our citizens will not forget the airport notice boards showing every single flight cancelled , the prison , day after day , that was the airport transit areas , and the interminable queues at stations , car rental companies and taxi ranks .
The airlines have suffered the greatest financial losses .
The citizens risk being made fools of : aside from the inconvenience and the unforeseen costs that will be difficult to recoup , air fares may be increased to offset the losses incurred .
This possibility must be avoided .
Just as it does for natural disasters , the European Union will have to respond by compensating citizens who have incurred unforeseen costs in an effort to minimise their discomfort , along with the airlines , but in so doing , it must avoid the risk of describing such compensation as State aid , and hence unlawful aid .
The citizens , above all , must receive assurances that the European Union will help them , so they feel protected , both directly and indirectly .
Until now , many still cannot admit that they feel protected .
From Parliament , which is drastically reduced by the absence of many Members who are unable to get here , we call for the urgent adoption of a European action plan of coordination between national governments and bodies and an organised form of protection of the citizens .
In this way , we would obtain that swift response to the needs of the citizens that the governments have been strangely unable to guarantee today .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the last few days , we have all been witnesses of the blockade of airports throughout almost the whole of the continent of Europe .
The situation is unusual , because it is not the result of strikes , but of a natural disaster caused by the eruption of a volcano in Iceland .
This paralysis , in which we are all to some extent involved , has brought with it a series of consequences , such as the financial problems of airlines and a growth in the significance of land and maritime transport .
It is this to which I would like to draw your attention .
In recent years , air transport has had a clear lead over other means of transport .
It was faster , safer and more convenient for passengers .
However , in the present situation , it is essential to introduce measures which will allow land and maritime transport to compensate us better for the inconvenience caused by the paralysis of air transport .
No justification is required for air traffic security .
Since the volcanic eruption in Iceland , travelling by air not only appears not to be a viable option , but almost an impossibility as well .
I strongly believe that more coordination at European level would have helped EU citizens stuck at various airports across the world or completely unable to set off on their planned trips .
I hope that the single European sky will become a reality one day .
As you are well aware , the complete ban on flights over the last few days has also affected our Parliament , or rather the operation of its plenary sessions .
I think that there is no justification for postponing the vote and reducing the session by a day , even though only roughly 65 % of MEPs were present on Monday evening , 19 April .
In my view , the session must be held as normal .
Commission Legislative and Work Programme for 2010 ( debate )
The next item is the statement by Mr Barroso , the President of the European Commission , on the Legislative and Work Programme of the Commission for 2010 .
I would like to stress that a good number of Commissioners are also present in the Chamber .
The whole European Commission is strongly represented , because the subject is extremely important for all of us .
We have had to curtail the subject somewhat , because of the change to the order of business , and after listening to what Mr Barroso has to say , we will hear speeches from the chairs of the political groups , who will give a political opinion on what the Commission is proposing for 2010 .
Then we will ask Mr Barroso to speak again and to respond to the comments of the chairs of the political groups .
President Barroso , thank you for coming .
It has not been easy for any of us to get to Strasbourg .
Many Members have not arrived at the European Parliament , so the attendance is not very high .
We decided not to vote during this part-session because everybody must have the opportunity to vote , and some Members could not come to Strasbourg at all .
So there are some quite new rules for this part-session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour and the pleasure of presenting to you today the first work programme of this Commission .
It is also the first work programme since the Treaty of Lisbon came into effect .
I have the honour and the pleasure of presenting it alongside practically my entire team , the European Commission , as a sign of respect for your Parliament .
This programme is being presented at a decisive moment for Europe , since it is now that we must act .
This programme is the direct outcome of our political dialogue .
After intensive consultations based on the political guidelines that I presented for the next five years , this Parliament entrusted me , in September , with the responsibility of a second mandate .
At the end of in-depth hearings that allowed us to forge a common vision of the actions presented , the College as a whole received your vote of confidence in February .
In other words , this work programme is very much in line with the political priorities expressed by your institution .
This being so , it provides a solid platform for achieving ambitious results .
Our very first priority must be to emerge from the crisis and to lay the foundations for sustainable , job-creating growth .
First , the urgent issues : we recently debated the results of the European Council .
Meanwhile , the proposed financial support mechanism for Greece was finally put in place on 11 April .
The Commission will play an important role in the implementation of this mechanism when Greece asks for it to be activated .
This is the logical consequence of the fact that the Commission is deeply involved , and has been since the beginning , in the search for a solution to the financial problems encountered by Greece and in preserving stability within the euro area .
Our involvement has always been in line with the principle of solidarity , but also of responsibility .
However , we must do more and ask ourselves why these problems have occurred and how they can be prevented in future .
That is why we are reviewing the Stability and Growth Pact in order to strengthen economic supervision and to extend it beyond the sole issue of deficits .
We need a permanent mechanism for resolving crises .
In short , we must demonstrate that the European Union , and particularly the euro area , is able to rise to the present-day challenges , and we must make use of all the possibilities offered by the Treaty of Lisbon .
That is why one of the Commission 's first major initiatives in the coming month will be to present a communication on the increased coordination of economic policies .
We all know that the collective interest of Europe is at stake here .
The Union must strengthen the system and take into consideration the whole spectrum of risks and economic imbalances .
We need to improve internal mechanisms .
By providing itself with more robust structures and with a more coordinated approach , Europe can help public finances embark on a new and viable path and can create a framework that is conducive to a broader , sustainable recovery .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the last 18 months , we have made enormous progress towards putting in place a financial system that is more ethical , robust and responsible .
We must continue along this path , plug the last remaining gaps in the regulations , and make sure that our supervisory structures remain in phase with a sector that is constantly evolving .
I am convinced that our proposal on hedge funds and private equity will soon reach a decisive stage .
The Commission believes that the legislative authority will come round to our common objective , which is to ensure that the new European supervisory architecture for the financial sector becomes fully operational from the beginning of next year .
In 2010 , the Commission intends to present several proposals in key areas , such as the derivatives markets , deposit-guarantee systems and market abuses .
The protection of ordinary consumers of financial services will receive special attention .
We shall also be working on other major aspects linked to currency-default swaps ( CDS ) and bear sales , and we shall shortly be proposing some guidelines on the use of funds for resolving banking failures .
Mr President , distinguished Members of Parliament , this Commission hit the ground running .
By presenting the Europe 2020 strategy right after taking office , we have set the scene to help bring Europe back on track - on track for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
We now need to work together - European Parliament , Member States , Commission - to build and sustain the momentum .
Achieving the vision of a sustainable social market economy by 2020 will require a strong effort from all levels of decision making and all levels of society .
At European level , our action must have genuine European added-value .
This is the goal of the Europe 2020 flagship initiatives - the Digital Agenda for Europe , a fully-fledged industrial policy , a European Plan for research and innovation , a resource-efficient Europe , new skills for new jobs , ' Youth on the move ' , fighting social exclusion .
This is where Europe can make the difference .
Thus , we will help drive the transition to a resource efficient and climate change resilient economy .
Fighting climate change will remain a top priority on our agenda , both internally and globally .
The energy and transport sectors will get particular attention this year - both critical to turn the challenge of a sustainable Europe into our competitive advantage .
The Single Market , as a home market of 500 million consumers underpinning jobs , competitiveness , affordable prices and consumer choice , will continue to constitute the backbone of the European economy .
Tapping its full potential is particularly important for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the most important driver for job creation in the European Union .
Bringing the single market into the 21st century is a priority for the Commission , which will make new proposals by 2012 .
This is also the subject of a report which I have asked Mario Monti to prepare and which we will be presenting very soon .
I want to underline the importance of social inclusion in our vision for Europe 2020 .
The real strength of a society rests on the opportunities it creates for its weakest citizens .
We must seize every opportunity to encourage employment and social cohesion .
That means being ready to exploit the emerging sectors which will generate new jobs .
It means providing people with the right skills to create and sustain high employment levels and facilitate economic transition .
It means working to overcome the impact of the crisis on young people by easing transitions from education and training to work .
To this end , a broad-ranged European Platform against Poverty will be built on the current European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
This agenda is , of course , a contribution to the fulfilment of our principles of economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The concerns and well-being of European citizens will remain at the heart of Commission action .
The implementation of a comprehensive Action Plan of the Stockholm Programme that the Commission will be adopting later today is focused precisely on ensuring that the benefits of European integration in the area of freedom , security and justice become more tangible to the citizens .
This Action Plan represents , on its own , a comprehensive work programme for the Commission in the area of freedom , security and justice .
It puts citizens at the core of our policies by facilitating the exercise of their specific rights .
It will also aim at developing an open and secure Europe with a particular focus on tackling cross-border crime and on a common immigration and asylum policy .
In the field of freedom , security and justice , the European Union has , in the last 10 years , gone from the application of the free circulation of persons to a common policy .
The achievements until now have been impressive but we need , more than ever in this period of exit from the crisis , to promote and defend European values and indeed , above all , to tap all the potential that is now created by the Lisbon Treaty .
The Action Plan contains a comprehensive list of measures to implement our already defined priorities in this field , both at European and global level .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty also gives us the tools to demonstrate greater ambition .
The increased role of this Parliament , more efficient decision making in the Council , the perspective of more coherence and consistency of Member States in European Council decisions , and the judicial review by the Court of Justice will strengthen European Union determination in responding to the expectations and concerns of our citizens .
When we look to 2020 , we must also address a number of long-term trends with a direct impact on the daily lives of citizens .
Action now will pay dividends in the future .
For example , the Commission will launch a public debate on the future of pensions and analyse options for ensuring the sustainability and adequacy of the pension systems .
Of course , in any area like this , many of the levers are national - but that must not hold us back from ensuring that the European Union makes a maximum contribution .
In the external field , the new role of the High Representative / Vice-President and the start of the European External Action Service will offer us the tools to build a stronger and more coherent EU external policy .
We will set out strategic trade policy priorities , take forward trade negotiations and work with partners on issues ranging from market access to regulatory framework and global imbalances .
We will project our Europe 2020 objectives on the global market place , for example , through the G20 .
The Commission will also be tackling the challenges of energy geopolitics , in order to ensure safe , secure , sustainable and affordable energy .
Another key priority for the Commission is to pursue the international development agenda and propose an EU action plan in the run-up to the 2015 Millennium Development Goals summit .
This initiative will form the basis for the June European Council to prepare a common EU position in view of the High Level United Nations Review meeting in September on the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , which aims at the adoption of a Global Action Plan for reaching the MDGs by 2015 .
We want a Europe that is open and shows in concrete actions its solidarity with the most vulnerable in the world .
Finally , as agreed with this Parliament , we will publish the Budget Review during the third semester of this year .
In this , we will set out what we see as the key principles and parameters for using the European Union 's financial resources to best effect , taking full account of the Europe 2020 strategy .
In parallel , we will be making more detailed assessments of key areas , including agriculture and cohesion .
I can assure you that Parliament will be fully associated at all stages of the budget review .
Before finishing , I would like to briefly explain a number of innovations in the work programme .
This programme , and future programmes , needs to offer the right framework for the institutions to build a solid consensus on where Europe should concentrate its attention .
We therefore need to be more political , and we also need to reflect the multiannual challenge of initiatives of the scale we intend .
I think the way we will prepare the work programmes in the future should be a concrete demonstration of the special partnership which I and the Commission want to establish with the European Parliament in this mandate .
This programme identifies 34 strategic initiatives that we are committed to putting on the table before the end of December .
I am sure you agree that this is an ambitious agenda for the next eight months .
At the same time , the programme includes many other initiatives for 2010 and beyond .
This indicative list comprises initiatives on which the Commission intends to work over the coming years .
Not all of these initiatives will necessarily lead to the submission of concrete proposals .
In line with the principles of smart regulation , we need to assess thoroughly which items should go forward , and in which form .
The work programme will be reviewed every year to identify new strategic initiatives and adapt the multiannual strand as required .
This ' rolling ' approach will enhance transparency and predictability for all stakeholders , while preserving the necessary flexibility to react to unforeseen developments .
One thing we have learned in recent years is that we should always predict the unpredictable .
Recent years have shown that strategic blueprints cannot be cast in stone - they have to adapt to reality on the ground .
Honourable Members , the Commission work programme for 2010 that we are proud to present today is an ambitious , but also necessary and realistic , framework for European policy making in the coming year .
It is realistic if all institutions are ready to join forces and cooperate with a view to delivering timely results to Europe 's citizens ; it is necessary because business as usual is not an option if we want 2010 to mark a turning point ; and it is ambitious because , more than ever , a strong Europe is required to deliver to citizens the solutions they are looking for .
They expect it from us , and we have a duty to work for their prosperity and well-being .
Thank you , Mr Barroso , for a comprehensive presentation of the Commission 's most important initiatives for the next eight months .
I would just like to stress that the strategic partnership of which you spoke is very important to us .
We distinguish between executive and legislative authority , but our cooperation is of crucial significance for our citizens , so it is with great pleasure that we have listened to your words about the necessity for contact between the Commission and Parliament to be as close as possible .
Your presence , and the presence of the Commissioners , during this sitting today is the best evidence that the intentions of the Commission agree with the facts . Thank you very much for this .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , on behalf of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we welcome the fact that the Commission has ambitiously set to work and presented its 2010 work programme .
We take this in the spirit in which it was meant , that the Commission is present , and as a sign of respect for Parliament , of taking Parliament seriously , and we are glad that they are all present .
At the same time , we regret that much time has already been wasted this year , since the delay in the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon has already prevented the harmonisation of the legislative programme and the budget from being made this year .
We have every confidence that this process can be restored in 2011 after overcoming minor difficulties .
The Treaty of Lisbon came into force , and henceforth we can no longer make any excuses , as Members of the European Parliament , nor does the Commission or the Council , for not taking decisive action and not starting the work , that is , implementing that which the Treaty of Lisbon prescribes and fulfilling what citizens want , placing them at the centre of our policy plans .
The European People 's Party prepared two lists with regard to the Commission 's plans .
We sent the details to you even before acceptance .
The two lists , which I would like now to cite briefly , consist simply of a list of what the Commission should not do , and a list that itemises what we would like them to do .
First , we would like to ask that the Commission not do what has been the practice till now , because that would render this debate meaningless , namely , that by October , only 40 % of your legislative proposals for the year had been tabled .
If this continues to be the case in the future , then these sorts of debates are pointless .
Parliament cannot exercise the right by which it wishes to make an impact on what proposals the Commission should put forward .
It is for this reason that we consider it important that these legislative proposals or work programmes are not considered on a par with the old Communist five-year plans , in which nothing , from start to finish , was true .
And what they eventually achieved had nothing whatsoever to do with the final objectives .
The other things we ask of the Commission is not to tolerate lies and deception .
At the moment , several European countries are in crisis because they concealed the correct data , and lied about the size of the budget deficit .
They concealed this information from the others , and yet we are all in the same boat , and such things affect many people .
This was the case in Hungary , this was the case in Greece .
In such cases , we expect the Commission not to shrink back , but to name and shame such countries decisively , or else there will be much more trouble later .
The renowned nineteenth century thinker of the Hungarian age of reform , Count Széchenyi , said that anyone who covers up trouble increases it .
So we should not cover it up , but come forward with it , and , on that basis , take the necessary decisive action .
The Commission ought to exercise its competence in this regard .
Do not misunderstand me .
I am not saying that the Commission is to blame for these crises .
The governments of these countries are responsible for these crises ; however , in the interest of the common good , we should have raised our voices louder and more decisively in order to see results .
Now let us move on to what the Commission should do .
First of all , it should at last take action and decisions , and should develop an ambitious job creation programme .
It should place citizens at the centre of our work .
Jobs , jobs , jobs must be our guiding principle .
Let me start here by saying that naturally , when we address citizens , we need to use a language that they understand .
When we say 2020 , then I - an MEP from a former Communist country - associate this once again with the five-year plan , or the sort of number they used to assign to prisoners .
Why do we not call the 2020 programme the European Union 's job creation programme , why do we not call the Stockholm Programme - a name that , by the way , no one besides us understands - the European citizen security programme ?
What I mean to say is that the words we use are also an important part of the start of this entire process .
We consider it important that small and medium-sized enterprises take an active part in the process of job creation .
They would not like it if the 2020 job creation programme was shoved down Parliament 's throat .
We need a thorough debate here , and not just in this Parliament but in the national parliaments , and the national decision-making authorities must be involved as well .
Let us learn from the failure of the Lisbon Programme - yet another name that no one understands !
Let us work for the security of our citizens and let us take the steps necessary in this regard .
Mr President , just one observation : man does not live by bread alone - strengthening our common values is also important .
We expect the Commission to continue those value-based programmes which deal with Communism , with the coexistence of national minorities , and with Europe 's common past .
The European People 's Party will support you , but we will criticise you very severely if you deviate from the original programme .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , Commissioners , I would like to thank so many of you for attending today .
Unfortunately , I cannot say the same thing about my fellow Members .
I am ashamed to say that not all of those who are not here are genuinely not here .
They are in Strasbourg , but they are not in the Chamber where they should be .
I find that very sad .
As we do not have a joint resolution , we will present our individual points to you and you can evaluate them in detail .
Mr Barroso , we agree with you that the main issue is competitiveness combined with social security in a sustainable Europe .
Of course , our main emphasis must be on continuing to combat poverty and unemployment , which is still rising in some areas or , at the very least , remains unacceptably high .
I would like to thank you for mentioning this , as it is something which some Heads of Government seem not to be convinced of .
How can we ensure that this happens in an era of budgetary consolidation ?
It goes without saying that we must consolidate our budgets .
However , this must be kept in proportion - I would ask the Commission to take note of this - and it must take place in chronological order , in order to ensure that the other essential objectives , in other words , combating unemployment and poverty , are not left in ruins .
I would like to take this opportunity to say how important this issue is , against the background of the recent Roma summit in Cordoba , at which you were not present , but which two members of the Commission attended , Mrs Reding , the Vice-President of the Commission , and Mr Andor , the Commissioner for Employment , Social Affairs and Inclusion .
I have recently visited Roma settlements in Serbia and it is inconceivable that places like this still exist in Europe .
I call on the Commission to do everything within its power to combat the problem of poverty and unemployment in this area .
My next point relates to the budgetary consolidation .
We need more investment .
We discussed this earlier on this morning with Mr Kallas .
We have invested too little , for example , in the trans-European networks .
Now it is possible to see where the problems have arisen because we still have not implemented what was proposed in the so-called Delors Plan .
When you talk about partnership , Mr Barroso , I would ask you to remember that we need this partnership , particularly with regard to the budget issue and future budget planning , because it is clear that the Council is already intending to make cuts in smaller items at a European level .
We cannot tolerate this .
Mr Barroso , you referred to the Monti report .
This is definitely an important report and it is good that you have asked Mr Monti to prepare it , as he is an expert in this area .
However , when we talk about the single market , we must also refer to the social market economy .
In this context , public services in particular are very important to us .
You have agreed to submit proposals for a framework directive .
We do not want to cover all the individual points here and now , but I believe that we will have to rely on these public services for the European identity , in particular , with regard to the transport problems that we have had , which indicate , for example , how important public rail services are .
Regardless of whether they are provided by the private or the public sector , they must be regulated and safeguarded by a common European policy for public services .
I would now like to come to my final and decisive point .
You spoke about the economic crisis and also about Greece and other countries which are in difficulties .
In our previous discussions with Mr Van Rompuy , we established that the actions taken by the European Council in this case did not represent the best that Europe can offer .
If all of this had been done two or three months ago , Greece would not have had to make high interest payments .
You referred to this , but I believe that we need more than references .
We need the Commission to call for these things with a powerful voice .
I agree with you that this is not about intervening when the crisis has already happened and the deficits are sky-high , because this fact is frequently misunderstood .
It is about preventing these things from happening as far as possible by monitoring economic and budgetary changes .
Once again , I can hear governments saying that we cannot investigate their statistics or their budgetary procedure .
This is not acceptable .
If we want to prevent what has happened in recent months and years from occurring again , then we must do this .
Why do governments have to keep their statistics and their budget procedures secret ?
Of course , governments must have a certain freedom .
They must have this freedom and , in the euro area in particular , it must correspond with the European objectives and targets .
Mr Barroso , we are ready to enter into the special partnership that you referred to .
However , this partnership must be based on a strong position for Parliament and for the Commission .
In the days to come , we will be negotiating on the framework agreement .
It specifies some of the details , but the decisive factor is the spirit behind it .
This also involves you stating clearly , when some Heads of Government want to misuse the Treaty of Lisbon in order to strengthen their own position , that the Treaty of Lisbon is intended to strengthen Europe .
This is why the Commission must have a powerful voice .
In this case , we will go along with you and support you , even if our opinions on individual details differ .
However , we must both fight for a strong Europe .
This is very important , particularly in the light of the recent behaviour of some Heads of Government .
Mr President , President of the Commission , I find this programme perhaps overly tentative in view of today 's upheavals and challenges , and I believe that we are entitled to expect greater ambition from the Commission , all the more so given that you committed yourself to this .
On financial regulation first of all , I fully understand what Mr Barnier is trying to do .
It is along the right lines , but I believe that we could have gone further and considered other avenues , such as the separation of banking activities , the taxation of financial movements or a pure and simple ban on derivative products , as is being contemplated today in the United States .
However - and , for me , this is more important still - I believe that we absolutely must do everything we can to promote the real economy and sustainable investment which , unlike the current , extremely financial services-driven economy , actually creates employment .
I would very much like it if we worked on concrete projects along those lines .
I cannot see any such projects in this programme today .
I also believe that we need far-reaching projects .
If ever there was a time to revive the idea of a Europe of the railways , it is today , with the crisis that we have gone through .
At present , we have 28 000 flights each day in the European Union .
This really is the time to revive this Europe of the railways that has been spoken about for decades .
However , I believe that nothing will be achieved without genuine economic coordination and economic governance .
From this point of view , I regret that the Council is in charge of a working group on this issue ; I would have preferred it to have been your Commission .
We urgently need budgetary , economic and industrial coordination .
We need to create a European monetary fund and , alongside it , to implement measures for stabilising the Member States ' public finances .
Although it is a word that is no longer used , we need to work towards fiscal convergence .
I am thinking in particular of the issue of corporate taxation .
Moreover , we will need to work on an own resource for the EU budget .
I believe that these would be powerful acts that might well put us back on the path to growth .
I would like to say one more thing about the future economic strategy of the Union for 2020 : please , do not give up quantified objectives in relation to poverty and education .
I believe that , from this point of view , you will have the support of the entire European Parliament .
We are talking here about the European social model that we want and that we love .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , Commissioners , I would also have liked Parliament to respond to the respect that you have shown it with a higher level of attendance .
We will have to work on this .
The work programme that you have presented is very wide-ranging and contains headings that sound very ambitious .
Even the introduction has the title ' A new era ' .
However , I am not sure that the details underneath these major headings do justice to this positive-sounding approach .
This is still all about the climate crisis and the financial and economic crisis .
The case of Greece has once again demonstrated that we not only have a growing divide in economic terms , but also in social terms , because the conditions in which European citizens live in the south , the east and the north-west are very different .
This means that we are facing major challenges .
I have to agree with Mr Swoboda in particular when it comes to a social Europe and more justice .
It is essential that there is a review of this area .
We are not at all convinced that what is currently on the table is enough to combat the growing poverty within the European Union .
Have we drawn the right conclusions from the financial crisis and the subsequent economic crisis ?
We believe that the right approach to financial and economic integration is to make new proposals for modifying corporation tax .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have long since been in favour of taking this further .
We also support energy taxation .
You will be able to rely on us if you finally put this into practice .
However , on the basis of our experience of the financial crisis , we believe that a clear objective for the tax on financial transactions is still lacking .
Of course , we can say that we are waiting for the Member States , but I believe that sometimes you must present more specific and more precise demands and then fight for them , and this is also what Mr Szájer has said .
It is clear that our response to the Greek situation has been inadequate .
We do not think it is acceptable that no proposal is now being made on Eurobonds .
Mr Barroso , you put a very great emphasis on services of general interest during your campaign for a second period of office .
The groups in Parliament have also asked you about this .
I think that what you have said about public services and how they should be regulated under the heading ' Putting people at the heart of European action ' is completely inadequate .
This means that you are already breaking one of your major promises .
As far as protecting the climate is concerned , the various Directorates-General which are currently involved with climate protection are working on scenarios with different objectives for 2050 .
In the case of transport , there is a long-term goal of a 70 % reduction , but for energy it is 75 % .
Mrs Hedegaard 's people have not yet decided .
I hope that they will set more ambitious objectives .
However , it is clear that Bali and the two-degree goal do not play a role for any of the Directorates-General .
What use is all the talk about a major new European climate diplomacy initiative if we have obviously given up on Bali and on the agreements made by the G8 ?
The contents of the programme will not be enough to allow us to make a successful European appearance in Bonn , in Cancún or in South Africa .
There is still a lot to do .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , talking of programmes , let me remind you of the lesson of the 1992 programme : for the Commission to achieve results , it needs to set one priority and focus on one policy at a time .
The effort to establish the single market was a worthwhile objective which could be easily understood by all those involved - and , crucially , by the public - but since then , all too frequently , we have seen the Commission launching initiative after initiative , regardless of whether Europe was the appropriate forum or whether it could really deliver tangible benefits , in the futile hope that they would make it popular .
That approach was wrong and it failed .
We therefore welcome the new direction which has been developed by President Barroso .
The European economy is still in deep crisis , and only consistent action will change that situation .
I do not simply refer to the immediate crisis triggered by the failure of the banking system , or the extra pressures now provided by transport emergencies .
I mean the underlying crisis which has seen the European economy left behind by more competitive and innovative economies across the Atlantic and in Asia .
We therefore strongly support the centre-piece initiative of this Commission : the 2020 strategy .
Whilst we believe there are details to be added and changes which should be made , the broad thrust of the policy is correct .
Europe needs strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth which can deliver high levels of employment , productivity and social inclusion - hear , hear !
This must be the overriding priority defining the Commission .
Our future economic prosperity and all the benefits it can generate depend on successful businesses and entrepreneurs ; they are the ones who create wealth and sustainable productive jobs , and that is the best anti-poverty policy yet invented .
The Commission must be their ally , not their adversary .
We therefore welcome the commitments to relaunch the single market , extending it further , to emphasise smart regulation , to ensure that the implementation of rules is consistent and fair throughout the Union , to reduce substantially the administrative burden and cut down on red tape and address bottlenecks , to share best practice in training , to modernise the labour market and to reduce barriers to trade .
In taking a lead in developing a vibrant , dynamic European economy , President Barroso will have our support .
We do not , of course , like everything .
We are concerned that some measures might result in infringements of the rights and responsibilities of Member States , such as the concept of a Citizens ' Europe or some aspects of the Stockholm Programme .
We are encouraged by the prospect of reform in the common agricultural and fisheries policies , but concerned this may result in more bureaucracy rather than a fair solution for our farmers and fishermen .
Finally , we do not agree that common initiatives undertaken by Member States in the field of foreign affairs should be totally taken over by the Commission rather than left to the Council .

The ECR was founded to uphold the principle of subsidiarity ; we want a Europe which focuses on its proper key tasks and delivers real benefits , and we are hopeful that President Barroso and his Commission - all of whom are here , one for each of us , today - seize the opportunity evident in much of the work programme presented to nurture a Europe playing its part in shaping an economic recovery and can offer a foundation for our long-term prosperity in the difficult and challenging years ahead .
Mr President , the title of the programme that we are discussing here today is : ' Time to Act ' .
When it took five days to organise a videoconference among Union ministers , I can only congratulate you on your sense of humour , Mr Barroso .
Why , though , is it time to act ?
Is it because no one has acted yet and the title is a piece of self-criticism ?
Or is it because this title , like all the other titles of our bureaucratic communications , is just an empty promise hiding behind piles of words ?
I will give you an example .
We are in the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , although the poor do not know about it .
Your paper talks about an initiative - and I quote - ' to ensure that the benefits of growth and jobs are widely shared ' .
Is that another joke ?
What initiative is that , and how can it make up for the social support that Member States are withdrawing for the sake of their stability programmes ?
How does the Commission intend to share the benefits of something that does not exist : economic growth ?
How does it intend to reduce the number of poor people without touching the income of the rich and the very rich ?
Our disagreement with you is about policy .
A return to the dictatorship of the deficit traps economies , cuts wages , cuts benefits and forces public investment into retreat .
That is a recipe for more unemployment .
Although it is time to act , the Commission thinks that the Union has , in the end , been able to join forces to confront the crisis .
Ask the Greeks whether that is what they think , whether we have been quick and whether we have been fair .
When will we have the European credit rating agency ?
Ask the Portuguese , whose debt interest goes up every time a Commissioner decides to talk about economics .
Ask the European public .
Ask the European public why things are as they are and they will look at the messenger and end up smiling , because in the end , there is no tax on a sense of humour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , enterprises , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , which make up 99 % of Europe 's productive fabric , need four fundamental elements : easier access to credit , greater labour market flexibility , less bureaucracy when it comes to opening up and managing businesses , and , lastly , protection from unfair competition .
We value the work done by the Commission to streamline European legislation with the annulment of 1 600 legislative acts during the last term of office , and we support the proposals made by the high-level group led by Edmund Stoiber .
Another important element for the competitiveness of businesses is the international trade situation .
At this time of crisis , it is important to strengthen the European Union 's trade defence system .
Businesses cannot compete with social and environmental dumping strategies implemented by some emerging economies such as China , where the cost of labour is extremely low and where there are no social safeguards and their associated costs or high standards of environmental protection .
Another issue on which the Commission should intervene more aggressively is the fight against counterfeiting and the protection of intellectual property rights .
In short , I cannot see any initiatives in the Commission 's work programme aimed at implementing the cohesion policy guidelines laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
For the first time , Article 174 of the treaty recognises the specific role of mountain regions , which represent 40 % of our territory and over 90 million European citizens .
I therefore call on you to include in the Commission 's next legislative programme a proposal for a framework programme to support the development of and to protect mountain regions , and to capitalise on all the possible uses for renewable energies that mountains offer .
Mr President , in the Commission work programme for 2010 , it was said that the European Union must face up to long-term challenges such as globalisation and must regain competitiveness .
The problem is that the EU has not faced up to globalisation : it has embraced it .
It is allowing a flood of imports from developing economies with wage rates a fraction of those in Europe .
The only way in which we can possibly regain competitiveness would be to drive wage rates down to their levels .
I am not , of course , even in favour of membership of the European Union .
However , even if I were in favour of it , I would accuse its masters of betraying the economic interests of its peoples .
I would say that the EU is not so much a European Union , as it is a global union trying to achieve the global mobility of all goods and services .
I believe that sovereign nation states should rebuild their manufacturing bases and then protect their markets and the jobs of their nationals .
However , my message is also for europhiles .
Europe , either as a whole or separately , will fail to protect its manufacturing and its agriculture from Third World competition at its peril .
Globalisation must be resisted , individually or collectively , or it will destroy us all .
The Commission 's document refers to the alleged need to develop further legal immigration policies to alleviate the perils of demographic ageing .
There is no doubt that ageing populations are a concern in many countries .
However , we must examine why the problems occurred .
Many women pursue uninterrupted careers and refrain from having children out of choice - and that is their perfect right - but many others pursue careers because it is economically necessary for them .
They work in order to pay the bills , not because they have a disdain for motherhood .
There is no doubt that this development has had an impact on birth rates , which have been depressed artificially at the behest of economic forces .
However , we do not have to take a laissez-faire approach to economic forces .
Economic intervention can change those economic forces and a change in those forces will bring about a corresponding change in family demographics .
The idea that we can import large families from the Third World as a substitute for unborn European children is based on a particularly pernicious and wrong-headed assumption , which is that we are the products of nurture and that Third World cultures are like overcoats that can be taken off at the port of entry and replaced with a European cultural overcoat that can be issued with residence and citizenship papers .
The children of such immigrants are allegedly as European as the indigenous population ; they are not .
Distinctive cultures are made by distinctive peoples and not the other way round .
We are not the product of our cultures : our cultures are the products of our peoples .
Replacing Europeans with people from the Third World will mean that Europe will be replaced by the Third World .
Europe is slowly but steadily being ethnically cleansed of Europeans .
Mr President , in general - we are not talking about those who have said clearly and honestly that they are against the Union and against membership of the European Union - I feel able to say that there is , nonetheless , in this House , broad agreement on the programme that we have just presented .
If there is one common factor that I have detected in the speeches of the most representative political groups , it is the idea of ambition .
We need greater ambition in Europe .
In this regard , I wish to take up a few ideas that have been voiced , ideas with which , I might add , I am in particular agreement .
Our friend , Mr Szájer , spoke of the need to avoid , in fact , the model of the five-year plan of the communist regimes .
That is precisely why we want to maintain this flexibility , which is important if we are to adapt to a changing environment .

At the same time , I would like to confirm once again , in response to Mr Szájer , but also to Mr Swoboda , that they are right when they call for greater action from the EU in economic and financial terms , and when they point out how the Member States have resisted , for example , the Commission playing a greater role in the supervision of national public accounts .
The first Commission of which I had the honour of being President presented a specific regulation aimed at giving greater audit powers to Eurostat , and that was rejected by certain Member States , which did not want the Commission to be able to play that role .
I therefore hope that the lesson to be learnt from this crisis is that we are increasingly interdependent , that economic policy in Europe is not just a national matter .
It is a national matter , of course , but it is also a matter of common European interests , since we need a greater degree of coordination .
In this respect , I believe that Mr Szájer , Mr Swoboda , Mrs De Sarnez and all the others are agreed on the need for such increasingly coordinated economic policy .
This is how we make progress , and in this respect , I wish to highlight in particular the ambition expressed by Mr Swoboda - and I thank him - for an enhanced partnership between the Commission and the European Parliament when we talk about the financial perspective , about the need to resist certain rather intergovernmental interpretations that one hears nowadays .
Such interpretations are surprising , because the Treaty of Lisbon is , in fact , the exact opposite of intergovernmentalism : it strengthens the European dimension .
I hope that we will be able to learn lessons from this crisis by moving in the direction of more , not less , Europe .
One example - to which Mrs De Sarnez referred - is the issue of financial regulation .
It is , all the same , odd , not to say ironic , that after so many requests from certain Member States for measures in the field of financial regulation , the Member States unanimously agreed to reduce the ambition of the proposals that the Commission presented following the de Larosière report .
This shows , therefore , that there is , at times , a gap between what is said and what is decided .
I hope that we , the European Parliament and the Commission , will together be able to fill that gap in order to try to achieve a little more consistency at European level , because we do , in fact , need that ambition .
The important thing now , I would stress , is to understand the principle of subsidiarity properly .
I am in favour of subsidiarity .
In this respect , I am also keen to voice my agreement , Mr Kirkhope , with this idea of subsidiarity , but it is important to have a proper understanding of what it means .
Subsidiarity means deciding which level of decision making is best .
On the subject of this air traffic crisis , the events taking place are , all the same , odd .
I have seen today in the press - and not only in the Eurosceptic or Europhobe press , not only in the tabloids , but also in the quality press - that the European Union now admits that it was mistaken in deciding to suspend flights .
That is unbelievable !
If there is one area that comes under national jurisdiction , it is European air traffic control .
The decision was taken by each European national regulator .
Yet the very people who are against European-level powers are now protesting against Europe .
Soon , the talk will be that it was the European Commission and Brussels that created the volcano in Iceland .
It is all really rather extraordinary .
( Applause )
Let us be clear .
There are different levels of responsibility : national levels and European levels .
In each case , we have to see which is the most appropriate level .
I can tell you that the Commission is ready to assume its responsibilities , but I believe that we must build an alliance with the European Parliament in order to state clearly what is , and what is not , our responsibility .
Without this alliance , we will always have this instinctive need - and , in times of crisis , we know that it is easier to resort to nationalist , populist rhetoric - to place under the responsibility of Brussels , as is sometimes said , or perhaps of Strasbourg too , what is frankly a national responsibility .
Let us show some common sense !
Let us concentrate on what we can do at European level , in areas where we can add value to our action , while respecting , of course , our Member States , which are democratic Member States .
The 2020 agenda , I believe , focuses Europe on what is most important .
What we need now is growth , but not just any old growth ; we need fairer , more open , more sustainable and more intelligent growth that is focused on the future .
We need to create new sources of growth in order to successfully tackle our biggest problem , which we shall be discussing this afternoon , namely , unemployment and , more specifically , youth unemployment .
It is in this area , in fact , that we need to build this alliance between the European institutions , by also working honestly and loyally with our Member States to produce concrete results for our fellow citizens .
I believe that in this regard , we have a good foundation for our work in the coming years and , after this debate , I feel encouraged - and I believe that my colleagues do too - by your words of support and , in certain cases , by your demands .
We shall try to prove equal to the task with which you are entrusting us .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Barroso , for your statement .
I would like to say that when it comes to the European Commission 's efforts on behalf of our European Community , the Commission has a huge ally in the European Parliament .
Most Members support these efforts and the view of the Commission that it should take on more responsibility , especially in the crisis situation which we spoke about earlier - it is then that we understand how much we need the European Union and action from the Commission .
The responsibility of the European Parliament has also risen markedly with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and we are pleased about this .
We think that this is good for Europeans - that it is good for our citizens .
Now , we have to accept more responsibility and use the opportunities presented by the treaty .
I would like to assure you once again , Mr Barroso , that you and the European Commission have allies , here , and I speak for the majority of the European Parliament .

Mr President , I just wanted to congratulate the Commission and its President , José Manuel Durão Barroso , on the ambitious , very pro-European programme that he has presented here today , which is clearly in line with the objectives of the Spanish Presidency of the European Union and with the programme of the trio of presidencies made up of Spain , Belgium and Hungary .
I can say that the Council is working with the Commission and also with the European Parliament , which I also congratulate on the constructive speeches made in support of the Commission 's legislative programme .
The Commission has worked very hard .
Everyone knows that the new Commission - known as the Barroso II Commission - should have been in office since 1 November , but , for various reasons , it arrived a few months later , and is working hard to make up for lost time in a constructive , positive way , which the Spanish Presidency is grateful for .
Mr Barroso and all the members of the Commission - vice-presidents and commissioners - are also aware that we are working with the Commission , I think in a very positive way , and we recognise its efforts in this respect .
It is also grateful to the European Parliament .
Whenever there has been a debate here on these issues , the European Parliament has always had a very constructive attitude .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask the European Parliament once again for these legislative initiatives to be adopted - today we are talking primarily about legislative initiatives - and for this to happen as soon as possible so that we can make up for the lost time that I was referring to .
I am sure that we are going to have Parliament 's cooperation as well .
Thank you for your statement on behalf of the Council and your support for the Commission 's programme .
I would like , once again , to thank Mr Barroso , all the Vice-Presidents of the Commission and the Commissioners for their presence .
This testifies to the fact that the Commission places great importance on cooperation with Parliament , which was also as we had hoped .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Commission 's work programme for 2010 is an ambitious and flexible multiannual programme setting out the following main objectives : tackling the crisis and supporting Europe 's social market economy , drawing up a citizens ' agenda which puts people at the heart of Europe 's activities , developing an ambitious and consistent foreign policy agenda with a global dimension and , last but not least , revamping the instruments and working methods used by the European Union .
One key element of the citizens ' agenda is the Stockholm Programme for ' an open and secure Europe serving and protecting the citizens ' , which was adopted by the European Council during its meeting in December 2009 .
I would like to welcome the Commission 's initiative in presenting an action plan for implementing the Stockholm Programme so that we can ensure that European citizens will actually enjoy the benefits of an area of freedom , security and justice .
The programme will mainly focus on the fight against cross-border crime and will consolidate the enforcement of the common policy on immigration and asylum , covering , in particular , areas such as combating organised crime , terrorism and other threats through improving police and judicial cooperation .
Currently , Europe is facing increasing unemployment and almost 17 % of Europe 's inhabitants are living below the poverty line .
Each day , many Europeans , even those in employment , are struggling with poverty and do not have opportunities to enjoy life to the full , as the recession is even pushing many people on middle incomes towards poverty .
Therefore , we must firstly focus particular attention on the problem of poverty facing those in work .
To increase employment , we must create new jobs , not just any jobs , but try to ensure high quality employment , taking into account the demands of the labour market .
Most attention should be paid to increasing youth unemployment , one of society 's most acute problems .
If young people are not given opportunities to enter the labour market , then the danger is that Europe will lose a whole generation of young people .
For some time , Europe 's demographic situation has also been forcing us to consider the employment of older people .
We must provide for labour relations that promote employment and ensure the possibility of life-long learning .
I would like to underline that we should also discuss the employment of disabled people .
It is important to give them the conditions to join the labour market , not just because of demographic changes , but for themselves , to ensure their own sense of dignity and self-worth .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Commission how Europe will create new jobs ?
What are the real chances for people to enter the labour market ?
How can we ensure quality employment so that we can reduce the poverty of those in work ?
The Commission work programme for 2010 consists of 14 pages of the usual commonplaces and platitudes .
It is right that Europe must respond jointly to the crisis .
However , this is a crisis which was only able to have such a negative effect on Europe because of Commission policy and unrestricted liberalisation in all areas .
Nevertheless , no one wants to change anything .
On the contrary , the further removal of trade restrictions which the Commission wants to push through will encourage globalisation , benefit large companies and cause damage to the Member States and their citizens .
The Europe 2020 strategy is intended to be the response to the current crisis .
As far as the specific measures are concerned , the approach to economic and financial policy seems sensible , as does the development of a new European supervision architecture for monitoring the financial markets .
Stricter controls on public finances and budgetary discipline within the Member States will hopefully allow us to avoid problems in future , such as those which we are currently experiencing in Greece .
The Commission 's new tax plans , together with the review of the energy taxation directive , which involves taxing energy products on the basis of their energy content , should be rejected because climate change , which is primarily a natural phenomenon , cannot be resolved simply by focusing on CO2 .
In addition , this will put the European economy under even further pressure compared with its competitors in America and Asia , where no initiatives of this kind are planned .
The Commission work programme for 2010 has established the right priorities .
As well as modernising ways of working , which will be a decisive factor in stimulating the economy , and increasing the involvement of European citizens , the Commission is focusing primarily on combating the financial crisis .
It is important that , in particular , those EU citizens who have lost their jobs during the current crisis are given new prospects for the future as quickly as possible .
As the spokesperson on the environment for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I am concerned that we should create as many sustainable jobs as possible and provide added value on the labour market as a result of the leading role played by Europe in protecting the environment .
In order to make the changeover to a new and sustainable industrial age , we should no longer regard job creation and comprehensive protection for the environment as mutually contradictory .
In my view , the Commission has been somewhat cautious in taking up this approach . We need to be laying the foundations for this now .
We will be able to achieve a great deal if we can improve the way in which existing regulations are applied .
I congratulate Mr Barroso on the ambitious Commission legislative and work programme for 2010 .
Unfortunately , time is running out - there are already only eight months left .
In spite of this , I hope the priorities will not be only empty promises .
The strength of the programme is its measures for combating the crisis .
Unfortunately , these concern mainly the economic situation .
In the section on the citizens ' agenda , there are no anti-discrimination initiatives , such as combating violence against women , greater determination and engagement in achieving social objectives and a long-term strategy for improving communication with the Union 's citizens .
We have been working on the phenomenon of violence against women for years .
It is high time there were effective , European legal regulations in this area .
I would like to see a proposal in the Commission 's programme for a directive on combating violence against women .
As for social objectives , the initiative to create a European Platform against Poverty before the end of this year is important .
Unfortunately , there are no specific details of any kind about this .
They have to be given at the meeting of the Council in June .
On the matter of modernisation of the Union and the instruments of its operation , I would like to call attention to communication with the citizens .
This must be a process , and not electioneering .
There is a communication gap between the EU and its citizens , which we must strive to reduce , and , in the future , to eliminate .
We must give EU citizens the feeling that they are ' at the heart ' of the Union 's activities .
Only then will the results of referendums not be a surprise .
The debate on the Commission 's programme is particularly important because it coincides with the beginning of a new era in the European Union .
The need to adopt measures at this time of crisis that can address the challenges in the long term makes it imperative to prioritise job creation , regulation of the financial markets and stabilisation of the euro , which should restore the confidence of the public , as well as of the economic and social players .
I would like to stress the importance of the cohesion policy in the implementation of the various European policies .
Europe 's regions will only be able to achieve sustainable , integrated growth through a cohesion policy that has visible results and which respects the principle of subsidiarity , and through governance at various levels : national , regional and local .
The objective of economic , social and territorial cohesion must guide the Union 's actions and must be achieved through adequate Community financing , with greater transparency , simplicity and efficiency in the use of the Structural Funds .
It is vital to define the guidelines for cohesion policy and the financial perspective for the post-2013 period .
I would like to draw attention to the situation in the outermost regions , which , because of their permanent structural characteristics , face obstacles that have a serious effect on their economic development and therefore require special measures .
The EU 's primary concern is to combat the economic crisis and support its social market economy .
The EU unemployment rate hit 10 % at the start of the year , with the rate of youth unemployment even reaching 20 % .
The increase in the employment rate is closely linked to the EU 's industrial policy .
What legislative initiatives is the Commission considering regarding the European Union 's future industrial policy and for generating new jobs ?
The European Council , which met on 25 and 26 March 2010 , set for the first time as one of the EU 's targets a 20 % increase in energy efficiency by 2020 .
We did not find this target in the Commission 's programme of work , even though initiatives are required in this area which can be targeted at both European households and businesses .
Furthermore , the Community budget for the transport infrastructure is almost non-existent for the 2010-2013 period , even though the challenges and development needs are enormous : ensuring intermodality between different forms of transport , the development of high-speed railway lines to serve not only all the Member States ' capitals but other large European cities as well , the development of rail freight corridors and the single European sky , along with the modernisation of ports and the development of maritime transport .
When will the Commission table a proposal concerning the necessary funding for the development of the trans-European transport infrastructure ?
Coordination of humanitarian aid and reconstruction in Haiti ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on coordination of humanitarian aid and reconstruction in Haiti .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to express to all the honourable Members in this Chamber great appreciation for the attention this Parliament continues to pay to Haiti .
Before passing the floor to Andris Piebalgs , who will inform you about the reconstruction and development of Haiti , let me outline the four main humanitarian challenges for the months to come and how the European Commission is addressing them .
The first is the continuation of humanitarian assistance and , in particular , shelter , sanitation and health services .
The relocation of the 1.3 million homeless in Port-au-Prince in temporary housing is a very complex undertaking because of practical issues such as land ownership , rubble removal , urban planning and security .
Today , the priority concern are some 10 000 to 30 000 people living in makeshift camps in flood-prone areas .
With the approach of the hurricane season , they have to be urgently relocated .
This is a priority in our programme , as is strengthening camp management skills .
We are paying very close attention to the pre-positioning of relief stocks .
Most of them were completely depleted after the earthquake .
We are now replenishing them and building the capacity of the Haitian civil protection service , which has actually become stronger as a result of the crisis , so that they can make use of them .
Secondly , we have adopted a ' follow the needs ' approach and are providing assistance where people are , in order to prevent further mass movements .
We have made sure that our help reaches the whole of the country and not just Port-au-Prince .
In this way , we have contributed to reducing the pressures in the capital .
Following the same logic , we are also applying a ' whole-of-island ' approach , whether it relates to the issue of Haitian refugees or to the logistics of the delivery of aid , or pre-positioning of relief stocks for the hurricane season .
The Dominican Republic matters also and is not forgotten in our recovery programme .
Thirdly , we are making sure that donor coordination results in building on each other 's comparative advantage .
With many actors in Haiti , this is no trivial challenge , but we have consistently been a very strong voice for UN-led humanitarian coordination .
When I was in Haiti , my impression was that we have actually done quite well - in terms both of the civil protection teams from individual countries and in our own work .
Fourthly , we must ensure the transition from humanitarian relief to recovery and reconstruction .
We are working very closely with Andris Piebalgs to facilitate this transition whenever possible .
I will give you two specific examples .
Firstly , in the food sector , we are encouraging local purchasing of food .
We are asking our partners - even if it is a bit more expensive - to reach out to local farmers to create demand and help them to recover .
That , of course , leads to work on reconstruction .
Secondly , we are also supporting cash-for-work programmes so , again , we can build a transition from relief to recovery .
Last but not least , we are very focused on results .
Europe is number one in terms of volume of aid and it has to be number one in terms of results .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , at the New York International donors ' conference , the European Union pledged EUR 1.235 billion .
We are the largest donor to Haiti 's reconstruction so , in this way , we will also be the largest contributor to the government of Haiti 's action plan for reconstruction .
I am also proud about the manner in which we did it because it was an EU common pledge , which consisted of support from many EU countries , like Spain , France and the wider Community .
But I am also proud that even my country , which has not had too many relations with Haiti , pledged additional funding , not just the funding channelled through the Community budget .
The New York conference took place in a very good spirit .
There was a very strong financial outcome , there was very clear ownership of Haiti 's Government and there were many stakeholders .
Some Members of the European Parliament could see that NGOs , including European NGOs , had a voice there .
EU businesses have also been involved and also interim mechanisms for coordination , proposed under the leadership of Prime Minister Bellerive and Bill Clinton .
As all the stakeholders are included in this mechanism , it gives a guarantee that money will not be wasted or used for other purposes .
It is very important now that we concentrate our aid as quickly as possible .
The Commission and Member States are already preparing a new country strategy paper and a national indicative programme for Haiti .
To support our joint efforts , we will speed up our efforts to set up an EU House in Haiti , which would give greater visibility but will also help involve non-resident donors .
I shall be going to Haiti this week to deliver first-hand concrete support to long-term reconstruction in the areas of infrastructure and governance .
This week , I will sign five financial agreements for a total amount of more than EUR 200 million and I will also inaugurate some of the work we have already done like the rehabilitation of the road between Port-au-Prince and Cape Haitian , which is fully in line with the plan of action of the government and which also supports the ' whole-of-the-island ' approach .
To reinforce the government capacities , I will also inaugurate the reconstruction of the Ministry of the Interior , financed with EU contributions .
I will also inaugurate a school in Mirabelais .
Our particular focus is on education , as President Préval has requested , and we will also announce more budget support delivery .
Delivering budget support is not blind support .
We have taken many precautionary measures and undertaken many visits , so I can guarantee that your money will be used for its purpose .
I will also commit to regulatory monitors for the construction process through regular visits and to speed up aid delivery .
I will keep the European Parliament constantly informed of the progress made on Haiti reconstruction .
I would also like to emphasise that it is not only me but the whole college : Kristalina Georgieva , the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , and also some of my other colleagues who will help oversee the reconstruction , such as Michel Barnier , who will go to Haiti in a couple of months .
It is the ownership not only of the responsible commissioner , but of the whole College .
We also need to discuss with the authorities a couple of issues on how to better deliver our assistance .
Long-term commitment from the international community will not prevail if Haiti quickly slips back to a ' business as usual ' approach .
To prevent this scenario , we must strive to be effective and we have already mentioned some of the ways in which we can achieve this .
But equally , there is great responsibility resting with the authorities and the people of Haiti to build in a better way .
Two aspects stand out , in particular .
On the social front , the government should be encouraged to enter into very close contact with the opposition and also with the whole civil society .
That will build genuine national consensus around the development plan and promote the stability necessary for its implementation .
On the economic side , the macro-economic framework presented in New York must be more rigorous and combined with a clear path towards employment and growth , which will break the cycle of poverty and inequality .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank both Commissioners .
There are three points I want to raise .
The first is the method and measures to be used for measuring the reconstruction needs of Haiti .
The second is to ensure that the commitments we are making will be met , and the third is to talk about property rights and the vulnerability of people living , for example , in shacks built on property they do not own .
First of all , in relation to the reconstruction works , let me say that I recently conducted the launch for the World Bank of a document explaining , in a very well-designed handbook , exactly how reconstruction should take place .
Are we going to use this handbook , or are we going to use similar measures , to ensure that the reconstruction effort in Haiti is professionally carried out ?
The World Bank has done excellent work on this .
The Haitian Ambassador attended when I launched that particular book .
Secondly , in relation to commitments we are making , I am very glad to hear what the Commissioner had to say about the EUR 200 million which he is forwarding almost immediately .
But will we be back here in a year , or in five years , or are we are last going to deliver on donor commitments to a poor country that simply cannot be left on its knees any longer ?
The third point I want to make is this .
The extent of the destruction in Haiti was such that we really have to look not just at the damage done , but at why that damage was so extensive .
People who did not own property were living in ravines and on the sides of mountains , in shacks and in any thing they could put together , because they did not own the property in which they were living .
If people have property rights , they will invest in building and constructing properties that have some chance of resisting future damage of this kind .
So I ask that this point be given active consideration as part of the approach to dealing with this problem .
Again , I thank both Commissioners for their presentation .
The situation in Haiti is far from being stabilised , as both commissioners , Mrs Georgieva , who was in Haiti at the end of March , and Mr Piebalgs have emphasised .
The same statement is also made by the humanitarian workers who are in situ distributing aid and helping with the reconstruction process .
Although the situation in the capital seems to be returning to normal , at least in terms of people 's everyday lives , I believe that efforts now need to be focused on rural areas , which are continuing to experience major problems .
These matters are all the more urgent and even more of a cause of concern as the rainy season is approaching and the state of the transport infrastructures may result in the interruption of the flow of aid intended to meet the population 's daily needs .
The reconstruction efforts are only just getting under way , as you told us .
It is obvious that other problems are going to continue to crop up as well , linked to infrastructures , providing decent living conditions for the population and ensuring that a minimum level of public services , education and health care is operating .
Problems will also crop up associated with having the necessary workforce and the extent of their training .
Another major problem is dealing with children who have been orphaned or separated temporarily from their families , and who are in one of the most vulnerable and dangerous situations for their future .
I believe that we must focus greater attention on this aspect of the humanitarian crisis in Haiti because of the ongoing problems involving the trafficking of children and illegal adoptions .
Last but not least , I would like to say that I am pleased that the task of managing Haiti 's problems remains a priority for the Commission .
I can assure you that the same thing also applies to all the members of the Committee on Development .
Mr President , the approach of the hurricane season in Haiti means that it is vital to maintain the humanitarian efforts and that other emergency measures are likely to be required .
First things first , it is important to provide for sufficiently robust shelters , in sufficient quantities .
This measure is relevant given , first , that rebuilding the destroyed homes takes time and , second , that Haiti 's direct exposure to hurricanes makes one fear the worst , as the recent experience has shown .
Seeking to pull out of the humanitarian effort now would be quite simply irresponsible .
Delaying the reconstruction effort would be equally irresponsible .
In other words , everything must coincide : the humanitarian effort , so that there are no more needless deaths ; the reconstruction effort , to restore as quickly as possible something resembling a normal life ; the recovery of the economy , which is essential in order to generate resources in the long term ; the strengthening of Haiti 's budget capacity in the very short term ; and the firm commitment to decentralisation .
The donors ' conference , which was held at the United Nations on 31 March , was a success .
What will remain of that conference when everything has been forgotten ?
Humanitarian interventions aside , let us first remember the need for a swift revival of the economy , something for which the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund is hoping and praying , since he is counting on an 8 % annual growth capacity over the next five years .
Second , in a similar vein , the revival of the agricultural sector becomes the economic priority .
Today , Haiti needs 80 % of its export earnings to pay for its imported agricultural produce .
Let us remember that , in the past , there were times when Haiti met its own food needs .
Third , Haiti 's development will have to be assessed on the basis of criteria of relevance , effectiveness , efficiency and sustainability .
Fourth , if development is to continue over time , it is absolutely essential for the people of Haiti to take responsibility for it themselves .
Fifth , the earthquake in Haiti once again demonstrates - if proof were needed - the importance of implementing without delay a rapid humanitarian aid system aimed at pooling both the material and the human capabilities of all the Member States of the European Union .
What is stopping the proposals in Mr Barnier 's report from being turned into a reality ?
Lastly , Europe 's significant efforts to help solve the Haitian problem will have been decisive .
My thanks to the High Representative , to Commissioners Piebalgs and Georgieva , and to their Directorates-General , who deserve our gratitude .
( PL ) Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my political group , and also on behalf of our group 's coordinator , Mr Deva .

I would like to stress the extremely important fact that international aid to Haiti at the moment is actually almost three times higher than the Haitian Government and the UN had hoped .
This aid is to total EUR 11.5 billion , and it is worth underlining that the Haitian Government had been hoping for a sum of just under EUR 4 billion over the next two years .
An absolutely fundamental matter is to concentrate on building infrastructure , which , by the way , my colleague Mr Deva emphasised during the last debate .
I would also like to stress an important matter - supervision of this aid .
The government in Haiti is very weak , and distribution of aid is largely in the hands of a diversified and very strange elite , and it is very important that international organisations and the European Union know to whom the money is really going .
Mr President , Commissioners , we must ensure that the promises of donations made at the donors ' conference henceforth materialise as actual funds , and also actually reach their intended recipients .
Of course , I do not believe that this is enough to rebuild Haiti in a lasting way , even though we owe the people of Haiti so much .
The people of Europe themselves have been very generous when it comes to showing solidarity but , unfortunately , there is a great risk of people forgetting or being made to forget the tragedy that our Haitian brothers are suffering .
Yet , as you said , there is a sense of urgency : urgency , because other cyclones may occur and would make people 's living conditions even worse ; urgency , in terms of rebuilding houses and buildings , such as schools and hospitals , at a time when the Haitian Government is beginning to evacuate certain camps ; urgency , in terms of coordinating and distributing food aid and care more effectively ; and urgency , too , in terms of developing a new sustainable agricultural and rural project to ensure Haiti 's food security .


All aid , and the coordination of international aid , must be aimed at ensuring that the people of Haiti have access to fundamental rights .
For example , why not stipulate that all public reconstruction contracts should be dependent on these rights and should contain clauses on employment , housing , education and health ?
One cannot coordinate aid and reconstruction properly without relying on the population itself and on its trade union organisations , non-governmental organisations and farmers ' organisations .
We should encourage the creation of a new project for Haiti aimed at eradicating exclusion , poverty , dependence , and economic and political domination .
Let us never forget that the terrible destitution of the Haitians is not due solely to a terrible earthquake .
It is also the result of the domination and pillaging of Haiti by many countries .
We owe the country a duty of effective solidarity at the same time as respect for its economic and political sovereignty : the economic and political sovereignty of the people of Haiti .
Mr President , shortly after the disaster , an assessment was carried out in order to establish aid priorities .
However , I hear from a reliable source , namely a Dutch NGO , that very little , if any , local expertise was drawn upon .
To me , that seems to be the first prerequisite if we are to gain the support of the local population .
It is therefore imperative that Haitian organisations and authorities are involved in the reconstruction effort .
European NGOs could be of particular service here , thanks to their good local contacts , and I was pleased to hear from both members of the Commission that they are also thinking along these lines .
In other words , we need to mobilise support in Haiti itself .
Another point that I would like to make is that , while the provision of food aid by the US and other countries might seem like a welcome initiative , it has decimated Haiti 's agriculture and food security .
This situation has resulted in Haiti becoming more than 50 % dependent on food imports and in there being no demand for 35 % of the local harvest .
We need to make a significant investment in local agriculture if we are to guarantee food security .
Here , too , from the positions of both members of the Commission , I infer that the Commission is thinking along similar lines and that makes me very optimistic .
Only today I read a whole-page article in Frankfurter Allgemeine about the current situation in Haiti .
It was truly heartbreaking .
I understand that housing and education are the priorities of the European Commission .
Keep working towards that goal .
I wish you every success and , above all , God 's help .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you also to the Commissioners for the common sense they have shown .
A great deal has certainly already been done , but I think I can say , also , that we cannot leave it at that : a very long-term programme - almost a permanent programme , I would say - is more necessary than ever given the apocalyptic conditions in which the country finds itself .
The critical period is probably still not over .
Just as on the first day , people are dying of hunger , thirst and poverty , and more than a million people on the island are still homeless and will shortly have to cope with the rainy and hurricane season .
What should be done , then ?
As the Commissioner has already said , coordination should be increased between the institutions and it should be linked to a more productive relationship with non-governmental organisations , especially those which , by operating on the ground , can get the best out of Haiti 's citizens , can empower them .
We must all be aware that being the point of reference for Haiti and its people in a way means making them understand that we want to see the value and the dignity of every single person restored and , for them , this means seeing their hopes of happiness restored amid the huge suffering caused by the earthquake .
( ES ) Mr President , commissioners , I would first like to express my condolences and thanks to the families and colleagues of the four Spanish soldiers who died last week in Haiti .
They were specialist officers from the Spanish army , but they went there as simple soldiers as part of the international aid effort and were doing aid work when their helicopter crashed .
Their example shows that in the majority of cases , there is no contradiction between security and humanitarian action .
Moreover , without security , it is difficult to maintain independence and neutrality in humanitarian work .
This is an acknowledgement we have to give to the armed forces of many European countries , including Spain .
Mr President , commissioners , Haiti has demonstrated that poverty severely aggravates the damage done by natural disasters , and also that a lack of governability hinders the possibility of an effective response .
Normally , poverty and a lack of governability go hand in hand , and this was and is the case in Haiti , which means that , as well as supporting the reconstruction process , we need to support governability in Haiti , because it is the only way that we will be able to achieve the objective that we set ourselves in New York : that Haiti itself should lead its reconstruction and that its civil society should participate in this .
( FR ) Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate the two Commissioners responsible for these matters on their speeches and on their constant concern to be extremely responsive .
So , congratulations !
The earthquake in Haiti has resulted in a surge of solidarity and fraternity on an exceptional and very justified scale .
I also applaud the courage and the efforts of the Haitian people , of the Haitian authorities , of civil society , of NGOs , of the Haitian diaspora and , of course , of the donors throughout the world .
The structural and institutional weaknesses in Haiti are well known , and this disaster has obviously revealed the tragic extent of those weaknesses .
In New York , on 31 March , the donors made it clear that their financial aid would contribute to the Haitian reconstruction and development plan .
The principle of appropriation is thus established so that the people of Haiti can once again have confidence in their institutions , which is an urgent requirement .
The donors ' assistance must clearly be well coordinated and of a high quality .
As President Préval says , reconstruction must be carried out more effectively .
This must be done , it seems , by creating , among other things , an interim commission for the reconstruction of Haiti and by establishing a multi-donor trust fund to oversee the donors ' generous contributions .
More effective reconstruction also means stronger governance and institutions based on the rule of law , and decentralisation , which are key elements of the redevelopment and reconstruction plan .
I hope , Commissioners , that you will , of course , take account of this approach , and needless to say , I am sure that you will .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , at this very moment , hundreds of thousands of people are still living in emergency camps and , with the rainy season and the hurricane season approaching , the situation really is urgent .
Faced with the countless humanitarian actors on the ground and in the absence of state capacity , every possible resource must be employed to improve the coordination of aid under the auspices of the United Nations , and to deliver aid consistently and effectively .
I travelled to New York for the international donors ' conference on 31 March , and I welcome the European Union 's contribution of EUR 1.3 billion towards Haiti 's reconstruction over the next three years .
For the first time , the European Union spoke with one voice through Baroness Ashton .
True , a substantial aid package has been pledged by the international community , but the difficulties now relate to the proper use of these funds and to decisions in relation to the methods of implementing the aid and the bodies involved , given that the main actors in this reconstruction process must be the people of Haiti .
The agricultural sector has to be a priority , and we must strengthen the country 's agricultural production capacities .
The European Parliament will monitor the reconstruction process and the use of these funds very closely , and I would point out how important it is to consider , at last , the creation of the civil protection force , for which we have been waiting so long .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioners , the humanitarian crisis in Haiti highlighted and , unfortunately , continues to highlight the problems with the European mechanisms for responding to international humanitarian crises .
We need to create fixed funding mechanisms .
In essence , we still do not have fixed headings in the European budget for financial assistance to third countries and the aid for Haiti was mainly given by European countries at bilateral level .
Aid needs to arrive immediately and , in the case of the people hit by the earthquake in Haiti , the aid had still not arrived a week later .
European resources need to be used efficiently .
We need to have specialist staff who can design and implement humanitarian aid programmes quickly and efficiently .
Obviously , an earthquake caused the disaster in Haiti .
However , similar humanitarian crises may well be caused by other weather phenomena , such as typhoons , tropical storms , floods and droughts , phenomena which will increase considerably in frequency and intensity in the wake of climate change .
We all know that climate change is a phenomenon which we , the developed countries , have caused ; unfortunately , however , it is often the poor countries that feel the impact .
We have a climate debt towards vulnerable countries and we must learn from our mistakes in dealing with the crisis in Haiti so that we can respond to our increasing global obligations in future .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioners Georgieva and Piebalgs , after the enormous tragedy in Haiti , we need to look to the future , as you have both noted .
The donor conference in New York a fortnight ago raised EUR 7 billion or , at least , that was the amount which was pledged .
On the basis of the Haitian Government 's action plan , the EU has pledged EUR 1.6 billion .
My question to you both now is : how will this now translate into lasting and stable reconstruction of the island ?
This will be a long process , in my view .
My second question to you both is : what is your assessment of the Haitian Government 's action plan and can you ensure that the significant funds that have been pledged will be used effectively ?
After all , the Haitians do not just have short-term needs , but long-term needs as well .
How can we further intensify support efforts for the 1.3 billion homeless and ensure that the infrastructure can be rebuilt in the medium term ?
This is important , not just for the population that has been affected , but also for the political stability of this island , whose government is incredibly fragile at the moment .
You have confirmed that yourselves .
It is the people 's perception that the aid is not reaching the places where it is needed .
How can we ensure that the political situation in this country and the approach of its government improve ?
I would like to ask you how you see the input , in terms of both human beings and financial means , to this Interim Haiti Recovery Commission chaired by Bill Clinton ?
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Striffler for raising this matter at today 's sitting , and Mrs Georgieva and Mr Piebalgs for their statements .
I think many of the measures proposed in the resolution on Haiti which we adopted in February are a step in the right direction and can be the basis for rebuilding a country struck by disaster .
These measures have two basic stages , and we are talking about these two stages today .
The first phase is about short- and medium-term crisis relief to help people with the most urgent needs , and Mrs Georgieva spoke about this .
The second phase concerns permanent reconstruction , which needs to be coordinated , and assessment of the needs of this reconstruction , while , at the same time , never losing sight of the fact that the owner of the process must be the people and the government of Haiti .
Thank you very much , Mr Piebalgs , for seeing that responsibility must also be borne by the Haitians .
The third stage is something only for us .
I mean the conclusions which should be drawn so that our aid is better coordinated , and I am glad that the Commission is working on this .
( FR ) Mr President , Europe has contributed millions of euro , tents , food , soldiers and doctors .
That is all well and good , but actually I would like to quote Jean-Yves Jason , mayor of Port-au-Prince , who , in February , used the word ' disaster ' , not to refer to the consequences of the earthquake , but to describe the complete and utter disorganisation of the humanitarian work that followed .
We should be asking ourselves the following question : how can we prevent a repeat of this disorganisation , which has cost Haiti dear ?
There is one answer to that question , Mr President , Commissioners , and it is one that we all know , that has been said here : by creating a European civil protection force .
I shall ask you again : when will the Commission finally decide to propose to Parliament the creation , specifically , of a force of this kind , one single force having the same rules of engagement , and identical command , transport and communication systems ?
It is possible .
It can be set up quickly before the next disaster .
I call on you now to stop talking about coordination and to act .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am satisfied with the outcome of the meeting of the donor countries because the large sums made available are an excellent result .
Even more important , however , was the guiding principle behind the use of the funds , namely not just to build back , but to build back better .
Haiti must emerge from this crisis stronger and with public buildings and private dwellings that are more advanced than the ones that existed before the earthquake wiped them out .
We must not think that the reconstruction will spell the return of the shantytowns or of socio-economic conditions such as those that existed before .
As such , money is certainly needed , but the substantial resources made available by the national and European institutions being only a first step , there is also a need for a long-term plan and for strong , authoritative coordination .
To this end , having also criticised in this House certain initial delays whereby Europe , in the context of its foreign policy representation , displayed neither exceptional efficiency nor exceptional spontaneity , today , we welcome instead the excellent work that our institutions are doing in the area of coordination , and hope that , on the basis of this position and of this commitment , the efforts will continue with a long-term plan that can be brought to fruition through the authoritative presence of our institutions .
( SK ) The earthquake in Haiti was immediately followed by international humanitarian assistance .
In addition to the American and Canadian military , I must also applaud the rapid and efficient deployment of groups from Slovakia and the international Military Order of Malta .
Not many countries provided rapid and effective aid .
Today , following the initial assessments of Professor MUDr .
Krčmér , an expert and a doctor who understands humanitarian assistance , it must be stated that many people and significant financial resources arrived from Europe but without the necessary equipment , machinery , food , water and fuel needed for effective intervention when rescuing victims from beneath fallen trees .
Not even the experience of several rescue groups was sufficient .
Good intentions also require a practical side in order to be effective .
I therefore call on the competent national and European institutions to put in place as quickly as possible a joint humanitarian assistance service , as we requested in the resolution on Haiti .
In addition to this , I consider it very important to support training in humanitarian assistance , and to have the necessary materials and equipment prepared in the eventuality of a natural disaster .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioners for their presentation and for all the effort they are putting into the Haiti case .
I also agree that it will be good to focus on the whole island .
Even if I am very critical about the whole of the Union approach , I might very well agree with your ' whole-of-the-island ' approach .
I also urge you not to forget the future commitments that we need to make .
We need to stick to the pledges we are making now .
If we see that the Member States are not so strict in keeping their 0.7 % pledges , you really have to be strong on this and make sure they come forward with their plans .
We also have to make sure that we do not make obsolete the progress that we are now making in Haiti by having other EU policies in place which will actually prevent progress from happening in Haiti and elsewhere .
We really have to stick to policy coherence so that we do not have success in Haiti only to have all our progress ruined because of other harmful policies .
( FI ) Mr President , the EU has helped Haiti , which is a good thing , but this disaster has clearly shown , in my opinion , that the EU must have rapid reaction groups for humanitarian action , and that we must develop civilian crisis management .
It is not enough to give money ; the EU should also be able to take rapid action in this kind of catastrophic situation , to provide assistance and send people over there .
People must receive concrete help , and not just after a long period of time .
While this help is certainly important , the EU is currently lacking the capacity for local help and rapid help .
I hope that people will focus their attention on this matter and that rapid action groups will be established .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , with your permission , I shall leave a bit of time for Mr Piebalgs to take on some of the long-term reconstruction questions .
This has been very useful and very encouraging for us .
Before I turn to the questions , let me join Mr Guerrero Salom in expressing sympathy to the families of the four Spanish soldiers who died , and also all those who lost their lives during the disaster and now in the recovery efforts in Haiti .
I would like to start with the bigger policy issue , on the EU improving its response capabilities .
I was very pleased to see my colleague , Commissioner Barnier , in the room because of the effort he has put into this topic .
On 26 April , we will have a chance in the Development Committee to discuss in more detail the work programme , which includes , for 2010 , strengthening the response capacity and a communication on this topic .
I can assure you that this is a very high priority for our team .
We will work very closely with Member States and with Parliament to come up with a solution that improves our capacity to respond to disasters , and there is a very simple logic behind it .
At a time when the intensity and frequency of disasters are increasing and the budgets of our countries are going to be tight for years to come , there is no other way but to strengthen European coordination and to build an asset base that can be deployed effectively in terms of impact , cost and results .
I can tell you that tomorrow , we are going to our first country visit on this topic .
This is going to be a very high priority for our team in the coming months .
Let me turn to four questions that have been posed .
The first is on the question of combining a response to immediate priorities with long-term reconstruction and our staying power .
This is really important because if we move too quickly to reconstruction , away from support for people in need , we risk a very serious tragedy .
We had to deal with this in the issue of food delivery where the government of Haiti suggested that we shift away from food provision to only cash-for-work and food-for-work , which is highly desirable but cannot be done everywhere at the same time .
This is something we are watching very closely .
Broadly , on the issue of food security , our new policy in the European Union is very progressive because it emphasises all other things equally , encouraging local purchase of food for humanitarian aid whenever it is possible to get it locally .
We have made this topic subject to a discussion in a morning session in New York where we invited NGOs , Haitian as well as international NGOs , and I was very proud that it was the European NGOs that put these issues of agricultural security for Haiti and high agricultural return in productivity for the discussion in Haiti .
I want to address the issue of shelter .
It is not at all a trivial issue because people actually do not want to move from where they are now .
They do not want to move for a variety of reasons .
One , even if their houses are safe , they are afraid to go back because of the trauma they experienced .
Two , because they moved as whole neighbourhoods and they are scared of losing the social fabric that keeps them together , so it is not just bad policy or lack of desire ; it is also the social phenomenon that follows a disaster of this nature that makes it not so easy to get people to move from flood-prone areas to safer ground .
But we are addressing this as a priority .
Let me finish with the question of long-term sustainability .
It is governance sustainability , it is also ecological sustainability .
I had the dubious privilege to fly over Haiti and Chile , within a couple of weeks of each other .
In Haiti , an ecologically destroyed island , of course it had implications for the scale of this destruction .
In Chile , the government has implemented for decades a reafforestation programme stabilising the soil and , as a result , creating a better environment , which is obviously very helpful for people .
We are thinking in the long term when we think of Chile .
This is not in my area but I have to pick it up as a former World Bank employee .
I certainly agree with you that what the World Bank is proposing about this coordination in the multi-donor trust fund , but also as an institutional project management approach , is something that we need to take to heart and follow .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as usual , if I had just one wish in my political life , it would be to have more time in Parliament to answer the questions I am asked .
I will not be able to answer all the questions put today , but I will go through some of them .
The support of Parliament is very important for the Commission , because Haiti is not a case to which only the Commission is devoting attention .
It felt that the whole of European society wished that the European Community make reconstruction a major effort .
It is like a textbook : an assessment was made at international level , the governments made plans , these were discussed with NGOs , there were various endorsements and there is an interim commission coordinating the whole process .
We are definitely not creating anything parallel .
We are working on the same bases and on well-prepared ground .
Regarding the commitment on the EU side , we have made a political commitment and we will deliver .
I believe that the same is also very true for other participants .
We are working on property rights .
That is one of the risk elements .
We have a land cadastre and we will work on it , but there could be risks .
The risks could definitely come from ownership of the political process .
The reconstruction effort can be sustained if there is a political process supporting the long-term development of Haiti and if people believe in it .
This is where the big challenge comes , and all we can do is to support the Haitian people and Haiti 's political society in this .
I believe that this can be put in place and could be successful .
Regarding the transparency of the process , the whole international donor structure has been established in a very clear and streamlined way with a lot of transparency .
All the EU processes are definitely transparent and will give a full assurance that money will be spent not only for the purpose , but also well and efficiently .
Lastly , I believe that we should not underestimate the people working on the ground - from the Member States , the Community , and also the broader international community .
I would also like to express my condolences to the families of those people who have died helping Haiti reconstruct .
There are many more people still working and trying to do their best .
They are the guarantee that , if the process is well organised , it will be successful .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.10 and resumed at 15.05 )

Written statements ( Rule 149 )
It is now time for us to carry out an interim review of the aid effort in Haiti .
The main questions that we need to ask ourselves are as follows : How quickly and effectively was and is the aid being provided ?
Does the aid support sustainable development in Haiti ?
How was the entire aid effort coordinated ?
How was the EU represented in foreign policy terms ?
I am particularly interested in the last two questions , because the devastating earthquake was the first test faced by the High Representative Baroness Ashton .
The purpose of the office of High Representative is to strengthen the EU 's role as a global player .
However , Baroness Ashton did not think it was worth travelling to Haiti shortly after the earthquake to provide symbolic support , nor was she able to ensure that the aid provided to Haiti was coordinated effectively .
Some Member States launched individual aid campaigns and others acted jointly .
Baroness Ashton should have been responsible for ensuring better coordination .
In addition , the government of Haiti has not been sufficiently involved .
The High Representative should now at last be realising what her job is all about .
She should be making constructive proposals for structuring humanitarian and financial aid following major disasters .
There is a great deal of development work to be done over the next few months and this also applies to Baroness Ashton .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have gathered here today to discuss European coordination of aid for Haiti .
Meanwhile , international commentators are criticising our uncoordinated action .
Three months have already passed since the tragic earthquake , and it would appear we are still unable to work out a common position on support for Haiti .
In January , we listened to many speeches about the role of the Union in the international scene , but it is a disgrace to see how weakly and indecisively the Union has acted up till now .
The allocation by the European Union of EUR 1.2 billion for aid to Haiti is worthy of praise .
World donors have declared that they will give USD 5.3 billion for the reconstruction of Haiti over two years .
In the longer term , the value of their aid is to rise to USD 9.9 billion .
These are very optimistic sums .
The cataclysm in Haiti has , however , made me stop and think about a country which , actually , collapsed a long time ago .
The earthquake was a natural disaster , but the present extent of poverty in Haiti is the result of economic , political and social collapse .
The collapse and violence in Haiti in recent years are the result of brutal relations with the outside world - with certain states and international concerns - which go back for hundreds of years .
International society has let Haiti down .
Let us do more to make up for this now .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Questions on any subject on behalf of political groups .
Then the second part of the sitting - questions on the employment situation in the European Union .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Centre for European Studies , the problems suffered by Greece , the Europe 2020 strategy and the search for answers to the financial and economic crisis all clearly indicate to us that in taking the necessary measures , we will soon reach the limits of what is possible under the existing treaties .
On the other hand , many Member States are taking refuge in a new form of intergovernmentalism , nationalism and protectionism , instead of looking towards Europe .
What do you plan to do to overcome these problems , to establish the necessary common objectives and to create credible European instruments , so that we are able to act effectively and provide the right answers ?
President of the Commission . - It is true that , quite surprisingly , some national politicians are making an intergovernmental reading of the Lisbon Treaty .
The Lisbon Treaty was agreed precisely to increase the European dimension ; to reinforce the powers of the European Parliament ; to make it easier to take decisions by qualified majority voting ; and to reinforce the role of the Commission in economic surveillance and external affairs .
This reading is therefore quite surprising , but it is indeed happening .
The role of the Commission is , of course , to be the guardian of the treaties , in accordance with Article 117 of the Lisbon Treaty , to protect European law and to be firm about the respect of European law , because the day the European Union is no longer a Community of law , it will no longer be a real Union .
Secondly , its role is to promote initiatives and to take the lead in initiatives .
To that end , it will do its job in trying to come forward with proposals which I hope will have the backing of this Parliament .
In my political guidelines , I mentioned the special relationship with Parliament , and I really intend to make that a reality .
Mr Rehn proposed a package in Madrid which has not yet been adopted , but which involved a discussion of sanctions right at the beginning of the debate .
In my opinion , we should not start our discussions with sanctions on the Member States , because that would be putting the cart before the horse .
Instead we should establish the common objectives , common projects and common instruments that we need in addition to what is already in place and only then should we consider sanctions for behaviour that shows a lack of solidarity .
What is your view on this approach ?
President of the Commission . - As you said , Mr Karas , there is no decision yet .
There was a first debate with the Finance Ministers and , in fact , the Commission will present a communication next month on reinforced economic governance .
We aim to reinforce the preventive and corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact .
We will make proposals for a more effective and broader surveillance of intra-euro area macro-economic imbalances and we will explore the options for the creation of a crisis resolution mechanism , but we will concentrate on substance .
We believe it is possible , with the current treaties , to do much more in terms of surveillance of the euro area and of the economic and monetary union if there is indeed a willingness on the part of the Member States to cooperate and respect the treaties .
Article 125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is the so-called no bail out clause , in other words , the ban on Member States of the EU taking on the debts of other Member States .
What is your view of the fact that the aid package put together for Greece will now result in countries such as the Federal Republic of Germany , for example , lending money to the Greek state for three years at an interest rate of 5 % while borrowing it themselves on a three-year commitment at 1.5 % ?
Given an estimated total of EUR 8.4 billion , that makes a profit of EUR 620 million .
Does the no bail out clause not also include the requirement that , if one Member State cannot take over the debts of another Member State , it also cannot earn any money from the debts of another Member State ?
Are you prepared to discuss with the German Government or with other governments what seems to me to be a completely unacceptable mechanism ?
President of the Commission . - It is true , Mr Schulz , that the Lisbon Treaty does not allow the so-called ' bail out ' of Member States .
The solution found so far - which has not yet been activated because it has not yet been requested - is , according to the Commission , fully in line with the treaty .
I want to underline this .
I know a debate is going on in some circles in Germany - and indeed in some other Member States , but in particular in Germany - and I want to say that it is simply wrong that what we have been contemplating is some kind of bail out .
It is not .
It is a coordination of loans .
The Commission will have this responsibility .
The IMF will also be in the scheme which , I have to say , is a creative one .
It is a solution that was possible only after extensive discussions with our Member States , but it is fully in line with the treaties and , of course , it respects the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty .
Let me conclude on a political note to say that I find it quite extraordinary that it was so difficult to find a solution of solidarity for Greece when one could be found for Latvia , Hungary and Romania .
If we can find those solutions of solidarity and responsibility outside the euro area , I think it is quite obvious that we should also find them in the euro area .

Mr Barroso , I understand that you are attempting to avoid answering my question , because it is an unpleasant one .
Therefore , I will repeat it .
There is at least a possibility that Member States which can borrow money on better terms than those on which they are lending it will be able to profit from the debts of another country .
As the no bail out clause states that Member States cannot take on the debts of others , they should not be allowed to profit from those debts either .
Are you prepared to say openly to Mrs Merkel or Mr Sarkozy , for example , or to anyone else that you are opposed to this course of action ?
President of the Commission . - I have been speaking about this matter with those leaders and others for many weeks , so I can tell you very frankly , Mr Schulz , that unfortunately , the only solution possible was this one .
The Commission had asked from the beginning for a more concrete signal of solidarity with Greece , of course , always respecting the principle of responsibility .
But what we have to do now is to ensure that Greece can be encouraged to return to market financing as soon as possible and , in fact , the solution found was one where the euro area Member States ' loans will be granted at non-concessional interest rates .
The pricing for loans by the IMF was considered an appropriate benchmark for setting euro area Member States ' bilateral loan conditions , albeit with some adjustments which were agreed on 11 April .
Mr President , President of the Commission , first of all , as far as the no bail out clause is concerned , the treaty does not say that .
The treaty says that a Member State cannot be forced to take on debts .
The treaty does not say that it is forbidden to take on debts .
This must be made clear , or else it just becomes a cacophony about the treaty .
I repeat : the treaty clearly states that a Member State cannot be forced to take on debts .
Therefore , everything concocted with regard to Greece involves things that are possible under the treaty and that can be enforced .
My question is slightly different .
Interest rates on Greek loans have risen again to 7.6 % , in other words 450 base points above the German rate .
Other measures are therefore needed , and I am thinking about very significant fundamental reforms : a European Monetary Fund , a European bond market , a more ambitious 2020 strategy .
Commission President , my question is this : at what point are you considering placing a package with reforms of this kind , including the reforms that Mr Rehn has already embarked on , on the Council 's table ?
For this is what is needed now , to present an ambitious package of reforms alongside the specific measure for Greece .


Firstly , Mr Verhofstadt , and also in response to Mr Schulz , let us be absolutely clear and honest with ourselves : if there are questions that you want to ask Mrs Merkel , you must ask them .
I am not here to reply on behalf of Mrs Merkel .
I am here to reply on behalf of the Commission .
Let us be clear about that .
Let us also be clear from the point of view of the Commission .
The solution that has been found scrupulously respects what is known as the no bail out clause .
Naturally , we have been very cautious on that point .
As far as the measures that we are going to take are concerned , the communication and the proposals on which we are going to work will be presented next month .
I want to talk about the communication regarding strengthened governance of the euro area .
A policy debate has already taken place and Mr Rehn has received a mandate from the Commission with a view to an initial discussion with the finance ministers .
I can therefore tell you that , some time in May , you will know the thrust of the measures we shall be presenting for the future to help strengthen governance in the euro area , and in the European Union generally .
Mr President , may I ask the Commission President whether the European Monetary Fund idea will form part of this proposal ?
Mr President , to give a concrete answer on that point , I can tell you that our position tends to go against the idea of creating a new institution within the context of economic and monetary union .
From my own perspective at least , I am not sure that this is a good idea , but I can tell you - personally speaking , since the College has not yet decided - that the idea of a facility for ensuring financial stability in the euro area seems a good one to me .
I might add that we are in the process of exploring different ways of providing for and strengthening insurance mechanisms such as those responding to the concerns that gave rise to the European Monetary Fund idea .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , I would have liked a Commission President who simply says to ask Germany to lend at the rate at which it has to borrow , which is 3 % .
You could at least say so publicly .
That would form part of the debate in Germany , but you are incapable of saying these simple things .
I would like to ask another question about ACTA .
You have been negotiating the ACTA Agreement against piracy and counterfeiting since 2008 .
In March , a European Parliament resolution told you to scale down the ACTA negotiations on counterfeiting .
Tomorrow , you are going to publish for us - thank you , we have been waiting a year for it - the assessment of the debates and a text adopted at the end of the New Zealand Summit .
You know that Parliament will have to say ' yes ' or ' no ' at the end of these negotiations .
Would it not make more sense to have Parliament participate more visibly , thereby ensuring some transparency with regard to the negotiations ?
Otherwise , you are going to find yourself in the same situation with Parliament as you experienced with SWIFT .
I would therefore ask you from now on to demonstrate greater transparency and to let us have the texts of the negotiations , just as you let large companies have them .
Parliament is every bit as important as a large company .

Mr President , Mr Cohn-Bendit , there is no doubt about that , and I have the greatest respect for Parliament .
I might add that is why the Commission , and more specifically , Mr De Gucht , obtained permission , from our partners in these negotiations , to make public all the texts from the negotiations .
As you know , they are going to be made public tomorrow , 21 April .
You are no doubt also aware that these negotiations began before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and we also wish to involve Parliament closely in these negotiations .
New powers exist for Parliament in the area of international negotiations , and the Commission is in favour of Parliament playing a greater role in such negotiations .


Mr President , Mr Barroso , let us avoid playing with words : whether or not you asked for it , unless you make transparency public , you cannot continue with the negotiations , given that you have the Treaty of Lisbon .
The issue is therefore not that you asked your partners to publish the reports for Parliament ; you have to do so , because otherwise , Parliament will never say ' yes ' to you , because you are now bound by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , therefore , you are now obliged to be transparent with Parliament , because in the end , you have to have a ' yes ' from Parliament , and that is not a certainty , given the state of the negotiations and of the text with which we are dealing .
You spoke about the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am very much in favour of the European Parliament 's role being strengthened in this area as well , and the text to be made public tomorrow , for which we had to obtain permission from our negotiating partners , is the text of the negotiations , the draft negotiation text .
We shall do it .
You are no doubt aware that some international negotiations are more sensitive and require a cautious approach for certain areas , but we want as far as possible to involve Parliament , to which the Treaty of Lisbon has rightly granted powers in the area of international negotiations .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - In March , the European Commission announced it would conduct another review of the Working Time Directive , after the previous review fell .
It was Parliament 's insistence on scrapping the national opt-outs from the directive which led to the stalemate .
As we will all recall , UK Labour MEPs in the pockets of their trade unions voted to scrap the UK 's opt-out , despite instructions to the contrary from their own government .
Now that we have a further review and considering that many EU countries want their workers to have the choice to work more flexible hours , can President Barroso confirm that this Commission will propose a directive that respects national opt-outs from the 48-hour working week ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I do not yet have a draft legislative proposal in my pocket .
It is too early , at this stage , to have fixed ideas about the substance of any changes .
As you know , there is a consultation paper that is deliberately open in tone .
I also want to hear the social partners ' views .
The new rules should protect workers from the health and safety risks of excessively long working hours and insufficient rest .
They should also be flexible enough to allow for the conciliation of work and family life and to promote the competitiveness of companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
I think we have to have a solution for that , Mr Kirkhope , quite frankly because , as you know , there are cases before the Court of Justice that oblige us to find a solution .
So we will try to find a broad-based support for a new proposal and avoid the long discussions that marked the last attempt to revise the directive .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - I understand that President Barroso does not want to prejudge the outcome of the Commission 's consultation .
However , there are a number of people in the EU - not least the three million people in the UK who currently take advantage of the opt-out - who will be looking for a commitment from him that , during an economic downturn , his Commission does not want to make it harder for people to work .
I am afraid that Commissioner Andor did not give us that assurance at the time of his confirmation hearing , but I trust that President Barroso will now .

President of the Commission . - You are very kind , Mr Kirkhope , but apart from Britain , there are , in fact , also 26 other Member States in the European Union , so you will understand that while we are very receptive to the concerns you have expressed , I also have to listen to other legitimate concerns .
This is a very difficult issue and an extremely sensitive one .
We have to find the right balance between the flexibility you are highlighting for small and medium-sized companies and the protection of workers which I am sure you are also in favour of .
That is what we are going to do .
That is why we are appealing to the social partners also to come forward with a constructive proposal .

Mr Barroso , you have spoken about your work programme and it has been discussed in Parliament .
You have said that you want to follow up on the critical remarks .
I have one question .
Recently , we have spoken a great deal about the crisis and how to overcome it .
However , I have the impression that very little has changed in the way the banks do business .
I would also be interested to hear the answer to another question .
Do you think that we and the Commission have done enough ?
If not , what do you believe it is still necessary to do in order to combat the causes of the financial crisis in the longer term , so that the banks cannot go on doing business in the way they currently are ?
President of the Commission . - Just today , in the work programme , we have presented our action in the financial sector .
We have done a big part of it , but another important part remains to be done .
I think the Commission proposals were the right ones .
In fact , I regret that , in some cases , the level of ambition has been reduced by Member States , for instance , regarding the supervisory framework that is now being considered by you in Parliament , and we will come forward with some proposals - there is a complete list that I have presented today to Parliament - in the near future .
But I think there are some specific things , to be more concrete , that we can do .
For instance , I am supporting the idea of a bank levy .
I think that should be a matter for the G20 .
I think it is fair that the banking industry , after all the problems it has created to the overall economic situation , also gives a contribution for the future of our economies .
So , as always , it is a question of balance .
We do not want to undermine what is a very important sector in our economies - the financial sector - but we believe that some more measures are important to restore confidence in the financial sector .
Mr Barroso , I have another brief question .
The chair of Deutsche Bank , Dr Ackermann , is a difficult man to make an impression on .
He has recently said outright that he wants to make returns of 25 % .
Do you not think that this flies in the face of the measures taken by the Commission and the individual governments ?
He is not changing anything .
He has said that he wants to make returns of 25 % once again .
This is what Dr Ackermann , the chair of Deutsche Bank , which is an extremely important bank , is saying .
President of the Commission . - I am sorry , I did not follow the statements by the Chairman of Deutsche Bank , and I cannot comment on something I am not aware of .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Because the financial crisis was a credit crisis and a banking crisis that took place and emanated from the large commercial banks - the Royal Bank of Scotland , IKB , Fortis and the like - do you accept that the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive , as well as being highly damaging to the UK , is a misdirected and misguided regulatory initiative on the part of the Commission that aims entirely at the wrong target ?
President of the Commission . - Absolutely not .
I think it is a very good initiative that aims precisely to restore some confidence in what is a very important sector of our financial markets .
I think it is in the interests of the financial sector to have credibility .
Let us be honest and open about it .
There is now a problem of credibility in the financial sector and it had its origin in , let us say , irresponsible behaviour of some major players in that sector , not only in Britain , as you said , but in other countries in Europe , apart from the situation that originated in the United States .
We need a proper level of regulation .
We believe that the regulation we have put forward is the appropriate balance and it does not aim at creating difficulties for the financial sector .
On the contrary : it aims at building trust .
The financial sector needs this kind of credibility to finance the economy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - How will the AIFM Directive , aimed at alternative investment fund managers , restore confidence in the financial sector when the problem is with the big commercial banks ?
That is my question .
President of the Commission . - I am sorry but I do not agree the problem is only with the big banks .
In fact , the problem created in the United States was not created by big banks only .
It was also created by non-commercial banks , by investment societies , by hedge funds as well .
So we do not agree with that analysis that it was created by big banks .
In fact , some of the big traditional commercial banks were not responsible for the crisis .
There were many kinds of players that have some kind of responsibility for the mess , let us state it very clearly , that was created in the financial sector .
We believe that an appropriate level of regulation is the best way to address the issue both for banks and for other kinds of instruments or operators in the market .
Mr President , the European External Action Service will be responsible to the High Representative .
The role of the High Representative , according to Article 18 , is to conduct the European Union 's common foreign and security policy , as mandated by the Council .
The Council , for all its faults , at least contains representatives of Member States .
However , influential voices among the political groups in this Parliament are arguing for the Commission to play a much more decisive part in the service .
In particular , it is argued that the Commission should provide at least 50 % of the staff of the External Action Service and that the service should not be subject to influence from intergovernmentalism .
I apologise for that word .
It is not mine but I see it as a code for the Council and the European Council .
Furthermore , of course , the High Representative is an ex officio Vice-President of the Commission .
All this seems to point to the likelihood that , in reality , the EU 's foreign policy will be run by the Commission and the idea that it is run by the High Representative , with a mandate from the Council , would be legal fiction .
Would you agree ?
President of the Commission . - I do not agree .
We are not there .
In fact , as you know , the creation of the institutional position of High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission is one of the most important innovations of the Lisbon Treaty and the idea is to put together what typically we call intergovernmental competences and Community competences .
For the common foreign and security policy , it will remain basically intergovernmental : it is the prerogative of the Member States .
But there are other Community competences that should not go now to the intergovernmental arm .
It should be kept , of course , in the Community method .
So the High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission is , as we say , usually double-hatted .
She will have to put together , using the best of the synergies , those two competences .
So there will be , of course , competences that she will be able to develop inside the Commission , as Vice-President of the Commission , but working also hand-in-hand with the Member States and with the Council .
I think that is the contribution to have more coherent and consistent external relations of the European Union , to reinforce the defence of our interests and promote our values in the world .
I can see the internal consistency of what you are saying as a Euro-integrationalist , which I am not .
But , in fact , what you are suggesting is that we should actually go beyond the Lisbon Treaty , which is bad enough , and almost cut out the Council which , as I say , for all its faults , at least contains representatives of nation states .
President of the Commission . - I could never suggest that the Commission go against the treaties , because it is its duty to ensure that the treaties are respected .
What I am really asking Member States to do is to respect the treaty , and all the institutions have to respect the treaty .
The treaty strikes a balance and that balance has to be respected .
It represents progress compared to the past , where we had completely different institutions to deal with what is , in fact , a very important common interest - namely the defence of European values in the world .
I consider it possible , in full respect of the treaty , to achieve exactly what the treaty aims to achieve .
That can be done in a spirit of good cooperation between all institutions and in full respect , of course , of our Member States .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I come from the south of Italy and in our region , the economy is based on small and medium-sized enterprises , on the textile , clothing and footwear manufacturing industries , and on agriculture .
Today , this type of industry is in serious difficulty because of the influx of goods from China and the Asian markets .
To produce a shoe in our region , in southern Italy , costs EUR 13 .
The cost of the finished product from China is EUR 5.50 .
A baby grow produced by us costs EUR 4-5 , whereas one from China costs EUR 1 .
Entrepreneurs are relocating in order to survive or are closing down , and when they close down , thousands of jobs are lost , and this also causes a consumption crisis and an impoverishment of the region .
Whenever I meet entrepreneurs , they ask me : ' What is stopping you from imposing customs duties , from imposing taxes ? '
For in China , there is low-cost production because children from the age of 12 work 10 hours a day with no social security benefits , no insurance and no health care rights .
I know that protectionist measures are undesirable , but what is the answer ?
Mr Barroso , when I meet entrepreneurs , what do I tell them that Europe is doing to combat an irreversible crisis in which so many businesses are failing , so many jobs are going up in smoke and entire regions of Europe , including the poorest regions , the south of Italy , are going through a serious and irreversible crisis ?
I would like to be able to offer some answers , Mr Barroso , and I would like to hear them from you .
President of the Commission . - I understand your concern and it is a very legitimate concern , and I would like to say a word about the small and medium-sized companies , which in fact are , as you know , the most important driver for job creation in Europe .
Now , how can you respond to this problem of competition coming from other parts of the world which have lower standards , both in labour and in environment ?
I think the solution is certainly not to close our borders , because the European Union is by far the biggest exporter in the world .
So the solution is to promote decent work and upgrading of social standards all over the world .
That is a matter which we have been pushing inside the G20 ; that is a matter that we have been pushing with the International Labour Organisation , and that is a part of our dialogue with other partners .
But I really think it is not a solution - unless there is dumping - to act via anti-dumping instruments , nor is it a solution to close our borders to other very important trade partners of Europe .
That will be self-defeating for us .
( EL ) Mr President , to pick up on the references made earlier to the handling of the Greek problem , all of us who are closely following developments in and the handling of these problems realise , and many of us have the feeling , that the Council has elbowed the Commission aside .
The Commission was , from the beginning I think , a balancing factor for the medium-sized and smaller Member States of the Union towards the Council .
Today , I think that its role in the issues faced by Greece , but not just Greece , is confined to action and statements of a technocratic nature .
My specific question is this : we are talking about the economy , about monetary union with more acute supranational elements .
We are also talking about the ambitious Europe 2020 strategy being prepared by the Commission and we are talking about combating unemployment and poverty .
How , when the Commission does not have the role that befits it , will it be possible to implement these ambitious strategies ?
President of the Commission . - The issue of employment , as you know , is dependent on the overall economic situation .
Let us be completely clear about it .
We cannot restore the levels of employment that we had before the crisis before we come back to more growth in Europe .
That is why we are concentrating our efforts on the new sources of growth and , in fact , trying to restore this growth that is critically important for the European Union .
That is our priority now .
That said , there were some measures that were taken specifically for employment .
We have some proposals in our EU 2020 strategy for new skills , for new jobs , for programmes for youth , but the basic thing is to restore the conditions for growth , including confidence in our economy .
When it comes to the Greek situation , as you know , a lot has to do with the confidence also in the future of the Greek economy .
That is why it is so much dependent on the correction of some fiscal imbalances .
( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , the employment situation in Europe is very worrying , as my fellow Members have just pointed out .
In 2009 , 2.7 million people in the euro area lost their jobs .
Furthermore , the poverty risk rate for the population with a job has risen to 8 % of workers in Europe , not to mention the fact that nearly 17 % of the population live below the poverty threshold .
Faced with this situation , do you not think that a two-pronged strategy ought to be implemented ?
On the one hand , by reinforcing decent work - it would have been worth including this issue , rather than employment strictly for growth 's sake , in the 2020 strategy ; moreover , are you counting on promoting the creation of green , intelligent jobs to develop a sustainable , united society ? - and , on the other , by increasing the overall employment rate in Europe , with particular emphasis on jobs for young people - you talked about this - but also for the over-fifties .
In this regard , the increase in requests made to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the restructuring in various sectors highlight the need to develop a global industrial policy .
All the issues you have raised are dealt with in the 2020 strategy , Mr Daerden .
I already talked about decent work in my political guidelines , just as I talked about the existence of a genuine industrial policy for Europe - not the old industrial policy , but a policy aimed at providing Europe with sustainable industry , a more modern , sustainability-focused policy .
As far as young people are concerned , at least two of the flagship initiatives are devoted to them , that is to say , the ' Youth on the move ' and the ' New skills for new jobs ' initiatives .
We have highlighted a number of objectives , for example , in relation to education , the fight against poverty and the campaign for social inclusion .
This aspect appears in the 2020 strategy , precisely because we consider that the fight against unemployment is now the main priority .
I believe that the development of this strategy will enable us to achieve significant results in the fight against unemployment .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , over the last few years , unemployment has increased throughout all the countries of Europe - albeit in different forms from one country to the next - and is destined to increase further .
Economists all agree that it will take at least two years for the tentative signs of recovery that are evident here and there to become the norm and that , in any case , for at least 10 years , the recovery will be so limited that it will not create any additional employment .
This means that we will have a rise in unemployment , with job losses among those who are today in employment , and , at the same time , we will have generations of young people who are not and will not be able to enter the labour market .
I ask you whether you do not think it is necessary , faced with such a situation , to promote a measure aimed at guaranteeing a standard income in Europe for all those who lose their jobs , and to regard the issue of young people as a kind of emergency and , hence , to come up with a specific training-related measure that will benefit them , for the entire time in which they remain outside the labour market .
President of the Commission . - You are basically right in your analysis regarding the situation in the labour market .
In fact , the situation is continuing to deteriorate , even if it is at a more moderate pace than in the past .
We are also starting to see more consistent signs of stabilisation in some Member States .
But it has been nine months since the economy started to recover from deep recession and it may take some time this year before the fragile pick-up in economic activity has an impact on reversing the trend in the labour market .
That is why our priority is now employment .
For young people , unemployment is particularly worrying , as you said .
We have more than 20 % of young people unemployed in Europe .
That is why we have launched three initiatives for this year .
Two of them I have already mentioned .
There is also the Youth Employment Initiative .
Among the specific initiatives that we are going to develop is precisely the step-up of vocational training through more apprenticeship schemes , financed by the European Social Fund and also fostering high-quality learning experience in the workplace after graduation , the so-called traineeships , including the possibility of traineeships in other Member States .
Last week , the European Climate Foundation launched its ' Roadmap 2050 ' .
This plan shows three pathways by which the European Union could cut its CO2 emissions by 80 per cent by 2050 , in line with our Kyoto aspirations .
We could do it at little more than the cost of business as usual .
We could become almost entirely self-sufficient in energy resources and we would see a significant net job creation through the decarbonisation of our economy .
But it can only be done at European level .
Will the Commission embrace this roadmap ?
Will it endeavour to give the European Union a new élan in proposing the necessary policy measures ?
Given the opportunities for job creation , will you , President Barroso , use the idea to galvanise the Member States into the necessary action ?
President of the Commission . - I am aware of that report of the European Climate Foundation and , indeed , under the 2020 strategy , we have proposed a resource-efficient Europe flagship initiative whose aim is precisely to decouple growth from resources , giving Europe a competitive advantage compared to other international partners .
This objective was also fully translated in the Commission 's working programme for 2010 and beyond .
It is the Commission 's intention to develop a path for Europe 's transition to a low-carbon , resource-efficient and climate-change resilient economy by 2050 , particularly through the decarbonisation of the energy and transport sectors , thus providing a long-term framework for policy and investment .
I underline the word investment .
We believe that the climate agenda can also be , as the renewable energy sector is showing , a way of creating more jobs in Europe , what we usually call ' green jobs ' .
Several recent announcements of new IT tools , like Google Books or iPad , would facilitate access to cultural content in digital format , notably the so-called ' e-books ' .
However , most of these initiatives come from the US .
What is the Commission doing to promote digitisation of our cultural heritage on the European continent ?
President of the Commission . - The European Digital Library , addressing the challenge of putting online the collections of our national libraries , museums and their archives , this is a major task of our times digitising , making available , preserving the wealth of our culture .
Yet we have to do it without jeopardising the rights of authors and publishers , including out-of-print works and for so-called ' orphan ' works .
We also have to assess whether our financial efforts and the public-private partnerships that are being experienced here and there are up to this very important societal challenge .
In this perspective , I have asked Vice-President Kroes and Commissioner Vassiliou to set up a comité des sages .
I am happy to announce today to you that Mr Maurice Lavie , Mrs Elizabeth Nigerman and Mr Jacques Decare will be entrusted with this task .
As a comité des sages , they will promote this idea of keeping our very important heritage through digitisation , in full respect of course of the property rights .
I look forward to receiving their recommendations on these important issues by the end of this year .

( PL ) Mr Barroso , I would like to know what , in your opinion , will be the effect on employment in the aviation sector of the airspace closures which have lasted for several days now ?
Today , on the front page of the influential newspaper , the Financial Times , it says the closures , which have affected nearly 7 million passengers and have caused the cancellation of 80 000 flights , have brought losses to the aviation industry of USD 200 million a day .
In your opinion , how will this affect employment in this sector ? - because I understand this was the main reason for your absence , and the absence of Mr Van Rompuy , during the funeral of the President of Poland in Krakow .
President of the Commission . - First of all , regarding the issue of the funeral , I want to keep it completely separate from the rest .
I had a great respect for President Kaczyński .
I worked in a very loyal manner with him .
I did everything to be present at his funeral .
I was present at all the ceremonies that I could attend marking the deaths of President Kaczyński , his wife and all those that were killed in that tragic accident .
I really do not understand how it is possible to make this kind of criticism against the European institutions , by using the death of so many people .
I was trying to go to the funeral of President Kaczyński until the very last moment .
The problem is that only on Saturday , very late in the evening , I received the information that the flight that was organised by the Belgian authorities was cancelled .
It was no longer possible for me to go .
So I want to make it absolutely clear that I have done everything I could to pay tribute , not only to the people who died in the tragic accident , but to Poland as a nation .
Regarding the issue , if I may now use the other minute to answer the question on the aviation sector , we are aware of the very important impact on industry of this volcanic problem and that is why we are already doing our work to see how we can in fact help , if needed , the European aviation industry .
They are suffering severe economic losses , which are caused by not being allowed to carry out their commercial activities for several days .
It is necessary to look for a global solution to help the industry out of the crisis and , in fact , we have a precedent , which was the crisis after 11 September .
So we are looking at possible ways in terms of alleviation of the State aid rules , as we have done in the past .
We discussed this in the college meeting today .

( EL ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , according to official statistics , unemployment in the European Union fluctuated between 8 and 9 % between 2000 and 2006 , to the glory of the Lisbon Strategy , which talked of full employment .
The Commission states in a recent report that unemployment will reach and go beyond 10 % in 2010 , a ' social volcano ' , to use the language of the moment .
In addition , in a series of countries applying austerity programmes , such as Ireland and Greece , as well as in countries such as Romania , Hungary and Latvia , where the International Monetary Fund has become involved , unemployment has soared to record levels .
In light of this , I ask you : has the Commission studied the repercussions of these austerity policies , which you push for and pressure countries into following in order to get out of the crisis ?
Have you studied the repercussions on employment and on the economy of a country in which the International Monetary Fund is involved ?
Do you believe that unemployment will fall in Europe as a result of these policies ?
President of the Commission . - We are not forcing anyone to take any measures .
Regarding Greece , decisions were taken by the Greek authorities , but you will certainly understand that this situation of macro-economic imbalances in the Greek economy is very negative for growth and also for employment .
It is clear that without a restoration of confidence in Greece 's public finances , there will be no investment or growth in Greece .
Without growth , we cannot generate employment .
That is why we should not set macro-economic stability and rigour in contradiction or opposition to growth .
The problem is to see how we can manage a transition , how we can keep stimulus in the economies that have the margin to do it , and , at the same time , respect the necessary balances of macro-economic stability .
That is why it is in the interests of the Greek economy and of Greek workers for Greece 's public finances to have credibility as soon as possible .
( DE ) My question refers to the volcanic eruption which will , of course , have an impact on particulate matter and CO2 emissions .
Do you believe that it is possible to evaluate what levels of particulate matter should be taken into account in future in order to prevent jobs being put at risk ?
Our air quality directives provide for significant restrictions in this respect .
President of the Commission . - This volcano problem is certainly beyond the control of the European institutions or the national governments .
It happened and now we have to react to its consequences .
Regarding the aviation industry , we have already said that we are looking at what we can do , also based on the precedent that was already there after 11 September .
Regarding the economic situation , I think it is too soon to make an overall assessment of the damage caused , and it is probably better to avoid very dramatic - or let us say , panic - scenarios .
What we believe is important now is to address the damage and to try to see what we can do at European level , bearing in mind one important thing - at European level we are responsible for one per cent of the public budget .
The other 99 % is in the hands of the Member States .
So I think it is unfair to look to the European Union to try to solve all the problems , where we do not have the means to do so .

( PL ) Mr Barroso , in the 2020 strategy , you have presented very ambitious rates of increase of employment , from 63 % to 76 % , and a reduction in unemployment among early school leavers to 10 % , but also an emphasis on education , which is the key to development , so that in the future , 40 % of European citizens will have completed tertiary education .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the following question : will the European Social Fund , as well as funds designated for research and development , be maintained in the future European Union budget ?
For this is , in fact , the key to an emphasis on modern methods , innovation and increasing employment .
Do you not think that we should also emphasise the development of micro-entities ?
For this is the best way to encourage self-employment , and rates of self-employment are still too low today .
Hence , in this context , these questions would appear to be justified .
President of the Commission . - Yes , you know we have proposed education as one of the targets in the EU2020 , including fighting against early school leaving and having more tertiary education .
We believe it is impossible to discuss European competitiveness without addressing the issue of education .
That is why we are trying to convince all Member States to accept that target and , certainly , afterwards there has to be a mobilisation of resources , some from Member States and some from the European Union .
We have to discuss afterwards the Financial Perspective .
We are not yet there but , certainly , I think some actions should also be taken at European level , complementing the efforts made by the national governments .
Indeed , in the Social Fund , we already have some actions for young people for apprenticeships and for traineeships .
This is our intention .
We cannot anticipate what funds will be available for the Social Fund but , certainly , we believe that we should have adequate ambition at the European instruments ' level .
( DE ) Yesterday , the media told us that the Opel plant in Antwerp will close .
This is just one of many examples of jobs being lost in Europe .
Next Thursday , the European industrial trade unions will be holding a day of demonstrations throughout Europe .
They are calling for jobs and the future of Europe as an industrial base to be safeguarded .
The trade union members want full employment , but they also want effective European policies and definitive answers today , not in five years ' time .
Your work programme does not provide very definitive information in this respect .
You have just referred to the guidelines and the Europe 2020 position paper .
In my view , this is not specific enough .
You should provide examples .
What do you plan to do to re-establish our strategically important industrial sectors in Europe and what role is the Commission playing in making the automotive industry future-proof and in safeguarding jobs ?
President of the Commission . - The employment guidelines are very much dependent on the overall economic growth , but we intend to reinforce the employment aspect in our EU 2020 strategy .
In fact , we have four guidelines : increasing labour market participation and reducing structural unemployment , developing a skilled workforce , promoting job quality and lifelong learning , improving the performance of the education systems and increasing the participation in socio-education , as well as combating poverty and social exclusion .
These are general guidelines that now have to be pursued by the European institutions with all the instruments they have at their disposal , and by national governments .
It is true that there is no silver bullet , there is no magical solution or panacea for unemployment in Europe .
It has to come also from the overall measures taken for growth in terms of respect for financial stability , in terms of confidence in our markets , in terms of tapping the potential of the internal market .
That is the only way to do it .
When it comes to the automobile industry , of course we know that there was over-capacity not only in Europe but in the world , and we are following this very closely with the industry itself , including with the trade unions in the sector .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , unemployment and exclusion among young people are a big problem .
As you have said , 20 % of young people are unemployed .
The problem is also that while many people are now being laid off , a large proportion of those laid off are over 50 .
At the same time , however , people in some Member States are saying that we must lengthen the period of time spent working , that we must raise the retirement age , and people are also saying that we need more workers from overseas .
This would therefore require a large amount of labour migration .
In my opinion , there is something of a contradiction here .
I would like to ask : if people want to lengthen the period of time spent working , then why are over-50s not being offered the opportunity to continue working ; why are they instead being laid off ?
Why are we not creating opportunities for our young people , but instead telling them that we need labour migration from overseas ?
What is the European strategy on this issue ?
Can we not bring about such a strategy ?
I believe that we are all of the opinion that talented young people should be found work , and that they should not be excluded .
Our society will always pay a big price for exclusion .
President of the Commission . - I want to win this competitiveness battle globally .
One thing is sure : we need more people , working more and longer - and I would add , better , in a more competitive way .
There is no contradiction between having longer working lives and having some immigration to Europe .
In fact , it is quite extraordinary , but today , there are almost one million job vacancies in Germany and almost half a million in the UK .
This shows that there is a problem of mismatch between the supply and demand for labour .
There is a lot to do in this area .
I believe that pension reforms are also a way of contributing to that .
I want to underline that , during this crisis , Member States did not resort to the traditional policy of having people leave the workforce earlier .
They have not done so .
In fact , it has been possible to keep people in work for longer .
This is important because , for Europe to remain competitive , we need to raise the employment rate in Europe .

( PL ) Mr Barroso , you said in your speech , today , that a priority for the Commission in its employment policy is , among other things , to help graduates and young people be effective in entering the labour market .
We know the unemployment rate in this social group is currently very high .
In Spain , it is currently almost 40 % , while in Poland it is 20 % and is , unfortunately , rising all the time .
I think one problem is that the subjects taught do not match the needs of the labour market , and also there is poor access to initial work experience .
In your opinion , can we speak of the low effectiveness of the Leonardo da Vinci programme in the area of education and vocational training ?
How do you assess the programme ?
Is the European Commission preparing new measures and , if so , what are they , in order to tackle the rising unemployment among young people ?
What can you offer and propose today , Mr Barroso , to the young people of Europe ?
President of the Commission . - Youth unemployment is the most dramatic problem now in terms of unemployment in Europe because it is more than 20 % .
That is why we have announced three concrete initiatives : ' Youth on the move ' , ' Youth employment ' and ' New skills for new jobs ' .
' Youth on the move ' to improve efficiency and equity of European education and training systems ; ' Youth employment ' to look at ways to overcome the impact of the crisis on young people and ' New skills for new jobs ' to better match skills and labour supply with demand .
I have just highlighted the situation in two of the largest Member States in Europe because , by 2020 , 16 million more jobs will require high qualifications and , for example , the European Social Fund will spend EUR 13.5 million , between 2007 and 2013 , in promoting adaptability measures for workers and enterprises .
So there are some measures that we can take at European level , Community level , to complement the action of our Member States regarding the problem of youth unemployment .
( DE ) Mr Barroso , I have to disagree with you .
You said that Europe 2020 included measures to exploit the potential for the creation of green jobs in the European Union .
That is not true .
You have simply failed to include this in the strategy and I am wondering why .
It is obvious that if you want to generate employment , the greening of the economy is a significant opportunity for job creation .
Why does this not form part of Europe 2020 ?
What is the Commission planning to do to exploit the job creation potential of a sustainable economy in Europe to the full , in particular , given that the European Council President has included this as an important point in his concept , because he believes that it offers a major opportunity ?
What is the Commission intending to do ?
President of the Commission . - I have to remind you that it was the Commission that launched the climate change and energy package and that we have highlighted the great potential for the creation of jobs in some sectors of the so-called greening of the economy and that , certainly , the priority for the future is such , one of the most important targets of the EU 2020 .
We have put at the centre of the EU 2020 our climate and energy targets , from 20 % reduction of greenhouse gases , to 20 % renewables and to 20 % gains in energy efficiency .
For instance , to have this target of 20 % renewables , we are going to create jobs throughout the renewables sector .
So it is certainly the central piece of our economic strategy for the future and , in fact , we have put that as one of the core objectives .
Growth , not only smart growth and equitable growth , but also sustainable growth .
( FI ) Mr President , a lot has been said here about young people , which is only right .
There is another group of people that are being affected very severely by this employment crisis , and that is women .
That is , at the moment , when national economies are going into debt and the Member States are cutting their budgets , these budget cuts are often aimed at areas such as health care and education in which women work .
I would also ask , Mr Barroso , what will you say and what do you intend to do to those Member States which are cutting human resources , education and health care , despite the fact that the 2020 strategy says we must invest in these areas ?
Given that , at the moment , the mood music in the Member States is ' cut , cut , cut ' , and not ' invest , invest , invest in people ' , what do you intend to do to these Member States ?
President of the Commission . - For women , it had risen to 9.3 % by February 2010 , compared with 9.8 % for men , so lower than for men .
It is true though , as you said , that in the future , female employment may give cause for more concern , as some of the sectors which will be most affected by the upcoming fiscal tightening are precisely those more dependent on women 's jobs .
What we have to do is to ask Member States to reflect this in their policies and not to accept that women be disadvantaged in this transition .
We believe that the target rate for employment - and we have also discussed this with the Member States in the European Council - should be aimed at promoting the employment both of men and of women .
In fact , in some Member States , there is great potential for this .
There are some Member States where the employment rate for women is still very much lower than for men .
President Barroso , thank you for your answers and for being present during Question Hour here at the European Parliament .
I think it was interesting .
Thank you , colleagues , for being active during the last hour .
We will also meet next month during Question Hour with President Barroso .
The EU strategy for relations with Latin America ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the EU strategy for relations with Latin America .
Madam President , High Representative , I would like to say that the report , as adopted by the committee , on the one hand , acknowledges the efforts made by the Spanish Presidency of the European Union - which I do not see in this Chamber , which surprises me given that we are talking about a Latin American matter - and , on the other hand , welcomes the Commission communication entitled ' The European Union and Latin America : Global Players in Partnership ' .
I think it is difficult to find two regions that have more in common in terms of values and interests than Europe and Latin America .
The figures , Madam President , are very well known : together , they have more than a billion citizens , account for more than 25 % of global gross domestic product and , along with the Caribbean countries , include almost one third of the countries that make up the United Nations .
It is also well known , although the figures show a slight decline , that the European Union is the main donor of development aid , the main investor in the region and the second largest trading partner in Latin America , and the largest in Mercosur and Chile .
However , more importantly than the figures , we consider Latin America to be more than a market for Europe , and we therefore share a whole series of principles and values , which are pluralist and representative democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , freedom of expression , the constitutional state , the rule of law , respect for due process and the rejection of all forms of dictatorship and authoritarian rule .
This summit , Mrs Ashton , comes at a very remarkable time in the calendar for the European Union and Latin America .
It is a remarkable time for the European Union , because having gone through the reform process , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we are a little engrossed in overcoming and contemplating our own problems , with the economic and monetary crisis .
We have seen that , for the first time , the International Monetary Fund is not having to rescue a Latin American country , but a European Member State that is part of the Monetary Union .
When we look at the European Union 's growth rates for last year , we see that , on average , we had a negative growth of 5 % , while Latin America had a negative growth of 1.8 % .
When we look at the forecasts for growth for next year , we see that the European Union is expected to have an average growth of 0.7 % , and Latin America of 5 % .
This means that the next summit is not going to be a North-South summit , like the previous summits , but a summit between equals .
In that respect , I think that we should look back , if only briefly , and feel satisfied at what has been achieved in the last few years .
It is clear , however , that a great deal still remains to be done .
In that respect , Mrs Ashton , between 2000 and 2010 , the European Union concluded association agreements with Mexico and Chile , but the United States concluded agreements with the whole of Central America , with Colombia and Peru , and also with various Mercosur countries .
We therefore need to make up for lost time quickly , and in some way seek strategic partnerships with Mexico and Chile , apply the future developments clause in these agreements , and conclude the agreements with Central America , where we need to introduce greater measures of generosity .
At the same time , Parliament welcomes the initiatives that you have put forward to establish the Europe-Latin America Foundation and also the financial investment facility .
This summit is not , however , just another summit , Mrs Ashton .
At this one , a very clear issue is going to be at stake .
If we continue to lose our share of trade with the region , which has declined from 25 % to just over 15 % because of countries such as China , we are going to become irrelevant .
Therefore , in line with the Spanish Presidency , I ask you , as High Representative and a Vice-President of the Commission , to send out a clear and very definite message regarding the commitment of this new Europe that we are building towards our old friends in Latin America .
Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , Honourable Members , I am pleased to be back at the European Parliament and I am looking forward very much to this debate on relations with Latin America .
I would like to begin by thanking Mr Salafranca for his excellent report .
I think it illustrates very well the convergence of views between our two institutions on the importance of - and , as he has rightly said , the prospects for - the European Union 's partnership in this region .
I welcome very much the commitment of Parliament to strengthen relations with Latin America , including through the interparliamentary dialogues .
Our joint efforts are central to developing a consistent policy and a strong presence in the region .
I agree that the upcoming summit is a good opportunity to reiterate our commitment to the region and our determination to deepen the partnership .
As the report rightly points out , the partnership has been a success .
Today , the EU is Latin America 's second-largest trading partner and the biggest investor in the region .
We are expanding our cooperation beyond economic issues to cover key strategic issues - climate change , non-proliferation , tackling drugs , the promotion of peace and security worldwide .
With this in mind , the Commission last year set out its strategy for Latin America in the communication called ' The European Union and Latin America : Global Players in Partnership ' .
Our main conclusions were to step up the regional dialogue and support regional integration , to strengthen bilateral relationships - taking into account the diversity of the region - and to adapt cooperation programmes to make them focused and results-oriented .
I am pleased we have taken a number of initiatives since then .
We have worked very closely with Brazil and Mexico on Strategic Partnerships and with Chile on the Association for Development and Innovation .
With Peru and Colombia , we have completed negotiations on a multi-party trade agreement and we expect to complete negotiations for an association agreement with Central America in the near future and are working to resume negotiations with Mercosur .
We have intensified our policy dialogues on a range of issues - sustainable development , migration and the fight against illicit drugs .
These are important negotiations and dialogues .
They strengthen our relationship .
There is also much that we can do in practice on regional integration .
It is very important that the combined weight of the EU and Latin America is able to focus on priority areas .
With regard to the summit , I agree very much that this is an important occasion .
We want to have an action plan that covers cooperation on key issues - science , technology and innovation , environment , climate change and so on .
Secondly , we want to acknowledge the progress that has been made with the various subregions and strengthen bilateral partnerships .
Thirdly , as Mr Salafranca said , we want to launch the Investment Fund and to establish the EU-Latin America and Caribbean Foundation .
We are working hard to strengthen those relationships between the European Union and Latin America in what is , of course , a fast-changing world and where we can maximise the potential that we have .
I am very keen to hear views from Members of this House and to respond to any questions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , against a backdrop of financial , social and environmental crisis , the European Union has a role to play , a role of cooperation for development , ahead of the Madrid Summit .
As the official champion of human rights and development aid , it must take up its many challenges in Latin America .
Let us remember that the EU is the biggest donor , having pledged nearly EUR 3 billion in 10 years .
The Committee on Development is delighted by the Commission 's pledge to ensure that the Millennium Development Goals are respected , especially with regard to education .
I am also delighted to find in the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' report recognition of feminicide and the prioritising of the fight against climate change .
All the same , I regret the absence of concrete measures and of a genuine development strategy .
After Copenhagen , the Committee on Development had called on the EU to take notice of innovative projects in Latin America , such as those presented at the Cochabamba Summit this week or the Yasuni ITT project in Ecuador .
Respect for the political , social , environmental and cultural rights of indigenous populations must be at the heart of our transatlantic relations .
We have also emphasised observance of the ILO conventions that are flouted in Colombia .
The minimum environmental and social standards must be respected .
Finally , we regret the absence of any reference to public services , water and health in the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' report .
Personally , I do not believe in the proliferation of study organisations with a ridiculous budget that do not allow for genuine dialogue with civil society .
I do not believe in the usefulness of creating more budget headings that cut into the development aid lines for the sake of unclear objectives .
I do not believe in any agreement of which the priority might not be respect for human rights and the environment .
The aim of the EU-Latin American partnership is not just to protect commercial profits .
The free trade agreements with Peru and Colombia are a very poor counterexample .
Our duty is to encourage regional integration and to oppose any signed agreement that would weaken such integration .
It is our responsibility to defend , above all , human rights and respect for the environment in all our external relations .
Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that we must see Latin America as a hugely important trade partner .
We believe that negotiations should be reopened for the agreement between the European Union and Mercosur , which affects 700 million people and will be the most ambitious bi-regional agreement in the world .
We also believe that negotiations concerning the agreement between the European Union and Central America should be concluded before the Madrid Summit , which is to be held in May .
We also need to develop the association agreements with Mexico and Chile , which have been a real success .
We must therefore express our satisfaction at the conclusion of the free trade agreement with Colombia , which is going to be very beneficial both to Europe and to the Latin American country .
We believe that Parliament 's job now is to ratify these agreements in due time and to ensure that no country in the Andean Community that wishes to conclude an agreement is excluded .
We , of course , also believe that free trade agreements can and should also be a useful tool for promoting the development of citizens ' rights and freedoms .
Lastly , we believe that the path to follow in the future is , on the one hand , to develop the European Union 's agreements with the various countries and regional groups and , on the other , to promote inter-regional integration agreements within Latin America itself .

Madam President , Mrs Ashton , first of all , allow me to congratulate Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on the very successful outcome of his report .
You are aware that the May summit is an excellent opportunity for driving forward relations between the two parties .
The Spanish Presidency is to be congratulated on the work it has done in this regard .
Nevertheless , I think that what is important is for the relationship to continue to be promoted and strengthened after that Presidency has ended .
You have a great deal to do in this respect , Mrs Ashton , because there is no other region in the world that has a greater historical , cultural and institutional affinity with Europe than Latin America .
There is all the more reason to promote the relationship if we consider that , due to the desire of the Latin American people themselves , but also due to Europe 's consistent support of democratic institutions , those institutions have achieved a high level of consolidation .
This report , to which I think I can say my group made a satisfactory contribution , is a good message to send to the May summit in Madrid , and I hope that it will contribute to the results of that summit , and help highlight the fact that it is essential to move forward in the strategic relationship between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean .
We , of course , support the adoption of the Latin America Investment Facility and the creation of the Europe-Latin America and Caribbean Foundation with a view to the summit .
In addition , although we are aware of the difficulties experienced in recent years , we hope that the Madrid Summit can give a definitive boost to the negotiations with Mercosur .
We also welcome the significant step forward of concluding the negotiations on the multi-party agreement with Peru and Colombia , and we trust that , when the time comes , a good , intelligent formula can be shaped that will allow for the desired incorporation of Ecuador , and that we will also leave the doors open , always open , to Bolivia .
Finally , how can we not celebrate the more than probable and welcome conclusion of the agreement with Central America , and the now accepted incorporation of Panama into that agreement and into those negotiations ?
I will conclude , Madam President , by saying that of course , all of this must be considered within the framework of what the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament considers to be the basic socio-political philosophy in this area .
That means supporting the various integration processes in Latin America , demanding respect for human rights and taking an inclusive , development approach , while always committing to keeping dialogue channels open despite any difficulties that might arise and to deepening our links with our strategic partners in order to achieve progress on these objectives .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I first of all wish to express my delight at the huge contribution made by Mr Salafranca to the development of relations between the European Union and Latin America and at the exceptional role he has played in compiling this report .
The strategic partnership between the European Union and Latin America for the period up to 2015 will develop against the backdrop of ' Agenda 2020 ' , the global agreement drafted to combat climate change and promote our aspirations for creating a green , environmentally friendly economy .
This is why I want to stress that Latin America is a strategic partner with which Europe must extend its economic and cultural influence even further .
Particularly during the current global financial crisis , this partnership can be of paramount importance and open up greater opportunities for commercial , scientific and technological exchanges , enabling us to emerge from this crisis in stronger , more stable positions .
Madam President , I would like to speak in Spanish , at least for the first part of my speech .
I would also like to acknowledge the process that has taken place in the negotiations since Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra 's report was first tabled and what we have achieved now .
I think it has been a good process , as you have accepted several of our positions , although I must say that obviously , if the report were written by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , it would be different , but that is the way things go in Parliament .
You said , Mr Salafranca , that you wanted to see the relationship between the European Union and Latin America as a relationship between equals , and I must say that I like this idea , but the problem is establishing who these equals are : are they the governments , which are also different , or are they the people , who are asking for more information , or for more rights - as in the case of women - or for poverty to be tackled ?
That is something that needs to be defined , and which I think is still somewhat missing from this report .
I do , however , admit that we have succeeded in some aspects .
I am also happy that the Verts / ALE Group has succeeded in including the cultural rights of indigenous peoples , a proposal that came from the Committee on Development .
The issue of feminicides , a very serious aspect of violence against women , has also been included , as has the ruling of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights .
I think that these are major steps forward .
There is also climate change , which does affect the populations on both continents equally , for example , with what is happening with the glaciers .
On one aspect , there is a difference between what the Verts / ALE Group wanted and what other groups wanted , which is that we are not in favour of continuing with the association agreements as we have done so far .
We would prefer to have an agreement with the whole of the Andean Community , a broad agreement , and not only an agreement with Colombia and Peru .
I would like to end with a specific question to Mrs Ashton :
I will continue in English .
This is a concrete question to you , High Representative , and one that unfortunately we were not able to include in the report .
Will you speak out against mega-projects like the dam at Del Monte on the River Shingu in Brazil , which is being planned at the moment , and which will destroy swathes of living space for the indigenous peoples and is also not the best solution in terms of energy consumption ?
There is a protest under way in Brazil , in which hundreds of civil society organisations are participating .
There are also legal proceedings under way in Brazil .
I would like to know from you what the Commission , and what you as High Representative , are doing in order to preserve the environment in the Amazon area for the peoples living there , and for all of us on this planet .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , High Representative , I congratulate Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on an excellent report on the EU 's strategic relationship and partnership with Latin America .
After the 2004 enlargement to central and eastern European countries , the EU has understandably refocused the CFSP towards the east , i.e. Russia , Central Asia and China , but nevertheless , trade between Latin America and the EU continues to grow rapidly .
So this largely democratic region with whom we have much in common must not be forgotten .
Later this year , Brazil will mark another stage in its emergence as a world economic and political giant when the country holds a presidential election and President da Silva steps down after his maximum two terms .
Brazil , along with Mexico , is now designated as an EU strategic partner .
Colombia is also a promising example of how democracy can truly flourish in Latin America and it is now negotiating an FTA with the EU .
It , too , will hold a presidential election and its people will undoubtedly miss the visionary leadership of Álvaro Uribe .
In contrast , Venezuela is led by a populist demagogue , Hugo Chávez , who has shown scant regard for democracy and freedom of expression .
Bolivia and Ecuador have also shown worrying signs of following the disreputable example of Chávez and Castro 's Cuba .
Finally , it is deeply regrettable that President Kirchner in Argentina has chosen to divert attention away from domestic politics and her poor performance as president by employing bellicose language over the Falkland Islands , whose inhabitants wish to remain British .

With regard to Mr Salafranca 's valuable report on the EU strategy for relations with Latin America , I would like to request that the Council and the Commission , who are both now represented in the person of Baroness Ashton , take urgent action on three issues .
My first point is that we need to demand the full cooperation of the Latin American countries , in particular , of Brazil , as rotating members of the Security Council , in all international attempts to bring the conflict with Iran over nuclear arms to a peaceful resolution .
So , we need genuine cooperation and support in that .
My second point is that we need to demand the full cooperation of the Latin American countries in the continued fight against Islamic terrorist networks .
This applies , in particular , to Venezuela , because Hezbollah is not exactly just sitting there minding its own business , and neither is Iran .
My third point is that we need to demand the full cooperation of the Latin American countries in the fight against the global evil of anti-Semitism .
Again , one person causing great concern in this respect is President Chávez of Venezuela , but unfortunately , he is not the only one .
Recently , the Stephen Roth Institute published a report which highlights several somewhat unpleasant aspects of this issue .
Finally , last week , the European press maintained a voluble silence as regards China 's growing influence in Latin America .
Does this mean the European Union will , on occasions , be caught in the middle between these two strategic partners of Brussels ?
( FR ) Madam President , Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra 's report contains many interesting things .
It is very comprehensive .
Europe cannot turn away from relations with a unit which , as Recital J of the report recalls , consists of 600 million people , accounts for 10 % of world GDP and to which we are connected by special historical ties , especially with regard to the Latin countries of Spain , Portugal and Italy , many of whose citizens went to live in Argentina , and even France , which still has a presence in Guyana .
However , I regret that the report does not tackle two essential issues more directly .
Firstly , there is the issue of globalisation , free trade imposed across the world , and the international division of labour , which is wrongly presented as a panacea and which poses extremely serious economic and social problems , not only in Europe , but also in Latin America .
Secondly , the other problem is that of independence from Big Brother , in other words , the US big brother .
We are not its enemy but even so , we must remember , after all , that the Monroe doctrine , the professed aim of which at the time was to prevent any recolonisation of Latin America by Europe , was turned into a de facto protectorate , the effects of which we saw a few years ago , above all , in terms of the brutality of the intervention in Panama .
Therefore , I agree that we should deal with issues such as drug production , but it is not our job to dictate the law , reason , justice or equality between men and women to the peoples of Latin America .
We believe that we should devote ourselves to those issues that are strictly essential .

( ES ) I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra on his excellent work on this report .
( RO ) The European Parliament is currently sending out a clear message about strengthening relations between the European Union and Latin America , all the more so as the EU-Latin America Summit is going to take place in one month .
At the same time , these relations between the EU and Latin America are one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
However , I believe that there is a great deal of untapped potential for boosting trade between both regions .
This is why the European Union must provide resources for promoting European products on the Latin American market .
In this regard , some Romanian products already have a market outlet in Latin America .
Our national car , the Dacia , is one example I can give of this .
Romania has a long tradition of good cooperation with Latin America , as our Latin heritage is a valuable asset we have in common .
I would like to emphasise that I welcome the new tri-partite approach mentioned by the rapporteur , involving the participation of the European Union , Latin America and the US .
At the same time , we must take into account cooperation projects which will consolidate the IMF 's legal status and equal access to education and the workforce .
Finally , Mr Salafranca 's report and the Madrid Summit must lay the foundations for the long-term development of the strategic partnership between the EU and Latin America .
( ES ) Madam President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra .
I think that this is a very important report .
I would like to say , ladies and gentlemen , that there are millions of reasons why we should consider Latin America to be a very important continent for Europe : there are millions of Europeans living in Latin America , and there are millions of Latin Americans who have come to our countries , to Europe , and have found refuge and asylum in France , Germany , Sweden and Spain from the suffering of their people .
Ladies and gentlemen , Latin America is very important for the European Union , which is why I am very pleased that in the next few months , perhaps largely as a result of the work done by Mrs Ashton and also the Spanish Presidency , it might be possible to conclude four major and very important agreements , with Colombia , Peru , Mercosur and Central America .
This is going to be extremely important for the European Union and , above all , for Latin America .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we need to help Latin America .
Its countries have weak state machinery , with public services that are still very weak because they have very low tax ratios , they have democracies that are still very flawed , and there are problems with human rights .
We need to help the Latin American people .
We always need to keep this vision in mind .
I would like to give you two messages , Mrs Ashton , or two recommendations , which I think are very important .
In order to work in Latin America , we also need to have the support of European enterprises .
Our external policy needs to be conducted with a very strong economic presence of our major companies in Latin America , which can do a great deal for the development of those countries with a culture of social responsibility and with a commitment to their development .
Finally , we need to form a global alliance with Latin America in order to work together in the world , on world governance .
Let us join together with them so that we can be stronger .

( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , Mr Salafranca , as a member of the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly , I am very pleased about your report , because it is really important for us to continue to strengthen the relationship between the European Union and Latin America .
We have made a great deal of progress since 1999 .
Latin America has a population of 600 million and almost 600 million people also live here in the European Union .
We have similar values and human rights and we are also linked by the desire for democracy and peace .
However , the actual conditions in the two continents are very different .
In a partnership , it is important to ensure wherever possible that both partners are equally powerful and that is not yet the case .
There are many problems in Latin America , including illiteracy , but also a lack of infrastructure , a general lack of education , democratic deficits and violations of human rights .
Fortunately , we do not have as many problems .
Many people there make a living from the drugs trade and this , of course , is something that must change .
As a major trading partner with an active involvement in development aid , it is our job to ensure that Latin America receives further help with its democratisation processes .
I would like to see the partnership leading to people in Latin America living in peace in the same way that we do in the European Union and allowing them to also learn and benefit from one another as we do .
This is why I very much like the idea of a Euro-Latin American Charter for Peace and Security and a Europe-Latin America Foundation .
I believe that this would deepen the partnership even further and really help us to make more progress .
( CS ) My fellow Member , Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , mentioned at the outset here that Europe and Latin America share very similar values .
There is nevertheless one exception .
In March , we discussed here the situation in Cuba .
When negotiating EU strategy concerning relations with Latin America , Cuba , as a significant player in this region , must not be overlooked .
Cuba 's Stalinist regime , with its totalitarian ways , is attempting to damage relations between the EU and this region as a whole .
However , the region does not deserve this .
Latin America is a significant partner for the EU , even without the Cuban regime .
The EU 's partner on the Cuban side should not be the current Castro regime , but the movers of change and the democratic opposition .
I have the greatest respect for all the opponents of Cuba 's communist dictatorship , and I would like to thank Cardinal Jaime Ortega for the brave words he delivered - yesterday , I believe - to the regime .
I am of the opinion that democracy , the observance of human rights and freedoms , freedom of expression , the rule of law , the legal state and the rejection of any form of dictatorship or authoritarianism not only form the foundation of the bi-regional strategic partnership , but are also an essential prerequisite for it .
Madam President , at the beginning of the debate , Baroness Ashton kindly said that she would respond to any question .
Baroness , I would urge you please to answer my following question .
Proposals documented by the Committee on Foreign Affairs include negotiations for the establishment of a Euro-Latin American Charter for Peace and Security , based upon the UN Charter .
Whose interest do you support in relation to Argentina formally asking the United Nations Secretary , Ban Ki-moon , to question British sovereignty over the Falkland Islands ?
The Argentine Foreign Minister , Jorge Taiana , has asked the UN to help stop further unilateral acts by the UK in relation to oil drilling in the area .
A recent summit of Latin American and Caribbean leaders saw unanimous support from all 32 countries for Argentine claims to the Falkland Islands .
Do you agree that , underpinned by the principle of self-determination in the UN Charter , Britain should maintain sovereignty of the islands , and will you be supporting her interests in accordance with international law ?
I would like an answer please .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a biregional strategic partnership has been in place between the European Union and Latin America since 1999 .
The basic principles of this partnership include respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , together with the right to education .
However , it is a fact that these principles are often violated .
In addition , around 42 million people in Latin America are illiterate .
The European Union is both the main investor in Latin America and an important trading partner .
Finally , I would like to say that the fact that women are socially disadvantaged and that discrimination against the indigenous peoples continues , to highlight just two of the problem areas , is in violation of universal human rights .
There is still work to be done in this area and improvements still need to be made .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish to congratulate Mr Salafranca on his highly integrated and substantiated report .
I also agree with the Vice-President of the European Commission and High Representative on the importance which she attaches to these efforts to forge a closer partnership .
It is a fact that there have been developments in Latin America over the last twenty years and it is true that what worried us during the 1980s , namely the numerous dictatorships , has been wiped out .
However , the drug trade , money laundering , terrorism and the huge problems caused by poverty , insecurity and unemployment in the region have not been wiped out .
We therefore call , with the help of the European Parliament and Lady Ashton , for particular importance to be attached to sectors relating to education and culture .
The countries of Latin America are the only countries which we can say are so closely linked - more than other third countries - to Europe on matters relating to history , education and culture , and I think that particular emphasis should be placed on these sectors .
Mr Salafranca 's report includes an integrated programme and proposes the creation of a foundation , which is also hugely important to the European Parliament , and , of course , it calls for a new and stronger role for the European Parliament in relations with these countries .
I think that this is what we should retain from today 's report .
( NL ) Madam President , in recent months , Latin America has increasingly been taking on a more clear and concrete importance in the eyes of the European Union , after years of receiving too little attention from the EU .
The European Commission brought out a communication positing both regions of Latin America as global players and partners , and negotiations on association agreements are now well under way .
I cannot help but stress the strategic importance of good relations with Latin America .
What I particularly have in mind here is the ongoing negotiations for an association agreement with Central America , the latest round of which kicked off yesterday .
The objective is to dot the final i 's and to wrap up the negotiations .
Although , in essence , I would welcome an association agreement with Latin America , I cannot stress enough that respect for human rights is of the greatest importance here . This agreement should contribute to the improvement of the human rights situation in Central America and it must be a constant incentive to these countries to respect human rights .
This agreement should contribute to the improvement of the human rights situation in Central America and it must be a constant incentive to these countries to respect human rights .
We are not just entering a trade agreement here , but also forging a connection with each other through the medium of political dialogues and cooperation .
The association agreement is important for Central America .
The region is characterised by a high level of poverty and this agreement must contribute to the economic progress of the people there .
During the negotiations , the EU must not therefore shut its eyes to the fact that Europe and Central America are not equal partners in the agreement .
The agreement must take sufficient account of the unequal starting points of the two regions and the asymmetry in the agreement is therefore very important .
In brief , this must be a balanced agreement and one that does not just bring benefits to Europe and major companies established in Central America .
No , above all , it must improve the situation of ordinary citizens and small businesses .
To conclude , we have chosen a region-by-region approach and I would stress that we must bring things to a conclusion in that fashion , so that no single country falls behind its neighbours .
( GA ) Madam President , I welcome this report and I commend the rapporteur on his excellent work .
I would like to draw attention to trade affairs between the European Union and Latin America .
It must be ensured that trade affairs are discussed on a level playing field .
European farmers and producers must adhere to many rules and they produce high quality food and goods .
These high standards result in higher production costs for European farmers and producers and these can be disadvantageous in the market due to the importation of products of lower quality and at lower cost .
It is not just for the benefit of European producers that we should look at this issue .
The European Union has done excellent work as regards protecting and strengthening consumer rights and health .
We are obliged to ensure that goods and products that are imported into Europe do not compromise these rights and do not endanger the health of European consumers .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Madam President , I will try actually to keep to one minute .
Perhaps Francis Fukuyama was wrong when he said that liberal democracy is the end of history , but he was surely right in his assertion that liberal democracy is the best thing which can happen to people .
If only everyone really did live in such conditions .
Unfortunately , democracy has been substituted in Latin America by populism , and capitalism by socialism , or economic populism .
In view of this I would like to address Mrs Ashton - Commissioner , I have an enormous request , that our experience , the money of European taxpayers and our know-how be directed , above all , to those countries which are on the road of democracy and are building a free-market economy , and not to those countries which are building populist dictatorships .
( RO ) The strategy for promoting relations with Latin America has proved to be invaluable between the time of its launch and now .
This strategic partnership has added further consistency to relations between our regions and facilitated the funding of projects and programmes in excess of EUR 3 billion during the last 10 years .
Fortunately , countries in the Latin American region have been more successful so far in weathering the economic and financial crisis than certain developed countries .
However , the poverty level continues to remain extremely high or is even increasing among the disadvantaged section of the population due to the chronic nature of social polarisation and the political and institutional dysfunction in the region .
In Bolivia , for example , approximately 60 % of the population live below the poverty line .
The figures reported for the proportion of the population living below the poverty line in Brazil and Argentina are 26 % and 13.9 % respectively .
This is why I strongly support the need for development aid to be focused on creating the institutional facilities in these countries , with the aim of levelling out the social disparities .
It is important for Mr Salafranca 's report to promote the increase in dialogue in order to identify the methods for achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
However , I believe that it is vital for us to ensure that this strategy considers including civil society and non-governmental organisations in this dialogue and in the actions involved in implementing the strategy 's objectives .

Madam President , as a member of EuroLat , I commend the Spanish Presidency and Mr Salafranca for emphasising the importance of our relations with Latin America .
Climate change and global warming should remain a priority on the political agenda between the EU and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and a commitment to Copenhagen targets should be reinforced .
Furthermore , energy and energy-supply dialogue should be boosted to combat climate change and to aid sustainable energy consumption .
But we have much to exchange , not only in trade but in culture and education , and the ultimate aim is that our trade relationship with Latin America is boosted by increased innovation on both sides and improved education and I would like to emphasise the need to further enhance and promote Erasmus to Latin American participants and the fantastic opportunities that it can offer personally , professionally and for future contacts and improved trade relationships between the EU and Latin America .
( SK ) I welcome the strengthening of relations between the EU and Latin America , which is one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency , since it benefits both sides and can bring advantages for the Member States of the EU and the countries of Latin America .
Latin America has enormous human potential , with more than 600 million people , as well as natural resources and a 10 % share of global GDP .
The EU , as the main provider of development aid , the main investor and the second largest trading partner for Latin America , should systematically consolidate its position in the region .
Fully functional regional cooperation based on common values , such as democracy , the rule of law and the defence of human rights , for example , will require targeted improvement of the current mechanisms of the bi-regional partnership .
I will also be promoting such an approach during the forthcoming plenary of the EuroLat assembly in Seville in May .
( ES ) Madam President , I would also like to take the opportunity of this debate to highlight a subject of great concern , a situation that we became aware of just a few days ago that relates to Colombia .
It has been discovered that the Colombian state security services are directly implicated in persecution , creating false witness statements and criminalising members of the opposition .
We learned this first hand from Senator Piedad Córdoba .
It is part of the dossier that the Colombian security services are preparing in her case .
We were informed that the Colombian Government or , in any event , that body , is seeking to artificially create links between her and guerrilla groups , namely the FARC .
Moreover , even more seriously - and this is a direct question to Mrs Ashton - the operation called ' Operation Europe ' refers to the explicit intention to pursue , clearly attack and discredit the human rights authorities in Europe , including the European Parliament Subcommittee on Human Rights .
I think this is serious , very serious , and demands an explanation by the Colombian Government .
I believe it is highly relevant in the context of this report for us to discover exactly what is correct and to find out whether the Colombian authorities are actually planning to do anything about it .
( DE ) Mr President , after more than 300 years of colonial rule and after the continent became an arena for the cold war , Latin America has now become one of the world 's emerging regions .
The fact that the Russian president Mr Medvedev has visited Central and South America is a clear indication of the fact that he is attempting to strengthen Russia 's economic relationship with South America .
It also shows that the EU is on the right track in improving its relationships with this continent , which has a larger population than the EU-27 .
However , this is not just about starting negotiations with the Mercosur trading bloc .
It also involves all the smaller countries which do not belong to this economic region or to the Andean Community .
The EU is not only the main investor or the most important or second most important trading partner ; it is also the biggest donor of development aid .
From a financial perspective , we already play a major role and , in my opinion , we must make use of this pole position to develop the relationship between Europe and Latin America .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union and Latin America developed a strategic partnership some time ago with the aim of achieving an effective partnership between the two regions .
I would remind you that bilateral summits have been held regularly since 1999 , and this year will be no exception .
In fact , another EU-Latin America meeting is scheduled for next May in Madrid .
It is thus with pleasure and a strong spirit of supportiveness that I speak today in the Chamber in favour of the report by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra .
I agree with the compliments and the congratulations that all , or most , of the speakers have expressed ; congratulations that are absolutely shared and justified .
The report , in fact , aims to consolidate the already strong political , historical , cultural and economic links that exist between the two regions , and I therefore see the foundation initiative as appropriate and completely relevant to the present .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I am keen to emphasise this specific aspect of the economy , and to quote some figures that show that this is a rapidly expanding area of primary interest , accounting for 600 million consumers , and producing essential raw materials .
The prices of raw agricultural materials in Latin America have recently benefited from slight atmospheric disturbances , which have led to a constant and plentiful supply in many of the producing countries of the area , and to the general return of many investors .
Moreover , I would remind you that the European Union is the primary investor in Latin America and the primary donor of development aid , with an expected investment of EUR 3 billion for the period 2007-2013 .
As my final and closing remark , Mr President , I would like to mention the topic of climate change - which was also recently addressed in the relevant committees , with the approval of important reports - to look again at a part of this resolution that has my full support .
I therefore call for discussions and cooperation with Latin America on the fight against climate change , so that the Copenhagen objectives can be achieved more quickly .
Cooperation with the largest developing countries is essential if Europe is to achieve the climate goals it has set itself .
Mr President , may I just say that I would like to add my compliments on the work that has been done and the comments that have already been made .
However , there still remain , as some people perhaps point out , some difficult questions on the issue of Colombia and its human rights record .
In the absence of one or two of my colleagues , including Richard Howitt , who cannot be here because of the volcanoes , I must refer to what he has pointed out : that there have been particular problems affecting trade unionists in Colombia .
I would like to ask the Commissioner and others to reflect on this in any strategy and involvement we have across this continent .


High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to begin - as honourable Members have done - by again congratulating Mr Salafranca for the excellent report and also - as he has done and as others have done - to thank the Spanish Presidency for the work that they , too , have undertaken in not only pulling together the work for the summit but all of the work that they have done to support the initiatives that have been undertaken .
The forthcoming summit is an important one .
It enables us to reinforce that relationship that honourable Members have talked about .
We will also be holding a Foreign Ministers ' meeting alongside the summit , which is particularly important to me .
I hope we will be able to use that occasion to deepen the relationship with a number of states who will be present at the time .
A number of honourable Members also talked about the importance of trade and the role of European businesses , with which I am in complete agreement .
We are the biggest investor in that region .
I was particularly pleased that colleagues talked about the role of innovation , which I think is especially important too .
Of course , a huge emphasis , as I would expect , was placed on human rights - the importance of making sure that is clearly part of all the dynamic relationships that we have and encompasses our work .
Honourable Members talked about the particular point made in the report about feminicide and , of course , indigenous people .
The Commission has always defended the rights of indigenous people and will continue to monitor the projects that were being described .
On Colombia in particular , I am very well aware of the views , not only within this House but , of course , with the European TUC and the international TUC , with which I have had links in my previous role .
We are continuing to follow the situation very closely .
We have taken note of the significant progress that has been made .
Within the trade agreement , colleagues will see the importance of the robust human rights clause and the commitments that are made within that agreement , which I hope - as we monitor those - will actually go some way to alleviating the concerns , but certainly will be part of our continuing relationship with Colombia .
I also agree about the importance of the role that we play with these countries in broader international questions .
Brazil and Iran were specific examples given .
I have been in discussion with Celso Amorim , the Foreign Minister of Brazil , precisely on that question and we continue to stay in touch about its importance .
The Falklands Islands were raised .
Member States have ratified the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
The Falkland Islands is an associated territory to the Union and the rule of law would apply .
Climate change is also a very important issue .
We should remember that we have a key dialogue with this region .
Finally , I was also very pleased that Erasmus and the importance of educational programmes in that context were mentioned .
To end - again , my congratulations go to Mr Salafranca .
Mr President , I would like to thank all my fellow Members for their speeches .
I would like to say to you , Mrs Ashton , that the fundamental element that will ensure that these relations move forward in the coming years will be the mobilisation of political will .
Political reasons were behind the ministerial dialogue in San José in 1985 ; political reasons were behind the institutionalisation of the dialogue with the Rio Group in 1990 ; and political reasons were behind going over and above this in the summits mechanism .
I would like to respond to Mr Kožušník by saying that we are indeed a community of values , and I would like to point out that in the last part-session , we adopted an important resolution on Cuba in which we called for the immediate and unconditional release of political prisoners .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask Mrs Ashton to intercede on behalf of a dissident , Marta Beatriz Roque , who is on conditional release and is ill .
She has just obtained Spanish nationality in a case promoted by a former MEP , Fernando Fernández Martín , so that she can come to Spain to be treated .
However , we need to move from words to actions , and this is shown in the association agreements .
I think , Mrs Ashton , that you have negotiated the agreements with Colombia and Peru very well .
I think that although the human rights situation in Colombia still gives cause for concern , it has improved substantially .
The Colombian people are clamouring for peace , and this agreement is definitely deserved .
I also sincerely believe that a majority in Parliament is in favour of this agreement .
Mrs Ashton , we need to give the Central Americans some room to breathe in the negotiations .
We represent 25 % of their exports , and they represent 2 % of ours .
We need to be generous and , as you said , we need to re-launch the agreement with Mercosur .
To conclude , Mr President , I think that on the one hand , the European Union is in decline , in economic terms , and on the other , it is strengthened by the presence of the High Representative .
Therefore , we need her to make a significant effort to demonstrate our political will at the Madrid Summit and to continue keeping relations with Latin America high on the European Union 's agenda .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in May .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Union is Latin America 's number one trading partner and the second largest trading partner in the case of Mercosur and Chile .
European Union Member States also provide the largest source of direct investment in Latin America .
However , relations between the European Union and Latin America go further than the commercial aspect as they include historical , institutional and cultural elements as well .
In this context , I believe that a trade agreement involving closer cooperation with Latin America needs to be drawn up .
In fact , the continuing efforts to sign an association agreement with Mercosur mark the first step in this direction .
The association agreement provides an instrument which would help promote both regions ' common economic , social and geopolitical interests .
This would also be the first intercontinental association agreement between North and South which would offer an alternative to other less equitable attempts at integration , such as the Free Trade Area of the Americas .
Closer trade cooperation between Latin America and the European Union would facilitate the implementation of economic and social cohesion policies aimed at promoting economic development and prosperity in both regions .
I hope that we will see a number of satisfactory conclusions pointing in this direction , presented at the summit to be held between the European Union and Mercosur on 17 May .
Agenda ( continuation ) : see Minutes
Kyrgyzstan ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on Kyrgyzstan .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased to have this opportunity to make a statement on Kyrgyzstan .
As this House knows very well , the situation on the ground remains somewhat fluid and tense .
Kyrgyzstan has attracted quite some media and political attention , and I have followed developments closely from the beginning , making two statements , one on 7 April and the other on 8 April .
I sent a delegation almost immediately , headed by the EU Special Representative , Pierre Morel , to the country and we stayed in close contact throughout his visit .
The coordinated EU-UN-OSCE effort that started last week in Bishkek continues at the moment and will continue until the crisis and its consequences are overcome .
Yesterday , I spoke with the Kazakh Foreign Minister Saudabayev , who today is visiting Bishkek as Chair-in-Office of the OSCE , and who has literally just sent me a message to say that he has completed his tasks .
The resignation of the President , on the basis of Article 50 of the present Kyrgyz Constitution , and his departure from the country is expected to reduce political tension .
However , that is not the end of the crisis , and we have important work to do .
Most importantly , we have to ensure stability and public order , and while the situation has generally calmed down , violence continues .
Reports told us yesterday that as many as five people were killed in riots in the suburbs of Bishkek .
All sides need to be careful and avoid provocation .
The restoration of law and order must be a priority .
Citizens and businesses in Kyrgyzstan need to be able to go about their daily life without fear for their lives or for their physical integrity .
The second issue concerns the legitimacy of the provisional government .
Although President Bakiyev has officially resigned , the provisional government needs to commit to a clear plan for how to return to constitutional and democratic order and the rule of law .
Elements of such a ' roadmap ' have been announced - a new constitution is being drawn up and submitted to referendum and presidential and parliamentary elections are to be held .
We will be happy to look at such a plan .
What is important for us in this context is that the constitutional process is inclusive and participatory .
Representatives of all parties and ethnic groups should be able to contribute to a new draft constitution before it is submitted to a referendum .
The early indications - I can tell honourable Members - are encouraging .
I hope these will be confirmed over the coming days , and I will discuss this with Ministers in Luxembourg on Monday .
If we are satisfied the provisional government is committed to a quick return to legitimacy and genuinely wants to join the democratic family , we will be ready to provide the necessary political , financial and technical support .
With the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe , we could contribute to the work on constitutional reform and the updating of electoral legislation .
We know from the presidential elections last year that there is considerable room for progress .
With the OSCE , we are willing to work on the preparations and modalities for monitoring the elections and , with the people of Kyrgyzstan , we are ready to do what we can to help turn their aspirations for a democratic and open society into reality .
Thirdly , it is clear that Kyrgyzstan needs material assistance .
In the very short term , we are willing to address any humanitarian needs that recent events might have created .
On the basis of the information that we have had from our partners in the field - the Red Cross and the UN Development Programme - there do not seem to be major unmet humanitarian needs at this stage .
However , there may be specific medical needs .
The Commission , through DG ECHO , will , of course , keep monitoring the humanitarian situation in the country and adjust as necessary .
We will continue the assistance that is already ongoing , notably in the fields of human rights , education and poverty eradication .
Fourthly , after the dramatic events of the last two weeks , there is a need for accountability and justice .
More than 80 persons died and many hundreds were wounded from gunfire opened against demonstrators in Bishkek .
These events cannot simply be put on one side .
We need clarity brought on what actually happened , on who was responsible , and on what needs to be done to avoid this ever being repeated in the future .
Finally , as the recent crisis has shown , there is a need for genuine economic and social reforms .
Unfortunately , the example of Kyrgyzstan shows how bad government and the lack of genuine reform can bring political instability and ultimately violence .
The upheaval and the widespread looting that followed , and now the rise in organised , large-scale crime , further aggravates the situation .
I will discuss with Ministers on Monday the political framework in which the European Union will be ready to address the most pressing needs , but of course , today , I am very interested to hear the views of the honourable Members on this matter .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you very much for your assessment of the situation .
I believe your assessment to be correct that we should first try to restore law and order and safeguard human lives and then begin to build on this foundation .
On the other hand , and you explained this in your last remark , the extent to which economic and social development is needed is clear , because this is also an important yardstick for political stability .
Of course , this also includes equality , which often suffers as a result of corruption and other similar factors .
Whether justifiably or not , this was obviously one of the causes of the clashes .
We must be aware that these countries are sufficiently unstable that our efforts to bring about stability by contributing to improved state-building , democracy and the rule of law are of crucial importance .
The whole region is of major strategic significance to us , not just the individual countries .
This relates not only to the available energy sources , but to the area as a whole , in particular , if we consider the religious orientation of the majority of the former republics of the Soviet Union .
If this were to take the form of fundamentalism , the results could be catastrophic for us .
For this reason , providing aid to these countries is of extreme importance , not only from the perspective of the aid itself , but also in relation to our interests .
We should remember that the neighbouring countries in the region , some of which are very large , are responsible for ensuring that these weaknesses are not exploited with the aim of rebuilding old power relationships that would not allow for modern development .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would also like to thank you for your statement .
A dictator or a president who behaves like a dictator is removed from power .
His successor celebrates and is pleased to be able to introduce democracy for his subjects .
After a few months , he is in the same position and it seems as if democracy has only been restored for the purpose of making comfortable , well-paid positions available to his son or other family members .
We hope that this cycle is not beginning again and that Mrs Otunbayeva has a different approach .
Her past , and the attitude that she has often demonstrated , are indicators of this .
However , indicators are not enough .
We need real proof .
If she is not to suffer the same fate as her predecessor , she must take a different approach and ensure that she helps the people of her country .
I hope that the president who has been thrown out of office will be sensible enough not to spread new discord and will make a genuine attempt to live a peaceful life in exile , which will give the Kyrgyz population the chance to build a democratic state .
Unfortunately , the situation that I have described does not apply only to Kyrgyzstan .
Similar conditions can also be found in other countries .
We wish the representative for Kazakhstan success with his task on behalf of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) .
However , the situation in Kazakhstan is also far from ideal .
The same thing also applies to Uzbekistan and to other countries .
The question of how we can encourage the development of democracy there - because it is not a product that we can simply deliver , it must emerge in these countries - is one that we must follow up .
This is a very sensitive region , as Mr Brok has already said .
Mr Morel is doing a good job as the Special Representative , but this is not enough .
I would like to remind everyone that during the German Presidency with Dr Steinmeier , a strategy for Central Asia was drawn up which we have heard very little about recently .
Therefore , I would like to ask you to take up this strategy again and to transform it into a stability strategy for the region .
This is not only about the energy supply from Turkmenistan through to Kazakhstan . It is also a question of the stability and , in particular , the political stability of a region which is very close to Afghanistan .
We know that in some countries , such as Uzbekistan , the situation is very fragile and problematic .
Of course , it is ultimately a question of humanity , because there really should not be any victims at all .
Against this background , we need to make a new attempt to put in place a strategy for Central Asia which covers the economy , democracy and humanity .
I would ask you to use the case of Kyrgyzstan as the opportunity to renew this strategy for Central Asia and to give it a new stimulus .

Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , there is a wonderful concluding passage in the Kyrgyz epic Manas - which is no small work of literature , being 20 times longer than the Odyssey and the Iliad put together and also an aid to understanding this country 's history - where the wife of the hero who represents the whole population sets out to safeguard his memory against foreign attacks and to protect his tomb . In the end , she decides that the name on his tomb should be that of his wife , instead of the hero Manas , precisely to ensure that it remains intact in the face of enemy attacks .
This type of dedication for the common good , for the people , should be what we expect from the new Kyrgyz ruling class , which is not , in point of fact , all that new .
Of course , I advise the High Representative to adopt a constructive and I would say positive , yet cautious attitude towards the interim government , but also to call for a series of reforms , a set of measures , which must be clear .
Not only an international board of enquiry into what has taken place , not only a clear schedule for restoring democratic rules - because this interim government , by its very definition , is not sanctioned as a legitimate government by the popular vote - but also reforms to oppose corruption firmly and effectively , and ultimately to make Kyrgyzstan independent from the judiciary , which is very far removed from the current situation .
Also - and this is linked to both the issue of the judiciary and to corruption - to streamline what is an extremely oppressive bureaucratic nomenclature and public administration .
In fact , this is the first real test of the European Union 's new Central Asia strategy in a critical , emergency situation of the type currently existing in Kyrgyzstan .
We must not let this country , where the influence of the United States is now very limited , end up in the rather suffocating grip of present-day Russia , and so I believe that this is an opportunity for us all to make a commitment .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , we know how much people hoped in 2005 at the time of the Tulip Revolution that everything would change when a new president came into office who genuinely took seriously the needs and interests of the people with regard to democracy and codetermination .
Unfortunately , that was not the case and now he has suffered the same fate as his predecessor .
The European Union must exert significance influence in this case .
Baroness Ashton , I welcomed the fact that you said that you have sent the Special Representative , Mr Morel , to the region .
I think that was both sensible and useful .
However , it is equally necessary for the EU now to revise its strategy for Central Asia to make it really effective .
I hope the Council will begin work on this next Monday .
My question is : How do you intend to tackle this ?
How do you plan to ensure that a genuinely comprehensive process is put in place for developing a constitution which involves everyone , as you have proposed ?
We need to help this region and Kyrgyzstan to move towards cooperation and away from confrontation .
I believe that this is important for the future of the entire region and beyond .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Kyrgyzstan is , in fact , particularly unstable .
Nevertheless , this country has been , and perhaps still is , one of those that seemed most open to the setting up of democratic institutions .

The Tulip revolution in 2005 once again raised immense hope .
Mr Bakiyev has failed ; he has been incapable of responding to the population 's needs and demands ; he has allowed corruption to develop , and played his own part in it with a certain clannishness ; he has emptied the coffers , if some statements are to be believed ; and he has installed an increasingly authoritarian regime , for which political opponents , human rights defenders and journalists have paid a heavy price .
After the riots of 7 April , a provisional government was put in place , but for all that , Mr Bakiyev does not seem to have given up , even though he has left the country , and yesterday new riots actually took place , as you said , in the south of the country and around the capital .
Commissioner , this country is actually of considerable strategic importance , and not only in military terms .
It must not be the playing field of certain major powers .
Despite some discussions , the European Union still does not have a great enough presence in this region of the world .
Its support and its diplomatic presence remain half-hearted .
One only has to read the stories that are breaking at present on the situation in that country to be persuaded of this .
This is not just about the United States , Russia and Kazakhstan , the country that currently holds the presidency of the OECD .
However , the EU 's support is essential to ensure that country 's independence .
You are right , Baroness Ashton ; priority must go to re-establishing the rule of law , but we must very quickly go beyond that and , as some of my fellow Members have already said , implement a proper strategy for this region of the world .
Yes , we must help this country to combat poverty ; 40 % of the population there lives below the poverty threshold .
Yes , we must facilitate economic development and , as you said , especially with regard to education , health but also water , which is an essential priority in this region of the world .
Yes , of course , we must support democracy and the defence of human rights .
This is now a matter of the utmost urgency .
Our undertaking , Commissioner , can and must be to prevent this country from swinging towards fundamentalism and a new authoritarian regime .
It is not a case of our interfering in the internal affairs of that country but , on the contrary , of helping the Kyrgyz people to once again trust in democracy .
This is the key to ensuring that the country plays a major role in this region of the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Kyrgyzstan is very important for the stability of Central Asia , a region in which Europe has particular interests relating to the supply of raw materials and energy .
Following the unrest of 7 April , it is necessary to re-establish conditions that will lead to the free , legal and rapid election of a democratic regime , if this is compatible with the local situation .
It is worrying that a considerable haul of weapons has been stolen by criminal gangs , with all the risks of increased lawlessness , armed conflicts and terrorism in the area that this entails .
Europe and others , including the OSCE , could contribute to helping the country develop institutions that are stable , operational , less corrupt and more democratic .
One such show of support could be an observation mission for the coming elections .
We cannot pretend , however , that a new constitution or parliamentary regime will be enough to bring about true democracy ; this inevitably depends on the political growth of citizens and a widespread awareness of the law and the rights of individuals .
We must provide long-term assistance in this area .
Mr President , last week 's riots have led Kyrgyzstan into a political , judicial and economic crisis .
Its constitutional court was practically disbanded and the interim government 's actions appear uncoordinated .
Meanwhile , the brother of Kurmanbek Bakiyev has announced that the hand-written resignation statement is a fake and that Bakiyev did not himself resign .
According to eye-witnesses , new local groups trying to take over regional governments have emerged .
Similarly , ethnic-based groupings appear , creating fear of more ethnic violence .
Criminal groups operate freely in the country .
Large numbers of weapons are being circulated and robberies are taking place .
Safety , security and the interests of the EU citizens in this country are still endangered .
The present interim government is unable to counter any of these threats .
The situation is completely unclear for the local people .
High Representative Ashton has issued two statements expressing her concern , but more active and practical actions are urgently needed instead .
It is important that the EU take a decisive position on the situation in Kyrgyzstan in this strategically important country .
We need to be more present there , cooperating with the UN , USA and OSCE to defend the interests of Kyrgyzstani and EU citizens who are currently unable to protect their lives and defend their property .
It is clear that the EU should pursue an independent investigation into the causes and effects of the riots .
About the material resources of the Kyrgyz Bank and the agency for investment and development : they need to be evaluated before assigning any further financial assistance .
Inactivity and hesitancy on the EU 's part and an absence of real strategy and tactics may lead to very dangerous developments and undermine the EU 's own economic and political interests and credibility in the region and in the rest of the world .
( EL ) Mr President , Lady Ashton , in the twenty years that it has been independent , Kyrgyzstan has been governed by a corrupt regime and little progress has been made in improving its democratic institutions .
As regards the last fifteen years , I can give you my own assurance , having been personally involved in my capacity as a member of the OSCE and otherwise .
The people who were governing up to yesterday and the people who overturned them are all cogs in the same corrupt system .
The army is in the capital , carrying out searches and making arrests as we speak .
Despite this , we need to give the present regime a chance , because we are in the final stage before civil war and the break up of the country .
The people of Kyrgyzstan are a peace-loving people and I imagine that many of you will have got to know them through the book by the famous author Chingiz Aitmatov , who was ambassador in Brussels up to 4 years ago .
However , financial distress and social inequalities , as well as the interventions of foreign countries , have caused explosions which may , on occasion , reach the limits of civil war , and here I would disagree slightly as to whether the people of Kyrgyzstan can ward off terrorism .
As I said , the danger of Kyrgyzstan splitting into North and South is real and is being cultivated by foreign agents , while its membership of the OSCE and the constant presence of the OSCE in Kyrgyzstan does not appear to be bearing fruit in terms of democratisation .
Of course , there is a permanent humanitarian crisis which may not be acute , but there has been no modernisation and no improvement in democratic institutions over all these years .
People are living well below the poverty line .
That is why the European Parliament needs to intervene , in liaison with the other institutions of the European Union , with the Commission and the Council , and review the strategy followed to date in the area .
A strong European Parliament delegation must monitor progress in democratisation and grant money in a controlled manner , with a view to developing institutions and education , because the destabilisation of Kyrgyzstan is a major danger for the destabilisation of the whole of Central and Western Asia , and of Europe .
If the European Union wants to play an effective peacekeeping role , it needs to act now .
( RO ) The situation in Kyrgyzstan is giving particular cause for concern .
This country has a strategic position in Central Asia .
It hosts on its territory a US military base making a major contribution to the operations in Afghanistan , as well as Russian troops .
It is unfortunate that the protests of the last few weeks have degenerated into violence and have resulted in the loss of human life .
The authorities must take measures aimed at protecting civilian lives .
Just yesterday , new clashes took place among ethnic Kyrgyz , Russians and Turks .
Given that large Russian and Uzbek communities live in this country , if interethnic clashes continue , the stability of the whole region will be affected .
Mrs Ashton , the European Union must focus particular attention on the conflict in Kyrgyzstan , provide humanitarian aid and get involved in stabilising the situation .
( SL ) Madam Ashton , we are here to discuss the alarming events in Kyrgyzstan and to help as much as we can to stabilise the situation in this country .
A proactive approach by the European Union towards Kyrgyzstan is particularly important , but it is equally important that we also maintain a high level of commitment in principle with regard to another issue , which has been removed from this sitting 's agenda .
However , because it is topical and because human lives are at stake , I feel obliged to call your attention to it .
I am talking about the plight of Sahrawi activists , peacekeepers from Western Sahara being detained in Moroccan prisons , who are on hunger strike and are risking their lives .
Amnesty International has also called our attention to their plight .
I would therefore ask , Madam Ashton , that you and your colleagues pay immediate attention to this problem because , otherwise , it might be too late .
Mr President , recent events in Bishkek are alarming and a sad end to the 2005 Tulip Revolution , or Colour Revolution , when President Bakiyev had promised democracy and human rights and instead delivered corruption , nepotism and increasing autocracy .
Kyrgyzstan remains the smallest and poorest country in Central Asia and has undergone a worrying infiltration of radical Islamists in the Fergana Valley in recent years , so stability must be the EU 's priority for the region .
It is right and proper now to recognise the new Otunbayeva government , an unusual example where we have a common interest with that of Russia , which actually supported the revolution and overthrow of the Bakiyev regime .
President Roza Otunbayeva served briefly as Ambassador to the United Kingdom , so she knows the workings of the European Union well .
Lastly , Central Asia is a strategic region for reasons of energy and global security and the operational capability of the US air base in Kyrgyzstan is vitally important to support ISAF in Afghanistan as well .
( PL ) Mr President , five years after the Tulip Revolution , when President Akayev stood down , a bloody revolution has taken place .
Two reasons can , of course , be given .
Firstly , the problem of nepotism and corruption and hence , the absence of the foundations of a democratic state , and secondly , the country 's financial and economic problems .
Mrs Ashton 's initiative , which has meant that Mr Morel can , today , give us a full report on what is really happening in Kyrgyzstan , seems fairly important .
I would like to make a fervent appeal in relation to the situation in Kyrgyzstan .
The country is , we know , an area of Russian influence , and also has an American military base .
The European Union 's active participation should be based , principally , on building the foundations of a democratic country , and also on ensuring internal security .
Over 80 fatalities is a bad signal for the building of Kyrgyzstan .
So I repeat my fervent appeal and have my fingers crossed for Mrs Ashton 's mission .
( RO ) Kurmanbek Bakiyev is neither the first , nor will he definitely be the last , political leader to cause disappointment and disillusionment and be treated like a dictator , after the glimmer of hope there was at the very start and after his name was initially associated with democratic optimism .
There is a simple explanation for this situation .
Due to the lack of stable institutions , politicians are likely to cause disappointment and get involved in this cycle of conflict , corruption and blackmail .
None of us should forget that President Bakiyev has exploited the fact that there is a Russian and a US military base on the territory of Kyrgyzstan to continually blackmail the West .
Therefore , the solution lies in setting up institutions created by consent , based on a broad consultation process and a wide consensus and degree of compromise among the political forces .
However , the main priority is to urgently put an end to the violence , as mentioned by the High Representative .
The violence is serious and a solution must be found as quickly as possible to put an end to it because , otherwise , it will prevent a process of political construction from getting under way .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Kyrgyzstan is alarming to say the least , especially if we consider the statements made by the former Minister for Foreign Affairs , in whose opinion Kyrgyzstan 's fate seems to lean ever closer to the Russian economic and border space .
One week after the fall of the government of former President Bakiyev , who fled his country by plane on 15 April , no one has any idea about the country 's final political destination or future political intentions .
What is clear , however , is the role of the Russian Ministry of Defence in facilitating the flight of former President Bakiyev after people took to the streets calling for his resignation .
Many weapons are in circulation in Kyrgyzstan , a small country with just 5.3 million inhabitants , and the only country in the world to house both a US and a Russian military base .
The tension is now spreading to neighbouring countries , and the European Union must take note of the priority and the opportunity arising at this time , which is , above all , to put paid to a possible civil war and help the country move towards a democratic parliamentary republic with a stable presidency within the next six months .
All this , as you said Baroness Ashton , can happen if we are able to make proactive contributions of two kinds : firstly , a diplomatic contribution , but also - as you stated , High Representative - a substantial and material contribution .
Our timeliness in providing aid to reduce and weaken all social tension will be decisive .
Baroness Ashton , let us act quickly and for the best , because this will be another important test for Europe .
We are not in Haiti , but in Kyrgyzstan .
Let us at least try to get there in time on this occasion .
( DE ) Mr President , when the Soviet Union broke up at the beginning of the 1990s , many people believed that the young democracies would develop almost of their own accord .
Now we know that these new states have inherited huge problems from the Soviet Union .
During the Soviet era , differences between the ethnic groups were largely suppressed , which is why there is so much religious and cultural conflict in these countries today .
Democracy does not just develop overnight and it will not emerge at all while corrupt clans are growing rich at the expense of the country and its citizens .
Rumour has it that the snipers who shot into the crowd in Bishkek were Uzbek and Tajik mercenaries .
It seems that this was an attempt to provoke an international conflict which could put the whole of Central Asia at risk .
European foreign policy should help to defuse the situation .
However , military intervention is the wrong approach , as is clearly shown by the German presence in Afghanistan .
It is essential to provide intelligent , targeted economic and development aid .
We must give priority to combating corruption and to depriving the local clans of their power .
It is really only then that democracy will have a genuine chance in Central Asia .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Europeana project is taking on a new , ambitious dimension .
With this EU digital library , the diversity and the wealth of our culture will be made accessible .
It is essential that our different countries be heavily involved in this project .
A crucial aspect of this initiative concerns a fundamental value : respect for cultural and linguistic diversity .
One of our continent 's horizons is Africa , but we have blackened that horizon with slavery and colonialism .
We have a duty of recognition and reparation towards its peoples .
Financial compensation could not meet this need alone , but thanks to the Europeana project , we can help to return to the African peoples part of their culture in terms of its oral literature .
Amadou Hampâté Bâ , a Malian intellectual , said : ' In Africa , when an old person dies , it is a library that burns ' .
Working to digitise works of oral literature , which are often collected by teams of ethnologists and anthropologists , and encouraging free access to them through the Europeana project , thereby making them universal in scale , would be a way of protecting and giving life to humanity 's cultural diversity , to which we are all attached .
Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , today I sit in the Commission 's space as well .
The honourable Members have made a number of important points and I will try in the short time I have to capture and address as many of them as possible .
Mr Brok , with Mr Tannock and others , talked about the importance of this being one of the poorest countries in Central Asia and , of course , one of the main recipients of EU assistance per capita .
I could not agree more that social and economic development is essential as part of the strategy that we need to put forward .
Mrs Swoboda talked too about the importance of making sure that what we have before us is a genuine political reform .
We are working very closely with the UN and with the OSCE .
Together , the people who have been in the region in the last few days have made this point consistently that we need to see the importance of reform as central to what happens next and I agree completely about the political stability of the region .
It is very important .
We need to look again very carefully .
There is a strategy for this part of Central Asia , it will be reviewed , but I am looking at it in the context of the External Action Service and what we should be doing within this region to pull together the different elements of Commission and Council support .
Mr Rinaldi and others too I think rightly described that we need to be cautious , positive and constructive in our attitude and I would agree too with a number of honourable Members who talked about the value and importance of the rule of law .
It is core to everything that we will do in the country to make sure that there is indeed the rule of law in operation and that applies in the legal system of course , but also in the political and constitutional reform that is so essential .
Mr Lunacek talked about the elections falling - I think that the actual words were used in the briefing I had - significantly short of the standards that we would wish to have internationally .
And I think the elements which I would put into the mix of things would include financial support , of course , and I have mentioned the rule of law , political and constitutional reform and the elections and the link that we want to make economically too .
One small example of that , of course , is that it is one of the great water-rich countries in that region , and it provides water to the regions , as honourable Members will know .
We have been assisting them with their water management for more than five years , and I hope that we will be able to return to that work which is so essential as soon as the crisis is overcome and we have a legitimate government firmly in place .
Those are just some of the elements that I would include .
I think that we are probably right in the level of presence in the region .
Pierre Morel has been there for several days .
He has just come back .
He will be briefing Mr Borys of the AFET Committee on 27 April to bring the committee up to date with all the events .
We are in touch by text every few hours and we have spoken several times and he has been in touch of course with colleagues too .
We have had a strong presence in him , I pay tribute to him and to his team for the work that they have done .



The importance of democracy , as Mr Provera said , can never be underestimated , in my view ; we have got to get beyond some of the issues that Ms Vaidere talked about : the instability , rumours , insecurities , the issues , which are clearly of enormous importance and , as I have indicated , we have set out what we wanted to do over these first vital few days which I hope honourable Members will feel has been responsive .
I think that the final thing that I would say is this , that some of the current members of the government in formation are the former human rights defenders on the opposition who were oppressed by the former President and who were supported by the European Union including , of course , Members of this House .
So , although I do not have any illusions about the nature of politics in this country and , indeed , in the region , I think that we have to try and give this government a chance to form itself properly , to agree to do the political and constitutional reforms , which are going to be so essential , to hold the elections it says it will have and , if it is willing to do those things , to support it now into the future .
And on that basis , I am very grateful for the comments which have been made and we will pursue the strategy as I have outlined .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in May .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the popular unrest that has broken out in recent days in the capital of Kyrgyzstan has halted the progress of the ' Tulip Revolution ' that kindled hopes of democratic change in the former Soviet republic in 2005 .
The European Parliament is following the development of the political crisis in the country with great concern . This is not merely because of the country 's crucial geostrategic position for Russia and the United States , but also because the stability of Central Asia , its political and economic development and interregional cooperation is of interest to the EU , not least , due to the importance of Central Asia for our energy supplies and our economic and trade partnership .
The risk of civil war breaking out and of a ' second Afghanistan ' must be averted .
We put our faith in the diplomatic mediation that the Presidents of the United States , Russia and Kazakhstan - the latter in his capacity as the current president of the OSCE - are deploying in their negotiations with the interim Kyrgyz Government for the establishment of public order and constitutional legality , in order that free elections can be held and the country 's problems resolved .
As Chair of the EU-Central Asia delegation , I hope , even despite the recent ethnic clashes , that we will do everything we can to bring about national peace and the lasting return of democratic life in Kyrgyzstan .
Stabilisation of the situation in Central Asia will guarantee good cooperation with the EU .
No one is in any doubt that Kyrgyzstan plays a special role here .
Kyrgyzstan is important to the European Union for strategic reasons - as a country which has sources of energy and natural resources , and because it is host to an American military base which is supporting NATO forces in Afghanistan .
At the same time , the failure to carry out suitable reforms after Kyrgyzstan gained independence has led to the dramatic situation which we are seeing today .
At present , let us concentrate on ensuring security to civilians and on giving them humanitarian aid .
In addition , we should take every possible measure to prevent radicalisation of the country .
We must not allow civil war to break out .
In the long-term perspective , it is essential to develop a new strategy for the entire region .
We need the rapid development of a specific EU position covering key aspects such as preventing religious fundamentalism , combating poverty and corruption , building civil society , the defence of human rights and democratisation .
In particular , we should send a team of observers to the next elections .
We have to keep abreast of what is happening and , while avoiding interference in internal affairs , we should do everything to help Kyrgyzstan turn to democracy and , after the situation stabilises , to carry out effective reforms .
I think that sending further aid from the EU to Kyrgyzstan must be conditional on the introduction of reforms which will ensure law and order and respect for human rights .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I welcome the fact that the European Union 's Special Representative has been sent to Kyrgyzstan .
We must know what the plans of the interim government there are . It must be guaranteed that there will be an end to violence in Kyrgyzstan , and the development of the rule of law and democracy there must be ensured .
During the revolution in Kyrgyzstan , the forces which came to power blamed President Bakiyev for restrictions on the free press , violence against journalists , the arrest of opposition leaders , corruption , a move away from democratic values and the country 's poor economic situation .
Our expectation should thus be to see Kyrgyzstan change before long into a democratic state governed by the rule of law .
At the same time , our hope will only be justified if we ourselves are prepared to direct resources into implementing this plan , because Kyrgyzstan 's struggling economy cannot afford the necessary support for carrying out the long-awaited social , economic and political reforms .
With the aim being to create sustainable development in the Central Asian region , we must , as well as offering economic help , also offer the interim government our know-how in carrying out reforms , just as we have done in Kosovo , Macedonia and elsewhere .
In this area , it is worth noting that Estonia has given this type of help to Ukraine as well as to Georgia , which shows that our experience of communicating with the people living in the area of the former Soviet Union cannot be underestimated .
With the change of regime which is taking place , we cannot miss any opportunity to facilitate a move towards democratic values in Kyrgyzstan .
It would therefore be irresponsible of us to leave Kyrgyzstan without support and make it dependent on some of its large neighbours .
EU - Canada Summit ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the EU-Canada Summit .
Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , Canada is one of the oldest and most like-minded partners of the European Union .
We work together on a wide range of issues - both bilaterally and , of course , around the world .
Our relationship is anchored in a shared history that goes back a long way and by common values that are deeply held .
It is on that basis that we cooperate to protect our common interests .
We do so of course for the benefit of citizens in Europe and in Canada , but also to promote security and prosperity worldwide .
So it is an important relationship .
We need to nurture and invest in it , so that we realise its full potential .
That is the purpose of the next EU-Canada Summit which will take place in Brussels on 5 May .
The timing is fortunate . Because it means that , as Canada is chairing the G8 and G20 summit at the end of June , our EU-Canada Summit allows us to take stock and align our strategies on global themes that will figure on the G8 and G20 summits , for example , how to promote a sustainable economic recovery , cooperation on financial market reform and regulation , climate change and combating nuclear proliferation .
I attended the G8 foreign ministers meeting recently in Canada where , indeed , many of these issues were discussed .
We will also have the chance to discuss EU-Canada bilateral relations and how we work together on regional crises .
Our aim is to have a focused , business-like summit .
With our bilateral relations , the summit will deal with efforts to upgrade and modernise the EU-Canada relationship .
It will offer us an excellent opportunity to provide support at the highest political level to reach an ambitious comprehensive economic and trade agreement as soon as possible .
We will take stock of the progress made during the first three rounds of negotiations but also give new impetus to these negotiations , bearing in mind its importance to expand trade and job creation .
On trade more generally , the summit should send a clear signal that the EU and Canada reject protectionism , recalling our commitment to reaching an ambitious , comprehensive and balanced conclusion of the Doha Development Round .
The summit should also address the subject of reciprocal visa-free travel .
Our goal is clear : we want visa-free travel to Canada for all EU citizens as soon as possible .
We will also have a chance to discuss our crisis management cooperation which , I am pleased to say , is expanding rapidly .
We have several crisis management operations ongoing , notably our police mission in Afghanistan , where our cooperation with Canada is exemplary .
Haiti will also be on the agenda of the summit for obvious reasons .
Canada plays a very important role in Haiti , and one of the areas where we can and should strengthen our joint efforts is in linking crisis management to longer-term development .
This was also the point I stressed during the New York conference on Haiti on 31 March which was co-chaired by both the EU and Canada , along with France , Spain and Brazil .
Along with my fellow Commissioners for Development , Andris Piebalgs , and for International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response , Kristalina Georgieva , I was pleased to announce at New York that the EU will contribute over EUR 1.2 billion to Haiti 's reconstruction and development .
The EU and Canada both have a long-term commitment to assist Haiti on the path to reconstruction ; to rebuild for a better future .
The summit will cover climate change .
Taking into account the post-Copenhagen context , adaptation to and mitigation of climate change will continue to top the agenda and will require supportive energy policies .
There is wide support for the idea that EU-Canada cooperation should focus on financing mechanisms as well as on support to third countries ' clean development .
The consequence of climate change for the Arctic will be another important element of our discussions at the summit .
Nowhere are the effects of climate change more keenly felt than in the Arctic region .
Environmental changes have a growing impact on the Arctic 's people , biodiversity and landscape - both on land and at sea .
Protecting the region , including its population , is a key objective of the EU 's evolving Arctic Policy , as honourable Members may recall from my presentation during the March Plenary session .
With more than 40 % of its land mass in the North , Canada shares our interest in protecting the Arctic environment and ensuring the sustainable economic and social development of the region .
Finally , when we talk about upgrading and modernising the EU-Canada relationship , we have the 1976 European Community-Canada framework agreement .
This is still in force but outdated .
EU-Canada cooperation has extended to other fields such as foreign and security policy and closer cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs .
So we need a modernised framework agreement to act as an umbrella for all our sectoral agreements , including the comprehensive economic and trade agreement and we are holding exploratory talks with Canada to upgrade that agreement at the present time .
In a world of big challenges and where change is constant , we need partners .
Canada is among the most important the European Union has .
We aim for a productive summit with clear results .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , thank you , Baroness Ashton , for your comprehensive statement .
As vice-chair of the delegation for relations with Canada in the European Parliament , I am particularly pleased that we are discussing in Parliament the forthcoming EU-Canada Summit .
As you know , the vote has unfortunately been postponed until the beginning of May .
However , I would like to present briefly the points that are important to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Since 1959 , Canada has been one of the closest and the oldest partners of the European Union .
Canada and the European Union share many common values and are firmly in favour of a multilateral approach to tackling global challenges .
In 2010 , Canada holds the G8 Presidency and will host the next G20 summit .
With regard to the current negotiations for a comprehensive economic and trade agreement between the European Union and Canada , it is important for us to deepen and strengthen the good relationship between the two partners at the forthcoming summit .
For this reason , we are calling in our joint resolution for a coordinated and coherent approach to the challenges which face us , in particular , with regard to the economic and financial crisis , foreign and security policy , development cooperation , climate and energy policy and the negotiations in the Doha round .
However , we are also calling for the problem of the visa requirement that has been partially reintroduced by the Canadian Government for EU citizens from the Czech Republic , Bulgaria and Romania to be resolved during the forthcoming EU-Canada Summit .
Against this background , we very much welcome the opening of a visa office in the Canadian Embassy in Prague and the establishment of an expert working group on this issue .
Finally , I would like to emphasise once again that I am convinced that the EU-Canada Summit will deepen the already close political relationship between the two parties .
Thank you for your commitment and your attention .
As Mrs Ashton , the High Representative , has also said , Canada is one of the European Union 's oldest partners , and this year 's summit is important in order to continue and consolidate this close cooperation in every area : economic , trade , climate change and military .
Indeed , I wish to welcome the measures which have been taken so far aimed at signing an EU-Canada trade agreement and I hope that this year 's meeting will give the necessary impetus to finalise it .
Bearing in mind the current economic situation and state of the climate , I must emphasise the need for close cooperation in order to identify alternatives to the traditional sources for producing energy , which will respect the particular features of both states , the European Union and Canada , which are involved in developing and using low carbon technology .
At the same time , cooperation should also be promoted in the energy-climate sector and maritime sector in the Arctic region .
There are also sensitive issues which will be touched on at the summit .
I am referring here to ecological issues , global warming , ACTA , CETA , the banking sector , bringing stability to financial and economic markets , the CITES conference and the EU-Canada agreement on PNR information .
I think that , bearing in mind the experiences from the past , the European Union and Canada will manage to resolve as many of these issues as possible .
However , these issues must be approached with tact and understanding , without any recriminations , simply looking ahead to the future and taking into account the interests of citizens on both sides .
Guaranteeing reciprocity in bilateral relations is one of the European Union 's basic principles .
We hope that , in the near future , Canada will waive the visa requirements for Romanian , Czech and Bulgarian nationals , thereby ensuring fair and equal treatment for all European Union citizens .
Finally , bearing in mind that the European Parliament 's opinion is required to sign any international treaty , it must be involved and consulted right at the initial phase of any project .
I take this opportunity to ask the Commission to establish effective communication with the European Parliament in order to achieve sustainable results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the partnership between the EU and Canada works very well , not only in the area of the economy , but also on questions of foreign policy , such as Iran , Afghanistan , Haiti and other similar cases .

Despite this , we are faced with a number of serious challenges .
I am sure that we can overcome them , because we have such a close friendship and partnership .
I am thinking about five points in particular .
Firstly , we must do the job of regulating the financial sector properly .
A great deal was promised by the G20 and I believe that it is important for it to be clearly shown at the G20 summit in Toronto , which is hosted by Canada , that the G20 countries are taking concrete measures and not just making promises .
My second point has already been mentioned .
We have very similar objectives with regard to climate policy .
We in Europe can definitely learn from Canada about carbon capture and storage projects and other developments in this sector .
We hope to be able to agree on joint standards for reductions .
My third point concerns the need for a new trade agreement and I believe that our objectives are very similar in this area as well .
I would like to highlight two points where action is needed and where we intend to move closer together , but still remain some distance apart .
One of these concerns visa-free travel , which you , Baroness Ashton , have already referred to .
I hope that it will be possible to treat ethnic minorities from EU Member States in the same way as all other EU citizens .
My last point relates to the passenger data agreement which expired in the autumn of last year .
It is de facto still in force , but no longer has a basis in law .
We need a new legal basis , so that we can produce a new agreement .
This new legal basis must ensure that civil rights are respected .
Modern technological opportunities for networking should not be used to make all the information on names , dates of birth , flight details , credit cards , and so on , readily available in such a way that this information can be misused .
We hope that we can work together to create a legal basis which corresponds to our European concept of civil rights .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Canada is a good friend and an important partner of the EU .
It is also an important international player and has long been a mature democracy which we can learn a lot from . However , because it is a long time since we have adopted a resolution on Canada in this House , we should take the opportunity to look more seriously at the relationship between Europe and Canada than this resolution does .
I find it rather embarrassing that the resolution refers to the many common challenges , but does not include the policy on the Arctic among them .
There is no mention of protecting the Arctic using targets and standards .
The Arctic is only referred to in passing and the fact that in March , Canada prevented Sweden , Finland , Iceland and the indigenous peoples from taking part in an international meeting on the Arctic in a rather unfriendly way is completely overlooked .
I am embarrassed that the problem of the tar sands , the bluefin tuna and the ban on seal culling are not addressed .
This is not all about provoking Canada . However , if we hold a serious discussion with a friend , it is foolish and shameful not to mention the problems that we have .
No mention is made of the fact that Canada did not play a particularly positive role in Copenhagen .
The problem of the visa policy , specifically with regard to the Czech Republic and its Roma people , should be highlighted more clearly .
We must work together in friendship , but we must not sweep the problems under the carpet , because that does not help anyone .
Therefore , my group will seek to ensure when we vote that the problem of the tar sands and of the import of seal products is included in the resolution .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , as chairman of the Delegation for relations with Canada , I warmly welcome this resolution , which is actually a first part of an EU-Canada Summit .
As has been said , Canada is one of Europe 's oldest partners , and strengthening our relations across the Atlantic has become a priority for both sides .
Again , as the noble lady said in her opening remarks , discussions are progressing with Canada for a comprehensive , economic and trade agreement which hopefully will set the standard for future trade agreements between the EU and third countries .
Parliament will have to approve these agreements , and I hope that the Commission will keep Members , especially the interparliamentary delegation and the International Trade Committee , fully informed and involved at each stage of these discussions .
The resolution before us is one that I can fully support as it is concise and sticks to the issues of the summit and our relations with the Canadian Government .
The resolution sets a positive tone for future discussions and illustrates this Parliament 's willingness to engage positively with our oldest trading partner .
It can be built upon to advance the reputation not only of this House , but also in future negotiations with other third countries .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , there has not been any assessment of the social , environmental and economic effects of an economic agreement between the European Union and Canada .
The Canadian Union of Public Employees , with 600 000 members in areas such as health care , education , local municipalities , public utilities and transport , is seriously concerned about the effects of such an agreement .
The National Union of Public and General Employees , with 340 000 members in Canada in the public and private sectors , is equally concerned , as is the Public Service Alliance of Canada , with 165 000 members .
These workers are concerned because they understand that such an agreement will be implemented primarily in the economic interests of big business in both Canada and in the European Union and not primarily in the interests of working people or of social justice .
Now , both the European and Canadian transnational corporations want to break into the provision of public services in Canada - on a maximisation-of-profit basis , of course .
They see an EU-Canada agreement as a vehicle to force extensive privatisation in areas like public transport , water provision and electricity .
Such a development would be ominous for Canadian workers ' pay and conditions .
It could be the beginning of a race to the bottom in exactly the same way as we have seen in Europe , where the EU Commission itself endorses the rights of private companies providing services to exploit workers , as proven when the Commission took the Luxembourg state to court for wanting migrant service workers to be given the same protection as Luxembourgish workers .
Now , Canadian water is a particular target of the water multinationals .
Some EU-based multinationals previously wreaked havoc in countries such as Bolivia with water privatisation and their baleful influence is already being felt in Canada .
Happily , ordinary people in Canada are prepared to fight to protect their public water provision .
They will need to be vigilant .
The European public sector workers ' trade unions are also concerned , and I call on both Canadian and EU-based unions to forge a real campaign to protect public ownership in public services with democratic control rather than maximisation of private profit , but not just a coming together at leadership level but a real involvement of the rank and file to protect their public services .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Europe and Canada have enjoyed a good partnership for many years , so it is only natural for us to seek to expand free trade .
Is the present method the best one , however , in view of the time that the negotiations have taken ?
Is the EU apparatus too cumbersome and bureaucratic to deal with this task ?
Canada would like a free trade agreement with the EU , but at the same time , Canada refuses to ban the terrible method used to slaughter seals that runs absolutely counter to all rules on animal welfare .
Similarly , Canada wants the right to tax shipping through an ice-free Northwest Passage .
A route north of America must be freely available to all , however .
The Northwest Passage is an ideal way to save time , money and fuel and benefit the environment .
It improves the competitiveness of all the countries of the northern hemisphere .
I therefore urge Canada to pursue the ideas behind the free trade agreement and drop any ideas of taxing use of the open sea .
( DE ) Mr President , as if it were not embarrassing enough that information has leaked out in the middle of the negotiations on the comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( CETA ) , the accusation has also been made that Canada is being forced to adapt its copyright laws to US and EU standards as part of the CETA and the anti counterfeit trade agreement ( ACTA ) .
It seems that the CETA refers to significant privatisation , deregulation and restructuring .
This involves local authorities being prevented from applying specific local or ethnic procurement guidelines .
Of course , it makes sense to put larger contracts out to tender and , of course , there must be rules in place to ensure that corruption and nepotism do not become rife .
When our local authorities here are already complaining that they are not allowed to use companies that show social commitment , but instead are generally forced to give contracts to the firms that dominate the market , it becomes even more incomprehensible that we are imposing similar regulations on other countries .
When free trade agreements allow multinational companies to sue governments for damages because of their decisions on environmental and health policy , it is clear that the European Union has learnt far too little from the financial and economic crisis and is continuing on the wrong , neoliberal course .
If the EU really wants to be there for its citizens , as the soapbox speakers always say , then it must stop going down the wrong road and turn itself into a bulwark against globalisation , while supporting friendly powers such as Canada .
( RO ) I would like , first of all , as other fellow Members have also done , to emphasise that the EU-Canada Summit is an important opportunity for deepening our partnership with this important democracy .
This relationship is extremely important to the EU as it involves partners who share the same values and have worked together over a long period of time .
At the same time , I would like to remind you of the declaration made at the previous EU-Canada Summit in Prague in May 2009 , which reiterated the partners ' common objective , and I quote , ' to enhance the free and secure movement of people between the EU and Canada , with a view to extending as soon as possible visa-free travel to Canada for all EU citizens ' .
One year on , we are obliged to note that we are far from achieving this objective .
Currently , not only are Romanians and Bulgarians still subject to a compulsory visa requirement , but , as you are aware , visas were reintroduced for the Czech Republic last year .
I think that we have here , first and foremost , a problem of reciprocity .
Given , as you are well aware , that all EU Member States have waived visas for Canadian citizens , in accordance with our legislation , we have , on the other hand , if I may say so , a problem of consistency as Canada has removed the visa requirement for one of the candidate countries , Croatia , while , I repeat , currently retaining visa requirements for citizens from EU Member States .
I believe therefore that the May summit must make significant , if not decisive progress on the issue of waiving visas for all EU Member State citizens .
I think that specific measures are required and this objective must be placed as high as possible on the agenda because we are no longer happy with declarations of principle .
This form of discrimination is extremely unfair , especially for citizens in the country where I come from , a Member State of the European Union , which has made significant technical progress in terms of waiving visas .
( DE ) Mr President , I am wondering why I always feel that I should suspect the Commission of not wanting to put things before the European Parliament .
That is the case with the free trade agreement which is being negotiated with Canada .
I would like to join in the criticism voiced by fellow Members who have said that some of the facts are suspicious , in particular , the one mentioned by Mr Higgins , and I fully agree with him .
In my opinion , trade agreements are a good thing if they promote general prosperity on both sides , but not when they serve the interests of a few large multinational companies almost exclusively .
When you find out that health , education or public security have suddenly become the subject of trade agreements and that they are to be deregulated and privatised , then you begin to suspect that the agreement is for the benefit of the few and will cause harm to many others .
I would like to send out a warning to the people who are attempting to bypass the European Parliament in introducing agreements of this kind .
The second point that I would like to make is as follows .
If you meet and negotiate with a long-term partner , such as Canada , you have to cover some unpleasant subjects .
I believe that a discussion and an agreement of this kind should include the issue of the seal cull .
This is not intended to annoy anyone , but to clarify the European position and to find a solution which would put an end to the appalling profit making at the expense of small animals .
( RO ) My fellow Member , Sebastian Bodu , was unable to make it to Strasbourg today and I am going to stand in for him .
At the moment , 39 million European citizens from Romania , the Czech Republic and Bulgaria are unable to travel to Canada without a visa .
More than half of this number - 22 million - are Romanians .
Retaining the visa scheme for entry into Canada , as in the case of the United States scheme too , creates the situation where some Europeans are second-class citizens .
European citizens ' freedom of movement must be treated on a uniform basis .
The visa issue affects the relationship between the European Union and Canada .
President Barroso called at the previous summits for a resolution of this matter .
This issue must continue to be raised .
In the case of Romania , the proportion of rejected visa applications from Romanian citizens has dropped from 16 % to 5 % between 2004 and 2008 .
Roughly 200 000 Romanians live in Canada , the large majority of whom have entered there through the Canadian state 's official immigration schemes .
I do not understand why Canada takes different approaches .
In 2009 , visas were waived for a European country which is not a European Union Member State , the reason being given that a large number of citizens originating from that country were already living in Canada .
I also believe that the Czech Republic must benefit again from the visa waiver .
The reason given for reintroducing visas must not become a factor for the other states .
The topic of visas has been entered on the agenda for the EU-Canada Summit by the European Parliament .
The EU must maintain the stance taken in October 2009 , which is to enforce the solidarity clause if the problem is not resolved by the end of 2010 .
Vice-President Ashton , achieving a visa waiver for Member States would be a major success for you in your job . I wish you every success in this endeavour .
( EL ) Mr President , Canada is one of the oldest and closest allies of the European Union and has been since 1959 .
However , our cooperation must always be based on common values and mutual respect .
Canada is one of the ten worst emitters of greenhouse gases in the world and is the only country which , even though it signed and ratified the Kyoto Protocol , then publicly announced that it had no intention of honouring its legal commitments .
Instead of reducing emissions by 6 % compared with 1990 , emissions in Canada have risen by 26 % .
The production of tar sand is the main cause .
Emissions of greenhouse gases from the production of tar sand are 3-5 times greater than from conventional production of oil and natural gas .
The production of tar sand also takes two to five barrels of water for every barrel of tar extracted and then creates a series of waste products which threaten both biodiversity and the life of the natives .
This production is also destroying the boreal forest , one of the biggest carbon sinks on the planet .
By 2020 , tar sand will probably have produced more emissions than Austria and Ireland .
Canada spends just USD 77 per person on green subsidies , compared with USD 1 200 for Korea , 420 for Australia and 365 for the United States .
Guaranteeing protection for the boreal forest is extremely important and it is important that we ask Canada to comply with the international agreements that we have jointly signed , but which only we are respecting unilaterally , and that should be the basis for any further cooperation .
( SK ) Since 1959 , Canada has been one of the closest and most stable partners of the European Union .
I am delighted that the economic situation has improved in Canada during the term of the current right-wing administration , which has not happened during previous electoral terms in this country .
The strengthening economic situation and the stronger Canadian dollar , which are leading to greater prosperity for Canadian citizens , have also sent a positive signal to other countries , creating favourable conditions for the development not only of political but also of economic cooperation .
I believe that the EU-Canada Summit in Brussels will bring concrete progress in negotiations over a complex agreement on economic partnership .
Canada is the eleventh largest trading partner of the EU , accounting for up to 1.7 % of overall foreign trade of the Union , and the EU is the second largest investor in Canada , while Canada is the fourth largest investor in the EU .
In 2008 , the total volume of goods reached almost EUR 50 billion , while services accounted for EUR 20.8 billion .
The liberalisation of trade in goods and services between the EU and Canada , along with greater access to markets , will make it possible to invigorate and deepen bilateral trade , which will certainly bring significant benefits to both the EU and the Canadian economies .
( CS ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the common visa policy of the EU now faces a major challenge in the form of the visa requirement imposed by Canada for the past 10 months on citizens of the Czech Republic .
Canada , through its unilateral measure in relation to the Czech Republic , has also quite unacceptably bypassed the EU bodies responsible for the common visa policy .
The rights of citizens of a Member State , as well as the prestige of the EU institutions which uphold these rights , have thus come under threat .
The unprecedented action of the Canadian Government towards a Member State of the Union confronts the entire EU with a test of solidarity .
Czech citizens are relying on the European Commission resolutely to take on the role of defender and representative of a Member State and its legitimate interests .
There will be a unique opportunity for this at the forthcoming EU-Canada Summit , where the visa question should be among the points of discussion .
It is high time that all possible steps were taken to achieve a breakthrough in this long drawn-out affair .
I applauded the fact that the Commission , in October 2009 , adopted a report in which it called on Canada to open a visa office in Prague and to establish a timetable for lifting the visa requirement .
Canada has fulfilled the first requirement but not yet the second , and therefore neither the European Commission nor the Council should be satisfied with progress to date .
The pressure on Canada should not be relieved , but , on the contrary , should rather be increased .
In this context , I would like to call on the Commission to make a clear statement regarding its commitment to propose , in case of insufficient progress , countermeasures involving the introduction of a visa requirement for Canadian officials and diplomats .
I firmly believe that we must stop dragging our feet .
Czech citizens do not expect fine promises and sympathetic noises from EU bodies , but concrete , goal-orientated actions .
In my opinion , the ball is now in the hands of the Commission and especially President Barroso , who will be the main negotiating partner of the Canadian premier at the summit .
If we fail to start acting self-confidently and forcefully towards the Canadian Government , any efforts we make will lose effect and the result will be that the faith of Czech citizens in European institutions will be seriously undermined . Our talk of European solidarity will then be so much hot air to them .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the EU delegation for relations with Canada , I would like to emphasise the fact that Canada and the EU share common values .
Our common values form the basis for the structure of our society and are of fundamental importance in this respect .
We should make increasing use of this common foundation to take joint responsibility for restructuring basic global conditions .
Our close historic and cultural links and our respect for multilateralism , including our support for the Charter of the United Nations , form the foundation of our partnership .
We must improve and strengthen our relationship on a variety of levels , in particular , of course , on the political level .
The agreement that we are discussing today will be the first based on the new treaty and the Commission should be aware of this .
The main requirements for a successful decision-making process for this agreement are transparency , cooperation and the inclusion of Parliament .
Two important subjects have been raised in this discussion .
The one-sided visa rules for Czech citizens are unacceptable and should be abolished .
Canada 's criticism of the strict regulations on the sale of seal products is an indication not that we need to change , but that Canada must change .
However , one of the objectives of the EU-Canada agreement is that we should work together to create a stronger trade area than the North American free trade agreement ( NAFTA ) area .
This is not just about economic cooperation , but also about sending out a clear signal that protectionism is not acceptable .
It is a lucky coincidence that Joe Biden is speaking in the European Parliament in Brussels on the same day as the EU-Canada Summit is taking place , because effective , professional cooperation with both parts of the North American continent is important to us and because together , we want to take more responsibility in the world .
( CS ) Baroness Ashton , I would like to point out to you that the Achilles heel regarding successful ratification of the agreement between the EU and Canada is the unilateral visa requirement for the Czech Republic , Romania and Bulgaria , because it creates an unacceptable form of second class citizenship in the EU .
Not just the other countries showing solidarity with us , but also many MEPs will be perfectly entitled to block ratification if Canada fails to fulfil the promise to tighten its lax asylum policy , which is supposed to be the precondition for lifting visa requirements .
Baroness Ashton , can you tell me whether you have pointed out to Canada that it is not acceptable for the country to postpone until 2013 the tightening of this generous asylum act which is open to abuse , and that it must amend the act as soon as possible , bearing in mind the shared values and good economic relations it has with the European Union , the terms of which are to be contained in the new trade agreement ?
Madam Vice-President , do you consider it your priority to raise the question of bringing forward this deadline at the summit with Canada in two weeks ' time , and to get the visa requirement lifted before signing the agreement with Canada ?
If this is not the case , are you aware of the possibility that this important agreement may not be ratified here in the European Parliament , because we do not intend to accept this behaviour on the part of Canada towards the three Member States of the EU ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you on behalf of millions of citizens for your solidarity , and to applaud the fact that the draft of your joint resolution , which we will vote on in Brussels , includes a clear call for the amendment of the Canadian asylum system and the quickest possible lifting of the visa requirement for almost 50 million European citizens .
( IT ) Mr President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the discussion and the debate in this Chamber lend great strength to its actions with a view to the May summit .
There is no doubt about the ideas that everyone has expressed : the importance of our relationship with Canada , the importance of the partnership and our shared values with a great democratic country with which we have a strategic need to cooperate .
However , some questions have been raised which , in my opinion , and on the basis of your mandate from this House , are questions which absolutely must be dealt with and , if possible , resolved , because it is the solutions that count at the end of the day , not the battles .
The first of these concerns the need to stress the principle of reciprocity regarding the free movement of Canadian and European citizens .
I am neither Czech , nor Romanian , nor Bulgarian , and other Romanian colleagues have spoken before me , but , all the same , as a European citizen , I feel just as cheated of my rights if European citizens cannot move freely around Canada - I am talking quickly , because you understand me , Mr President , but I think you would like me to repeat it for the translation - but , all the same , I feel cheated if other citizens from other European countries cannot move freely around Canada , while Canadian citizens can move freely around all the European countries .

Moving onto the issue of the seal massacre : we are always moved when television programmes or press enquiries show the vicious , terrible actions used in certain hunting pursuits : in this Parliament , we have the chance to voice our opinions , and I believe that we should stop feeling upset and protesting and start taking action .
Our relationship with a great democratic country such as Canada should also allow us to bring up problems and to request moratoriums .
I thank Baroness Ashton for the action she will take and report back to this Parliament , beginning with the summit in May .
( CS ) Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in connection with the forthcoming EU-Canada Summit , I would like to mention one of the fundamental principles on which the EU is based .
This is the principle of solidarity . This value must be respected in all circumstances if the EU wants to retain the trust of its citizens , even in cases which involve a problem for just one Member State .
As has already been said , in July 2009 , Canada introduced a visa requirement for citizens of the Czech Republic .
At the request of the Czech Republic , the question of visa relations with Canada was included as an item at the February meeting of the Council of Justice and Internal Affairs .
Solidarity with the Czech Republic was expressed at the meeting by Romania , Bulgaria , Hungary and Slovakia , and also in clear terms by the Spanish Presidency .
The Commission also proclaimed solidarity , although there is no concrete solution in sight , even after negotiations between the groups of experts .
Time moves on , and it is decidedly not working in favour of the EU and its citizens .
For EU citizens from the Czech Republic , waiting for a new Canadian asylum act to be passed as a condition for lifting the visa requirement , with the closest realistic deadline in 2013 , is hard to swallow .
In this context , they are therefore expecting real help from the EU .
If we often talk of citizens having a crisis of confidence in European institutions , let us also seek reasons for it in an approach , which , unfortunately , has not been one of complete solidarity so far .
Mr President , I hope the High Representative will congratulate the Canadians on their diplomatic skills because they have something to teach us .
At the recent conference on the trade in endangered species ( CITES ) , they teamed up with their Japanese allies to comprehensively defeat our attempt to introduce a trade ban on bluefin tuna .
That CITES conference was all too reminiscent of the one on climate change in Copenhagen , where the EU position was unclear .
We seemed to have spent a lot of time debating amongst ourselves , rather than debating with others , on a day-by-day basis and we ended up being soundly thrashed .
Japan and its Canadian allies had spent months beforehand doing the rounds , winning friends and buying a bit of influence here and there in order to get the votes they needed to get the result they wanted .
We ended up coming out looking incoherent , disorganised and weak .
The Environment Commissioner has said that this must never happen again .
He is determined to make a change .
However , we have conferences of this kind taking place across the world all the time and we need to ensure that we are harnessing the full diplomatic skills of the European Union to ensure we have a forward-looking strategy , that we use our resources effectively , and that we stop punching below our weight .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to highlight a very serious problem in enforcing intellectual property rights in these negotiations .
Critical comments from Canadian professors of law and also from Harvard indicate that the planned agreement could amount to a complete revision of Canadian copyright , patent and trademark law .
On the one hand , the Canadians feel that their sovereignty and their right to make use of their own intellectual property are being restricted .
However , on the other hand , strict and precise rules governing copy protection and the extension of this protection to cover films are very , very important .
It seems to me particularly crucial to include the Internet in any discussions on the enforcement of intellectual property rights , because it is impossible to protect intellectual property on the Internet without cross-border agreements .
I am in favour of a specific ban on recording with video cameras in cinemas .
This should be enforced in Canada .
However , it is important for us to find a middle way .
We should support the protection of intellectual property , but oppose blanket surveillance and persecution on the Internet .
Of course , it is also important to take into account that Canada has a different legal tradition and a different legal system .
This is a very difficult problem to solve , but I hope that we can find an effective solution .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , our most important concern should be to provide support for small and medium-sized businesses , particularly during an economic crisis .
These companies employ two-thirds of all workers and generate 80 % of tax income .
For this reason , it is essential for public tenders to focus on giving small and medium-sized enterprises the opportunity to be awarded public contracts .
Of course , the technical regulations , in other words , the trade facilitation measures , must also be adequately taken into consideration in this agreement .
What I would like to know is whether there is an agreement with the World Trade Organisation to incorporate the basic principles of the Doha negotiations into this free trade agreement .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , air transport is vital for bringing the European Union and Canada closer to each other by facilitating the transportation of goods and persons .
The EU-Canada air transport agreement , signed on 18 December 2009 , and the agreement on civil aviation safety between the European Union and Canada , signed in Prague on 6 May 2009 , are two important elements in the transatlantic dialogue between the European Union and Canada .
The first agreement is enforced provisionally until its entry into force after its ratification .
The Council has not yet received any notification in this regard .
The second agreement is not enforced provisionally .
The Council must send the proposal for a Council decision and the text of the agreement to the European Parliament for its opinion .
Bearing in mind the importance of air transport in the cooperation between the European Union and Canada , I would like to ask you , Vice-President , when the two agreements between the European Union and Canada will be able to enter into force properly .
Mr President , Canada is a close ally , but the EU must be a critical friend where necessary .
Canada 's record on climate change is poor and Canada was obstructive during the Copenhagen negotiations .
Of particular concern is the tar sands industry , as Mr Arsenis mentioned .
Extracting oil from tar sands requires much more energy than oil produced from other sources , as well as being very polluting for the local environment .
Given that the Canadian Government is currently trying hard to get the Commission to weaken its approach to carbon measurement in the implementation of the Fuel Quality Directive , may I ask the High Representative whether she will be raising the issue of tar sands in the summit discussions ?
Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , this has been an extremely useful and valuable debate for the preparations for the summit .
Honourable Members have covered a wide range of different topics and I shall not least be making sure that the two presidents - the President of the Commission and the President of the Council - who , of course , will be leading the European Union at the summit , are fully aware of the issues that have been raised .
I am very grateful for the helpful way in which Members of Parliament have given me information , and put questions on areas I have to confess I do not know very much about - for example , on air transport , which I will have to find out about for them .
I would like just to pick up on two or three of the key areas that were discussed .
In the context , there seemed to be a general view among honourable Members that this is an important relationship .
Perhaps some of the frustrations I felt in the Chamber were because we recognise the importance of Canada and the importance of the shared values that we hold .
The frustration of those honourable Members from the countries particularly affected by the visa question is therefore completely understandable .
Let me begin with trade , because quite a lot of the different contributions focused on that .
We are right to go for an ambitious trade agreement .
This will not be easy and from the very beginning - and I actually launched the trade negotiations - we recognised that , because of the particular interests of the EU and Canada , this was never going to be an easy negotiation .
However , we should be very ambitious on both sides .
One example is intellectual property rights , where I am very concerned that Canada needs to make sure it has a proper regime in place .
I know that it is looking at that and that the discussions and the rounds so far have been extremely positive and constructive and things are moving at a good pace .
I agree that we need to keep the Committee on International Trade fully informed and , as Mr Bradbourn said , those with a particular interest in Canada also need to be clearly in the loop on that .
There will be an impact assessment , which is already being worked on at the present time , and , of course , Parliament will play its role in giving assent or not to the agreement when it is finally put forward .
There is a very clear and key role for Parliament there .
All I would add to that are two things .
One is that a good trade agreement actually benefits our citizens .
That is what it is for .
It is to make sure that for consumers , there are greater choices and for workers , there are greater opportunities .
We need to ensure that all our trade agreements provide genuine opportunities across the European Union .
On the point on small and medium-sized enterprises , which I agree is very significant , I am reminded that one of the statistics that always struck me as being very interesting is that only 8 % of our small and medium-sized enterprises actually trade , and only 3 % trade outside of the European Union .
I have always felt , and continue to do so , that if we were able to increase those figures and provide opportunities - and government procurement may indeed be one of the areas where that is a possibility - then that is an opportunity in both directions for our small and medium-sized enterprises to benefit .
A number of honourable Members talked about the Arctic , and we have had discussions about that in recent times in Parliament .
I accept that this is a very important issue , not least because it links to the other important issue I wanted to raise before I mention visas , which is climate change .
As far as we are concerned , Canada did belong to the group of countries that , in the Copenhagen negotiations , did not , in our view , take us anywhere near far enough .
We can debate Copenhagen further - and no doubt in other conversations with the Commissioner responsible , there will be opportunities to do so .
We were interested that , in the Speech from the Throne on 3 March , the Canadian Government stated that it fully supports the Copenhagen climate change accord .
That is significant , and what we want to do in the context of the summit is to encourage and urge Canada to be ambitious , notably in increasing its mitigation target for 2020 .
The international carbon market is key in shifting investment towards a low-carbon economy , and part of what we are able to do in our bilateral relationship is to push forward on those strategic questions of investment , of green technology and of collaboration , in trying to support all the measures we need to take to mitigate the problems of climate change .
The final issue - and there were many , but I just want to pick on three - and one which I , of course , wanted to raise , is the whole question of visas .
This is extremely important and , as Member States represented here through their MEPs have mentioned , there are three Member States who are actually affected .
There is a lot of work going on to try and resolve this matter .
We have had a lot of dialogue with Canada , a lot of the issues are well known and there are issues for Canada to resolve in terms of the legislation that it needs to put in place for the future .
Honourable Members were quite right to raise this question and it will be part of the discussions .
The second expert working group meeting took place in Prague to look at the issues particularly relevant to the Czech Republic , and that has been facilitated by the Commission , so the Commission is fully involved .
I did pick up on , and will take away from this debate , the frustration of honourable Members who have raised the need to work quicker and further to address this problem and to recognise what is absolutely the most significant point of this , which is that this is not a bilateral issue , but a European Union-Canada issue , and we need to address it as such .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in May .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At the moment , 39 million European citizens from Romania , the Czech Republic and Bulgaria are unable to travel to Canada without a visa .
More than half of this number , 22 million , are Romanians .
Retaining the visa scheme for entry into Canada for some of us is an untenable situation as it creates two classes of European citizens .
European citizens ' freedom of movement must be treated on a common , uniform basis , while the visa issue concerns the relationship between the EU and Canada and not bilateral relations between Canada and the respective states .
In the case of Romania , the proportion of rejected visa applications from Romanian citizens has dropped from 16 % to 5 % between 2004 and 2008 .
Roughly 200 000 Romanians live in Canada , some of whom have entered there through official Canadian immigration schemes .
This is one of the reasons for a large number of visa applications .
The topic of visas was entered on the agenda for the EU-Canada Summit by the European Parliament .
The EU 's stance must be to apply the solidarity clause if the issue is not resolved by the end of 2010 .
The waiver of visas for Member States would be a first achievement for the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
I think that one of the priority issues on the agenda for the EU-Canada Summit , scheduled to take place in Brussels on 5 May , must be to waive visas for all European Union citizens , on the basis of reciprocity and in order to eliminate the current discrimination preventing Romanian , Bulgarian and Czech citizens from visiting Canada without a visa .
This situation is all the stranger considering that , last year , the Canadian authorities removed the compulsory requirement to apply for short-stay visas for citizens of Croatia , a country still negotiating its accession to the EU .
Romania has made significant progress in the last few years , including with regard to certain important criteria for removing the visa scheme .
The rate of rejection of visa applications , the rate of exceeding the legal residence period and the number of asylum applications are in steady decline .
This is why the visa waiver would reflect this development , not to mention that equal treatment given to European and Canadian citizens would help strengthen mutual trust .
Question Time ( Commission )
Τhe next item is Question Time ( B7-0207 / 2010 / rev. 1 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one :
Subject : Creation of a European credit rating authority
Does the Commission intend to propose the creation of a European credit rating authority for the Member States of the eurozone and / or their credit institutions ?

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Papastamkos for this question on a subject which , in my current capacity , I consider absolutely essential to the proper functioning of the economy and the financial markets .
Credit rating agencies play a crucial role in assessing the risks associated with the situation of companies and also , for that matter , of the Member States , and the crisis has shown - and this is putting it mildly - that their method of operating has posed and continues to pose problems , with very serious consequences at times .
That is why the G20 quite rightly took tough decisions to put in place supervision and new rules of governance .
I wish to remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that at the time of the crisis , the Commission very quickly assumed its responsibilities in this regard , prioritising the regulation of the activities of credit rating agencies over the last two years .
In September 2009 - in other words , one year after the collapse of Lehman Brothers - the regulation on credit rating agencies was adopted with Parliament 's support ; I would like to pay particular tribute to the work of your rapporteur , Mr Gauzès , to address the problems caused by these agencies ' operating methods , which contributed significantly to the financial crisis .
The regulation of which I speak introduced a system of compulsory registration for all credit rating agencies established on European Union territory .
It imposed a set of stringent requirements : firstly , to ensure that possible conflicts of interest are brought to an end ; secondly , to review and improve the quality of ratings and the methodology used ; and , finally , to ensure that these rating agencies operate in a transparent way .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am confident that the new rules on credit rating agencies about which I have just been speaking will definitely improve the independence and integrity of the rating process , will make credit-rating activities more transparent , and will improve the quality of such ratings , including those relating to the sovereign debt of the Member States - the countries of the European Union - and of the EU 's financial institutions .
That is the stage we are at .
Mr Papastamkos , as regards the creation of a European public credit rating agency such as the one for which you are calling , it is an idea that is becoming part of the debate on possible alternatives to the credit rating agencies ' current economic model , which is known as an ' issuer pays ' model .
The effects of such an idea must be carefully evaluated , particularly in terms of responsibility .
Clearly , Mr Papastamkos , my first priority today is to ensure that the 2009 regulation is properly implemented and to make the current , reformed system work .
However , I am not ruling out this idea that you support of creating a European agency .
It must be considered in the light of the evaluation of the 2009 regulation and of its effects on credit rating agencies .
Moreover , this evaluation is provided for in the regulation , and the Commission must submit it to Parliament and the Council between now and December 2012 .
What I can confirm is that the Commission will soon be proposing an amendment to the regulation on credit rating agencies in order to entrust the new European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) with overall responsibility for supervising these agencies .
You in Parliament requested this when the regulation was being negotiated , and the Heads of State or Government have reached agreement on this principle .
We will , therefore , make this amendment .
I am convinced that the transfer to the new authority for the supervision of credit rating agencies will strengthen and improve the regulatory framework that we in the European Union have at our disposal .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Barnier for his reply and to say , Commissioner , that this is a subject on which I have repeatedly exercised parliamentary scrutiny since back in 2006 , in other words , before the international economic crisis broke .
In my opinion , there are two paradoxes : there are international rating firms , but they are not subject to international supervision .
The second paradox is that private schemes and interests outside Europe are acting high-handedly against European institutions and Member States .
I should like - and I call , Commissioner - for Europe to move at a faster rate and with a quicker pace and , finally , I should like to know where the geographical seat is and how the turnover of these credit firms will be divided ?

Mr President , Mr Papastamkos , I am aware of your long-standing commitment , and that is why I welcome this dialogue that you are opening between us for the first time today , because I personally have only been in post for a few weeks .
I am taking account of this new regulation , which was proposed by the previous Commission , under Mr Barroso 's authority , and which improves matters .
I have mentioned the new requirements that will be imposed on credit rating agencies and I have spoken about the latest progress that will be made on the proposal that I shall put to you , in accordance with your wishes , for supervision by the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) .
You are right in what you say : this is not the only area in which , in a now highly integrated common and single market , we see that there are businesses , particularly financial businesses , that are no longer nationally owned .
I would remind you , Mr Papastamkos , that in half the countries of our European Union , 50 % of the banking industry belongs to groups from other countries .
We are therefore in an integrated market with businesses that are largely transnational , but supervision has remained at national level .
Our task , therefore , is to ensure integration , and that is what we are committed to doing .
With the new powers being granted to ESMA , the international - European , let us say - supervision that you are calling for will be very much a reality .
Now , as regards your country , which has suffered this shock , we must be very vigilant .
I am not going to jump to conclusions about what happened .
We must be vigilant in all cases in which credit rating agencies reach decisions on the Member States , and evaluate their economic situation and that of their public role .
Why ?
Because at stake here is , in fact , a sovereign state , the cost of its debt and , in the final analysis , the situation of its taxpayers , who I believe are too often made to bear the brunt of things .
This , incidentally , was the subject of the proposals that I made to the Ecofin in Madrid on Saturday on foreseeing , preventing and managing future crises , so that taxpayers do not always have to bear the brunt of things .
I am very aware of the effects of the decisions taken by credit rating agencies and of the effect that these decisions have on the behaviour of investors .
That is why we need tough , demanding legislation , and these agencies must weigh up all their responsibilities and must be supervised in order to do so .
They will be supervised by the European authorities under the proposals that I will be making at the end of this year .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you for the excellent report .
It makes me feel quite optimistic that establishing the European credit rating authority will finally make us independent of private US agencies .
However , what interests me in this context is not only the location , but also the functional and structural composition of this European credit rating authority .
Ultimately , it is important for an organisation of this kind to have teeth .
I am , of course , also interested in the expected consequences of the proceedings and in the consequences of a member of the euro area having a bad creditworthiness rating .


Mr Obermayr , Mr Papastamkos asked me about the opportunity , which he supports , of creating a European credit rating agency .
This agency , if I have understood his idea properly , should be public .
I have not taken up a position on this subject .
This is not , I might add , the direction in which the Commission was heading , since its proposal focused - through the regulation that this House adopted - on the reform of the current system of agencies , which are private , and on the very rigorous consolidation of the transparency requirements to avoid conflicts of interest , of honesty in their credit rating work .
This is the stage we are at .
This regulation is now on the table , it will enter into force as soon as possible , without delay - I mention this in passing - and we will then complete this plan by entrusting a supervisory role to the European Securities and Markets Authority .
As regards this new agency that Mr Papastamkos so very much wants , I am not ruling it out .
Nevertheless , we really need time to evaluate the change in business model which the idea of a European credit rating agency entails .
It is an idea that I find interesting , but it must be carefully evaluated .
I am not , therefore , going to say who would be part of it or how it would work , because I do not know .
There would also be the question of the public authorities interfering in the work of such an agency .
The strict conditions applied to private credit rating agencies should also apply to a European public agency , in particular , the rules on conflicts of interest .
These issues would arise if we moved towards the creation of a new European public agency .
Frankly , in order to work on this matter seriously , without improvising , we would need , firstly , to take the time and the decisions necessary to implement the reformed system that you have adopted through this regulation , and , secondly , to take the time to seriously address every issue and , in particular , those that I have just mentioned .
The rule is that , if the author is absent , the question lapses .
However , given the exceptional circumstances of this plenary , what we shall do is I shall read out the names of the Members who are not present and they will receive a written reply to their questions .
However , there will be no related debate in plenary .
So , the members who are absent but will receive a written reply , in the order in which the questions were submitted , are Mr Balčytis and Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienė .
Part two :
Subject : Consumer choice and smart phone technology
The increasing popularity of smart phones has created a new market in terms of technology , software and applications .
Certain smart phone and device service providers trap consumers and have organised the market in such a way that they completely control users ' experience in terms of their access to software , navigating programmes and applications .
It would appear that , under these circumstances , consumer choice is limited .
Does the Commission intend to safeguard consumer rights and choice in this growing digital market and can it tell us if open operating systems will offer a way out for smart phone consumers ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission is closely monitoring the developments regarding smart phones and related markets .
As the honourable Member recognises in his question , in some instances , new markets are being created .
The Commission is fully committed to ensuring that general EU rules and principles relating to competition are respected , while taking account of the dynamic and fast-changing circumstances in the market .
As recent cases such as Microsoft and Intel have shown , the Commission will take enforcement action to ensure that competition on the merits allows , where necessary , consumers to choose between different alternatives and therefore benefit from technical developments and innovations .
In that respect , while acknowledging that proprietary technology is at the heart of Europe 's success in second- and third-generation mobile technologies , the Commission is , at the same time , aware of the excellent technical development driven by non-profit technologies .
While we have to leave it up to the industry to decide the specific business model it wants to use and up to the market to choose the winner , the Commission emphasises the importance of interoperability in encouraging competition on the merits between technologies from different companies and helping prevent lock-in .
In this context the Commission welcomes the use of openness specifications that may prevent the unfair transmission of dominant positions between neighbouring markets .
Open platforms serve that purpose , allowing the creation of competitive markets on top of software systems .
Can I thank the Commissioner for the reply .
Just changing , slightly , there have been a number of news stories recently regarding the concept of content-based censorship which is occurring with this technology .
Some applications have been refused by operators and software manufacturers due to their political content .
What can the Commission do to ensure that there is increased competition in accessing information via new technologies and that the right to freedom of speech is not infringed upon ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - I know that the points you refer to in your second question can create problems for competition on the market .
We are closely monitoring this issue all the time but I cannot comment on particular investigations that are now ongoing or are being developed .
However , I am fully aware that the questions that you raised and the concerns that you have presented to Parliament are real , and my role and that of the competition authority is to monitor the situation and to avoid a kind of dominant position with closure of the market , barriers for new entrants and , ultimately , problems for the consumers and users of these new technologies , who should benefit and not suffer from the development and improvement of technologies .
( DE ) Mr Barnier , in the first Roaming Regulation for data exchange and telephony , we established a must-carry obligation , which means that every operator in Europe must be able to reach every customer .
Conflicts are now suddenly arising from the fact that operators are removing these services from the networks and are not prepared to provide the necessary support .
Do you think it is necessary for the national regulatory bodies to take action in this case ?
( DE ) I welcome the fact that the Commission is dealing with this subject from a competition perspective .
My question is : Has the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled on similar cases and could these cases be cited in the context of this type of access restriction ?
Are there any users of smart phones who have already attempted to take legal proceedings against their service providers ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - In relation to the question , I think we should combine , where appropriate , regulation and competition instruments .
In terms of some of the aspects that were raised in the questions and in your intervention , competition instruments have been useful and shall continue to be useful , but I am not excluding that at any moment , the Commission , where appropriate , will use the regulatory powers that we have .
We did this in the past and we can do it again in the future .
I think the best solution is an adequate mix of competition and regulation , not as alternative instruments , but as complementary ones .
And , regarding your question , excuse me , honourable Member , I am not a lawyer ; I do not know the least thing about the complaints of individual citizens before the courts .
In any case , we receive some information and sometimes complaints , and every time that we need to react where we consider that the information we have received or the complaints that have been sent to the Commission deserve a reaction on our part - and you have seen our instrument - we do just that .
As I said in my previous answer , in this area , in this question , with these problems , we are now dealing with some investigations but I cannot publicly confess because by nature , I have to be discreet .

The next author , Mr Toussas , who is absent , and Mr Ziobro , will receive written replies , as explained earlier .
Subject : Activity of credit rating agencies
The day after the harsh measures taken by the Greek Government were announced , the credit rating agency Moody 's is threatening to downgrade the five biggest banks in Greece .
According to the international credit rating agency , the rise in unemployment and the fall in disposable income may cause additional pressure on the Greek banking system , which is already facing lower profits and further depreciation of its assets .
As announcements of this sort and the time at which they are made feed speculation , what comments does the Commission have on the situation in the Greek banking system ?
What measures does it intend to take on the ' activity ' of credit rating agencies ?
Member of the Commission . - The financial crisis in Greece did not originate in the banking sector but in the public sector .
Banking sector vulnerability has increased , however , due to the exposure of the banks to Greek government bonds and , more importantly , due to low economic growth prospects .
The Commission , in making its own analysis of the Greek economy and financial system , takes into consideration multiple sources of information , including the credit agencies .
In this context , the Commission is carefully monitoring implementation of the additional fiscal measures announced by the Greek authorities on 3 March 2010 and adopted by the Greek Parliament on 5 March 2010 , with a view to achieving the 2010 budgetary targets .
The Commission is closely monitoring developments in the Greek banking sector .
Some 8 % of the banks ' assets are in the form of government bonds or loans , although the government and non-performing loans arising are not expected to top eight per cent in 2010 due to the weak economy .
Furthermore , Greek banks are heavily dependent on the ECB refinancing operations for short-term funding being shut off from the international money markets .
The Commission takes its responsibility to ensure macro-financial stability in the euro area and the EU as a whole .
Indeed , banks in other EU countries are exposed to the Greek crisis mainly through their holdings of government debt , with France and Germany the most concerned .
While these exposures are not very large in terms of GDP , they are likely to be more significant in terms of the balance sheets of individual banks .
Meanwhile , about 10 % of Greek banks ' balance sheets is invested in southern and eastern Europe , implying another transmission channel .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
Obviously , there are problems with the banks in Greece .
There is the liquidity that has been produced by the Greek public sector which , unfortunately , is not moving towards the real economy ; but what I should like to point out to you is that every time that Greece announces certain measures , certain forms of borrowing , these famous credit rating agencies come along and downgrade the credit rating of Greece and the Greek banks .
This is a sad role .
A debate was held earlier , and I have no wish to recycle it .
These credit rating agencies , which are private US firms , are truly unreliable and I consider it unacceptable for the European Central Bank and the European institutions to consider them - even today - to be important .
The question which arises , and the answers which were heard earlier , are this : alright , the issue may be regulated in 2013 .
Right now , can the European Union and the institutions stop taking account of these agencies ' ratings ?
Member of the Commission . - As I have just said , in its own analysis , the Commission is taking into account not only the credit rating agencies but also its own analyses .
The European Commission is following events very closely in the public and in the banking sector in Greece , so we come to our own conclusions and make proposals to the Council on the basis of those conclusions .
There is something else , of course , and that is the activity of the credit rating agencies .
These are private companies , which are very influential with respect to the financial markets , but that , of course , is not the responsibility of the European Commission .
( DA ) Mr President , we are all very concerned about what we can do to relieve the problems arising from the financial crisis .
Commissioner , I saw that in the media the other day , you suggested that , in future , the Member States should submit their draft budgets to the Commission before they are debated and adopted by the national parliaments .
I would like you to give us more details as to how the Commission will , in future , be given opportunity to comment on the Member States ' draft budgets before the national parliaments do so .
It sounds extremely interesting .
I would like to hear more about it .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your reply .
I listened with a great deal of attention to the information which you gave us and how you explained the Commission 's position .
I am trying to reach a conclusion .
If , at some point in the immediate future , another country in the euro area faces similar problems with credit rating agencies and market pressures , will we proceed along the same well-trodden path ?
Will we adopt a ' wait and see ' approach ?
Will we assume that , with the approach that we have applied to date to the problem of Greece , we are dealing overall with structural problems in the euro area which may , at some point , be of concern to other Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - Let me first of all recall that I am answering these questions in place of Commissioner Rehn , who is ill , so this is not my particular portfolio , but I can say , on the questions that have been raised with respect to the national budget that we discussed for the first time last week in the college , what measures should be taken for the future monitoring .
That is , of course , one of the topics that will be addressed , but it is clear that at this moment , there is no decision on that yet .
There has only been a debate to make sure that the matter is duly discussed in the college and the competent Commissioner will come with proposals shortly .
Then you can , of course , discuss it with him directly .
On the second question , there is no reason for the Commission to take a different stance vis-à-vis Greece and vis-à-vis whatever other Member State , so I hope these questions are not put to us any more ; if they were put to us again , we would have exactly the same stance .
Subject : EU broadband strategy
Can the Commission clarify what measures it intends to take in order to promote high-speed Internet access throughout the territory of the European Union , especially in rural areas ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - In a world that is moving fast into a new digital age , Europe needs to be prepared with the state of the art broadband infrastructure that will indeed drive the growth of tomorrow .
The Council of March 2009 fixed an indicative target of achieving 100 % coverage by 2013 .
The Europe 2020 strategy has taken the challenge one step further by setting the 2020 high-speed broadband targets as 30 megabits per second for all Europeans , including people living in rural regions , and as 100 megabits per second for 50 % of households subscribing to the Internet .
The Digital Agenda for Europe , which is one of the seven flagship initiatives under EU 2020 , sets out a strategy to promote high-speed Internet in Europe and is scheduled for adoption not that long from now .
The agenda will be followed by three documents on broadband : firstly , broadband communication , which details the implementation of the agenda with respect to broadband ; secondly , the recommendation on new generation access ( NGA ) , which aims to clarify the basis to encourage investment in high-speed Internet ; and thirdly , the first radio spectrum policy programme , which will form the basis of the Commission 's strategy to generate enough spectrum for wireless broadband .
The actions to promote high-speed broadband in the Digital Agenda comprise not only the Commission commitment but also suggestions to the Member States .
Those suggestions will bring into focus the development of national broadband strategies covering the promotion of private investment using town-planning rules , mapping of infrastructure and clearing of rights of way ; and by doing that , the Member Sates can substantially cut investment costs and make them more viable .
They will also focus on bridging the financial gap by fully using the available Structural Funds to fund high-speed broadband and , where there are no incentives for private funding , direct public financing .
The Commission , for its part , is looking at the options available to increase private and public investment in NGA to reach the agreed targets .
Financial engineering will be among the considered options to reduce the gap between what is required and what the market is prepared to invest .
deputising for the author . - Given the fact that we live in an increasingly digital world , as you have acknowledged , where so much of our daily business is carried out online , one group that , in my view , has been left behind are older citizens , who have limited or no access to the Internet .
What can we do to ensure that they are not excluded from society , and what can we do to help them ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - It is not only the Commission but also the Council which took the wise decision , so to speak , to have an indicative target of achieving 100 % coverage by 2013 .
100 % is 100 % , so whoever you are thinking of should be covered by the 100 % .

I very much welcome this question by Mr Crowley , and I am interested indeed that in Ireland , there is a new wireless broadband roll-out to provide first-generation access to rural communities , which I think is an exciting initiative .
I wanted to ask you specifically about an issue that has come up in work I have done , which is on the State aid criteria for supporting local broadband initiatives .
Some local authorities that I know have been trying to work with public authorities to consolidate demand together to give a viable package for an investor .
But apparently , in some cases , this is considered to infringe State aid criteria .
So could I ask if her services could support some of these community projects by giving some clear guidelines about State aid criteria to help those public / private partnerships which would , I agree , be crucial to achieving universal broadband .
( RO ) Commissioner , the Economic Recovery Plan provides a sum of EUR 1 billion to cover up to 100 % of the broadband infrastructure .
I would like to ask you what stage this project is at , bearing in mind the importance of establishing this infrastructure .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am grateful for the first question because , indeed , when talking about broadband , it is not only about cable fibre , but also wireless , via satellite and so on .
So , when I answer the honourable Member by saying that it is 100 % coverage , I do not mention in which way the problem will be dealt with or solved .
But I am quite positive about Ireland and their investment level .
When there was the opportunity to spend structural funds , especially focusing on and investing in this type of issue , Ireland made the most of that opportunity .
It was a bit under 50 % .
Compared with other Member States , I felt dismayed as sometimes it was a third , or even this opportunity was not taken .
Investing in this type of infrastructure is really working for the future and the recovery of the economy and creating jobs .
But , sometimes , I count my blessings and also my past experience .
In my former portfolio , I had the privilege to review State aid rules .
One of those reviewed State aid rules was connected with , for example , broadband .
What we did with the review was to give more guidance as to how , when and in what way it could be dealt with .
By the way , it is also investigating , with the European Investment Bank , possible ways to take advantage of their funds and support the funding of civil engineering .
I think that , at the moment , with the recent review of the State aid rules , it is quite clear what is possible and what is not acceptable .
You can always ask the staff of Joaquín Almunia to give you guidance , so do not hesitate when there is any uncertainty .
All in all , we need to be aware that this is really public-private partnership that is making a big difference in this type of issue .
Of course , it depends on the Member State and what is at stake , but all in all , I think that with the 100 % coverage - and I am repeating myself - we are serving an excellent goal by talking about the 50 % .
I know what 100 megabytes are , but what can I imagine ?
Well , a blink of an eye is less than 100 megabytes so we are talking about a tremendous step forward .
So broadband measures and what concerns us in this debate is really scheduled to take place earlier than 2011 .
Subject : Great Britain , Sweden and the euro
How does the Commission evaluate the dangers to the EU as a single economic area from the fact that Member States such as Great Britain and Sweden have still not introduced the euro as their currency and what measures and initiatives are being planned for the new term of office of the Commission in this sector ?
Member of the Commission . - The economic benefits of adopting the euro accrue to both the Member States that join the euro area and to the euro area as a whole .
Detailed analysis and argumentation on this matter can be found , for example , in the Commission 's EMU @ 10 report of 2008 .
Under the treaties , all EU Member States are obliged to join the euro area once they fulfil the necessary conditions .
However , Denmark and the United Kingdom have negotiated an opt-out clause that allows them to remain outside the euro area .
If Denmark and the United Kingdom decide to apply for membership of the euro area , they will be subject to the same convergence assessment as any other candidate , as happened with other Member States that have already joined the euro area .
The Commission would support their preparations fully , including preparations for the actual cash changeover .
Sweden does not have an opt-out clause .
For the time being , Sweden does not fulfil all the criteria for introducing the euro .
In particular , it is not a member of the exchange rate mechanism tool , and some elements of its central bank legislation would have to be made compatible with euro area membership .
Nevertheless , the Commission considers that those Member States not currently in a position to fulfil all convergence criteria for joining the euro should strive to meet these conditions .
( DE ) Mr De Gucht , I just have two supplementary points to make .
Firstly , will the Commission attempt to encourage Sweden to fulfil its obligations ?
Sweden has an obligation under the treaties and this cannot just be interpreted arbitrarily .
Secondly , what is happening about Estonia ?
Do you think that Estonia will become a member in the foreseeable future , perhaps even this year ?
Member of the Commission . - As I rightly mentioned , Sweden does not fulfil certain criteria .
I mentioned the two criteria : it is not a member of the exchange rate mechanism , and some elements of its central bank legislation would have to be made compatible with euro area membership .
It seems to me that these are , let us say , criteria which are possible to fulfil .
They are not economic criteria with respect to debt or with respect to deficits .
Whether or not the Commission will take action in that respect is a matter for you to put to the Commissioner who is competent for this , Mr Rehn , who unfortunately is ill at the moment .
With respect to Estonia , as far as I know , this is still under reporting with respect to the convergence criteria and there is no definite stance of the Commission on this .
Subject : Extending cuts to the private sector
On 4 March , your representative , Amadeu Altafaj , stated that cuts in the Greek public sector might well be followed by cuts in the private sector .
From an economic point of view , any such development would exacerbate the recession by cutting domestic demand and internal consumption .
The immediate impact of this cyclicity is a reduction in state revenue .
I should like to ask the Commission where the optimism that disarming consumer power will guarantee Greece a way out of the recession comes from .
I think that no one needs any particular knowledge of economics to say with certainty that limiting consumer power leads to even deeper recession .
Member of the Commission . - Indicators reveal that over the last decade , there has been a disconnection between wage and productivity developments in Greece .
This has generated competitiveness losses , reflected in persistent current account deficits and a fall in export market shares .
Labour market rigidities and wage setting have been identified as an important factor behind the excessive wage growth in Greece and the resulting gap in unit labour costs with its main trading partners .
In recent years , domestic demand has been the main contributor to economic growth , fuelled by buoyant growth in general government expenditure and household incomes .
Private final consumption expenditure per capita increased by more than 80 % over the last decade .
This model has clearly been unsustainable , resulting in the build-up of significant fiscal , which means a high general government deficit and growth debt stock , increasing interest payments and macro-economic , which implies a high current account deficit and external debt outflow of income imbalances .
The increased financing needs of the government have resulted in the public sector absorbing a large part of the available financing , thus ruling out the private sector and adversely affecting the economy 's growth prospects .
Economy-wide wage moderation , with public sector wage cuts playing an important signalling role to the private sector , and fiscal austerity measures are thus indispensable to put the Greek economy on a stronger footing by restoring competitiveness and achieving fiscal consolidation .
The Commission is aware that fiscal austerity measures and wage moderation may have a negative short-term impact on demand .
Nonetheless , given the current situation that Greece is facing , these measures are necessary to restore market confidence and to lay down the foundations for a more sustainable growth model for the Greek economy in the long term .
Greece has adopted an ambitious programme to correct its deficit and to reform its public administration and the economy .
The consolidation measures taken by Greece are important for enhancing fiscal sustainability and market confidence and have been strongly welcomed by the Commission , the Eurogroup , the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
The courageous measures included in the stability programme and the packages announced in February and March 2010 include not only the envisaged wage cuts through a reduction in allowances paid to civil servants and Easter , summer and Christmas bonuses , but also measures to improve the tax collection mechanism , widen the tax base and increase tax compliance .
In the communication adopted on 9 March 2010 , the Commission concluded that Greece is implementing the Council Decision of 16 February 2010 and that , based on available information , the fiscal measures announced by the Greek authorities on 3 March appear sufficient to safeguard the 2010 budgetary targets .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the National Statistical Service of Greece announced in its most recent - I think it was today 's - announcement that unemployment in Greece has risen to 11.3 % , of which nearly half ( 45 % ) are young people up to the age of 34 .
At the most productive ages , from 25-34 , unemployment is 14.6 % .
I would also point out that this generation of young people in Greece receives extremely low wages , well below the European average .
They are the EUR 700 generation , as they are called in Greece , and we are worried that wages will go even lower .
So I think that we must be very careful when we make these generalisations , especially at such a difficult time for unemployment because , as you will understand , Greek society is worried .
Do you think that , while there is such high unemployment and all these problems in Greece , we can get back to growth with new cuts and new redundancies ?
Member of the Commission . - Of course , we are very much concerned by the unemployment in Greece , and not only in Greece but also in the rest of the European Union .
On the other hand , it is also quite important that economic fundamentals are respected and when , over a certain period of time , wages go up faster than productivity , then you have a problem , and that is essentially what has happened in Greece .
I realise that this is a massive problem , especially for young people , and we are actively monitoring the situation , but we are also of the opinion that long-term financial sustainability of a Member State of the European monetary union is essential .
( EL ) Mr President , my question is about the principle behind and reason for my fellow member 's question .
He said that Mr Rehn 's representative suggested that cuts should be made in the private sector in Greece .
The question , Commissioner , is this : with what right do Commission surveillance officials , Commission spokespersons and possibly Commissioners talk , suggest , forecast and exert pressure as to what Greece should do in sectors unrelated to Community policy , such as wages , pensions , public administration and health ?
Who accredits these statements and where does the competence and jurisdiction come from to question , to pursue or to suggest such provision for the Greek economy ?
Member of the Commission . - We are certainly not asking for employment in the private sector to be reduced , but we are seeing unemployment rise , not only in Greece but also in a larger part of the European Union as a result of the financial economic crisis .
What we are saying is that we have to redress the Greek economy if we want the Greek economy to be sustainable over the longer term .
We should also preserve the economic monetary union , which is of invaluable importance for the whole of the European economy : that is what we are saying ; we are certainly not saying that unemployment should rise .
Unfortunately , this is the result of policies that have been conducted over a certain period of time .
Subject : Conflict of responsibilities of Member States and the EU in connection with IMF agreement ( s )
In order to prevent a broader crisis , the Commission has provisionally amended the rules on State aid , by considerably simplifying the terms of eligibility of SMEs ( European Economic Recovery Programme ) .
Hungary recently went through a very difficult financial crisis , as a result of its economic policy .
On the basis of the EUR 20 billion agreed with the IMF , Hungary is obliged to come into conflict with values such as high levels of employment and protection for minority groups , values enshrined in the treaties which Hungary , as a Member State of the EU , considers to be of paramount importance .
Can such an agreement be legal ?
Who is responsible if , in a Member State of the EU , further to an agreement with an international organisation which has nothing to do with the European Union , the employment situation deteriorates drastically , including in respect of aid for the employment of people with disabilities ?

Member of the Commission . - When the global financial crisis hit Hungary particularly hard in autumn 2008 , the Commission and the Council decided very quickly to support Hungary with a major EU support package of up to EUR 6.5 billion , which exceeded half of the available funding for non-euro area Member States at the time and , together with the loans from the IMF and the World Bank , made a total of EUR 20 billion .

I would like to stress that without this assistance , Hungary would have faced much larger disruptions to its economy than the 6 % decline observed last year and the expected stabilisation this year .
Moreover , given that the government had lost access to financial markets , no support would have meant that fiscal policy would have been even more restrictive than has been the case under the programme , and expenditure restraint would have been more severe .
Thus , by limiting the magnitude of the recession , avoiding a sharper increase in unemployment and supporting the financing of the deficit , that international assistance has directly contributed to limiting the social consequences of the crisis , including among the vulnerable sections of society .
Of course , in order for the economic programme to be credible , and to reassure investors that over time , Hungary would be back to sound public finances and sustainable growth , it was important that the government implemented an economic strategy that included financial consolidation measures .
Under the principle of subsidiarity , Member States are responsible for the design and implementation of social policy measures .
That being said , the assistance supported the actions of the government aimed at making budgetary savings and at better targeting expenditure and , in particular , at assisting poor and low income earners .
Thank you for the answer .
On behalf of Mr Kósa , I would like to add a remark .
After all , the reason why Hungary could not take advantage of the multi-billion euro stimulus offered by the European Economic Recovery Plan was precisely because rules such as these did not make possible a larger scale economic stimulus , and this went hand in hand with the further deterioration of employment .
In particular , support for the employment of people with disabilities could not be realised , and so a strange contradiction arises here .
I would ask for your opinion on this .

Member of the Commission . - I am not responsible for this Commission file , but it would seem to me that the honourable Member is hinting at a EUR 100 billion package , but that it is a package that was financed by the Member States themselves , and which the Member States got the authorisation to put into practice .
It was not money that was put at the disposal of the Member States .
You will find the EUR 100 billion on the debit side of their national budgets .
What has happened with Hungary , because it was necessary , is that additional aid of EUR 20 billion was put at the country 's disposal , which is something that has not happened with the other economies .
They have only been authorised to take measures so that they could overcome the crisis , but no actual disbursement has been made to those Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the reply which you gave does not , in my opinion , reflect the problem and speculation behind the question and , given the situation in Greece , I should like to ask you this : have you any concerns about the entry of the International Monetary Fund , an external organisation , into the internal affairs of the European Union ?
Wherever the International Monetary Fund has been , it has - one might say - sown destruction .
So the question is this : has the Commission any concerns as to why the International Monetary Fund has entered the European Union and in which treaty and in which article is provision made for the participation of the International Monetary Fund in the procedures of the European Union ?
Why does it not opt for a European solution in the case of Greece , as provided for in Article 122 ( 2 ) of the treaties ?

Member of the Commission . - Very briefly , if the IMF were to intervene in Greece , that , of course , would be at the request of Greece .
They do not intervene unilaterally and , as the honourable Member knows , there has been a European agreement among the Member States and the members of the economic and monetary union to have a joint effort of the Member States of the European Union and the IMF .
But it is only at the request of a Member State , in this case Greece , that this will actually happen , and that is what I understand is presently being discussed .
Subject : Budget deficit in Cyprus
The economic crisis has hit the entire world , including the countries in the eurozone .
Does the Commission have any information on the budget deficit and other indicators of the Cypriot economy ?
Are developments in the Cypriot economy and its indicators a cause for concern ?
Do you consider that measures need to be taken in respect of the budget situation in Cyprus and , if so , what measures and for how long ?
Has there been an exchange of views and have the positions and recommendations of the EU , by which I mean the Commission , been conveyed to the government of Cyprus ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me kindly ask you whether this debate could come to an end .
I am replacing Mr Rehn , and normally Question Time stops at 8 o 'clock .
I have other engagements so I cannot stay .
That is a real problem for me .
I have no time and cannot stay .
I travelled here with great difficulty from part of the European Union and I do not accept the response from the Commissioner that he has no time .
If you have no time , walk out that door now .
I am a Member of Parliament , I have a question down for answer here .
I have a lot of engagements as well .
I have sat here for a very long time waiting for my question while all sorts of supplementaries were answered .
I should have the courtesy of a reply in this House .
I think it is very arrogant of you to say you have no time .
Member of the Commission . - It is up to the President to decide on this .
Let it also be very clear that I am not at present answering questions that are put to me but am replacing Mr Rehn , who cannot be here because he is ill .
You have to say that to the President .
I respect the authority of the President in Parliament .
It is not up to me .
You are right to point out the problem .
You are replacing Commissioner Rehn , which is unfortunate , of course , given the importance of the questions .
Nevertheless , Question Time is scheduled until 8.30 on our agenda .
Given the circumstances , whereas I cannot tie you down on that chair , I can tell you that what is expected is for you , having received the unfortunate role of replacing Commissioner Rehn , to do so in the full range of his questions .

Member of the Commission . - I had understood it was until 8 p.m. , but , as I have already said , you have the chair and it is up to you to decide what I should do , so I shall continue .
The financial crisis which has also evolved into a macro-economic crisis has been the worst in post-Second World War history in terms of both magnitude and global coverage .
The crisis took a heavy toll on the global economy , including the EU and the euro area countries .
As such , it unavoidably affected Cyprus , a very small , open economy .
According to provisional estimates released by the Cypriot Statistical Service , the gross domestic product of Cyprus appears to have contracted by 1.7 % in real terms in 2009 .
This is the first time economic activity in Cyprus recorded a negative growth rate over the last 35 years .
These unfavourable economic conditions , coupled with the fading-out of the asset boom and an expansionary fiscal policy partly due to measures adopted within the framework of the European Economic Recovery Plan , led to a deterioration of the public finances .
According to the latest notification of GDP-related data from the Cypriot authorities transmitted in March 2010 and currently under validation by Eurostat , the general government balance reached a deficit of 6.1 % of GDP and the general government gross debt attained 56.25 % of GDP in 2009 .
The Stability and Growth Pact requires the Commission to prepare a report whenever an actual or planned deficit of a Member State exceeds 3 % of GDP reference value .
Currently , the Commission is in the process of preparing such a report for Cyprus .
Once the report is ready , it will be presented to the Council , which should decide whether the deficit is excessive .
If the Council concludes this is the case , it would make recommendations to Cyprus and would establish deadlines for effective corrective action to be taken .
In the meantime , the Cypriot Government has also sent its updated stability programme .
The programme spells out the medium-term budgetary strategy until 2013 .
Currently , the Commission is in the process of assessing the update and preparing its recommendation for a Council opinion on the programme .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , it would be extremely embarrassing if you did not give an answer right now to the question asked .
Be that as it may , I should like you to tell me if Cyprus is in danger of being put under supervision and if you are satisfied with the convergence programme .
Of course , you said something about estimates , but I should like to know if you are satisfied with the convergence programme tabled by the government .
Member of the Commission . - Well , I can only repeat what I said , that there will be an assessment and this is the normal procedure that we apply to all Member States including Cyprus .
If the Commission comes to the conclusion that this is an excessive deficit , then it will make recommendations to Cyprus .
Subject : Greece and the current crisis in euro cooperation
Greece is revealing the other side of euro cooperation at the moment .
In the good old days , the impression was that everything in the EU was peachy .
However , as soon as the consequences of the financial crisis hit Europe , the situation deteriorated drastically .
The Greek public deficit was 12.7 % of GDP in 2009 , well above the 3 % ceiling permitted under the Stability Pact for countries in the eurozone .
Athens is now forced to impose an austerity package which makes provision for cuts of EUR 4.8 billion to the national budget .
The Greeks are being forced to tighten their belts and the austerity measures are hitting everyone indiscriminately , from civil servants to pensioners .
Generally speaking , fluctuating exchange rates are not a good thing .
They are of no benefit to anyone , nor do they resolve fundamental , structural problems .
However , we are obliged to acknowledge that money , like everything else , has a price .
The price of money in Greece is being felt in the form of massive interest rates which are freezing all forms of economic activity .
When the situation becomes that drastic , a country needs to be able to apply the emergency brake and ' slash ' the price of money .
Does the Commission not agree with this and does it not therefore accept , by extension , the inherent weakness of the euro ?
Member of the Commission . - The honourable Member seems to suggest that having an independent monetary policy in Greece would be a way of alleviating the crisis affecting the country .
This is not correct ; the high interest rates from the Greek Government are not due to monetary policy factors but rather to high risk premiums related to market concerns about debt sustainability .
ECB interest rates are at a historical low and the Central European Bank has been providing very ample liquidity to the euro area financial system , including the Greek institutions .
Of course , participation in the euro requires that economic adjustment of course via channels other than the exchange rate , as shown in many Commission documents , for example , the comprehensive 2008 report on EMU @ 10 .
Adjustment in the euro area has not been sufficiently smooth in the past .
This is why the Commission has highlighted the need to reinforce EU multilateral surveillance procedures based on intensified peer pressure to identify and tackle vulnerabilities in Member States at an early stage .
The Commission is currently preparing proposals to this end , as I already mentioned in reply to a previous question .
( DA ) A wealth of possibilities exist for regulating a country 's currency - provided that country has its independence .
However , that is precisely what members of the euro area do not have , because they dumped a great many of the instruments they used to have in Frankfurt .
Moreover , it is not correct that interest rates do not differ within the euro area , for there is great variation in private interest rates for both medium- and long-term borrowing , and the Greek bond rate is much higher than the Danish bond rate , for example - despite the fact that we have our own currency .
What I would like the Commission to give an answer to or concede here is whether it will face up to the fact that were Greece not bound by the position set out by Frankfurt , then Greece would have devalued , and this devaluation would have remedied a large part of the problems that Greece is facing .
Member of the Commission . - Certainly not .
The whole idea of a monetary union is of course - and everybody is perfectly aware when they become a member of the European monetary union - that you can no longer devalue your currency because you do not , in fact , have a currency any more .
There is only the common currency .
There is no longer such a thing as a Greek currency .
The Greeks have the euro as their currency .
So an individual devaluation is completely contradictory to the whole idea of a European monetary union , and it is not by accident that Greece is a member of the European monetary union .
It is a member because they did everything - really everything - to get in .
Subject : European Monetary Fund
The idea of a European Monetary fund was refloated over recent weeks as a mechanism for addressing crises like the crisis that hit Greece at the start of the year .
What is the status of this proposal ?
How could such a fund operate in practical terms ?
What are the main obstacles to the creation of an EMF ?
For example , is it feasible to create it on the basis of the provisions of the current treaty ?
Member of the Commission . - The crisis has demonstrated the need for establishing a crisis resolution framework for the euro area .
Due to the need to consider all economic , legal and institutional implications , this is an issue for the medium term rather than the immediate view .
The Heads of State or Government of the euro area gave a strong signal on 25 March by calling for the establishment of a task force to work on measures for the euro area framework for crisis resolution before the end of the year .
The public discussion regarding a European Monetary Fund has touched a number of elements that are relevant in this respect .
In particular , the Commission agrees that there is a case for establishing a framework for emergency financial support under strict conditionality and subject to incentive-compatible interest rates .
However , no new body is needed to provide it or to define and monitor conditionality .
Consistency with the stability-oriented governance framework of the EMU needs to be ensured .
The Commission is considering the scope of proposals to this effect .
More generally , a firm commitment to sound policies by all euro area Member States remains the cornerstone of the successful functioning of the EMU .
In this context , the Commission is in the process of preparing for the proposals on reinforced economic policy coordination and country surveillance building on the proposals presented in the recent Commission communication on Europe 2020 strategy .
First of all , can I apologise to the Commissioner .
We are all suffering a little bit of cabin fever because some of us have not been able to get home and are trying to help some of our families to move around the place .
I realise that the Commissioner has other appointments and is substituting for a colleague .
Could I ask the Commissioner , in relation to his reply , what would constitute the medium term ?
Are we talking half-way through the lifetime of this Commission ?
Are we talking a year , 18 months ?
What sort of period does he see for some more definitive response in this issue to materialise ?
Member of the Commission . - You should put the question on a specific timeframe to Commission Rehn , but when you look at the recommendations that we have been making and the agreement that has been made to support Greece , in particular , by a combination of bilateral loans and International Monetary Fund support , it is clear that the Commission is of the opinion that what happened now in any case could not be resolved by the putting into place of a European Monetary Fund because this would certainly take much more time than we have with respect to Greece .
So this is a medium-term project that we are sympathetic with , but with respect to a specific timeframe , I really suggest you put the question to Mr Rehn .
Subject : Financial monitoring procedures for the Member States
The Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Policy , Mr Olli Rehn , said that the key lesson of the crisis is that we urgently need broader and deeper monitoring of economic policies , including action to promptly identify and address imbalances , with a view to safeguarding macro-economic stability in the eurozone .
Given that the Commission has the tools , under Articles 121 and 126 of the treaty , to monitor the Member States ' financial policies and given that the majority of them have a deficit which well exceeds 3 % , does the Commission intend to strengthen the preventive character of monitoring and , if so , using what means and procedures ?
Does it intend to table proposals to strengthen economic convergence in the eurozone ?
Does it intend to promote the necessary structural changes in the Member States so that they are already applied at a time when their public finances so permit ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has long argued in favour of deepening and broadening euro area economic surveillance .
The importance of this issue was recognised by the European Parliament in its report on the 2009 annual statement from the euro area and public finances .
The Commission intends to make full use of the new treaty instruments to achieve stronger policy coordination and governance .
A forthcoming communication will outline new proposals in order to frame the development of a comprehensive framework for crisis prevention and correction in the euro area through recourse to the new Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The communication may include proposals to reinforce the preventive and corrective arms of the Stability and Growth Pact - proposals for more effective and broader surveillance of intra-euro area macro-economic imbalances - and explore the options for the creation of a crisis resolution mechanism for euro area countries .
Regarding fiscal policy , a reinforced emphasis on fiscal sustainability is warranted because of the impact of the crisis on debt and growth potential , as well as the demographic factors kicking in .
The incentives for compliance with the preventive and corrective dimensions of the Stability and Growth Pact need to be made stronger .
The commitment to consolidation needs to become stronger in good times .
Underlying vulnerabilities of public finances should be taken properly into account when designing the optimal consolidation part .
New focus should be given to debt dynamics and sustainability and quality of public finances , including national fiscal roots .
There is also a need to address cases where the rules are continuously broken ; penalties could be made more deterrent and incentives strengthened .
Competitiveness developments and macro-economic imbalances , on top of fiscal imbalances , are a matter of concern for all EU Member States .
However , surveillance of macro-economic imbalances and competitiveness diversions are particularly warranted for EU Member States that linked to the euro because of the higher degree of economic and financial spillovers across euro area Member States ; less market discipline ; the absence of exchange rate risks and more challenging adjustment with potentially high cost for the euro area as a whole .

Competitiveness divergences are a cause of serious concern for the functioning of the European Monetary Union .
During the decade preceding the crisis , divergence has been underpinned by a worrying build-up of a range of domestic economic imbalances in some Member States including , inter alia , high debt and housing bubbles in some current account deficit countries , as well as entrenched weakness in domestic demand in some surplus countries .
Diverging wage and cost trends , the accumulation of a sustainable external debt position and the protracted mythical allocation of resources raised the stake for adjustment and increased vulnerability of public finances .
At the same time , countries heavily relying on trade surpluses have fallen victim to the sharp contraction in world trade in the early stages of the global crisis .
Therefore , complementing fiscal surveillance , the Commission intends coming forward with proposals for the broadening of economic surveillance in the euro area , addressing macro-economic imbalances and competitive developments .
The aim is to set up a framework for early detection , prevention and effective correction of intra-euro area imbalances .
The third main element in the Commission 's proposal will explore the options for setting up a crisis resolution mechanism .
The ad hoc mechanism for possible financial assistance for Greece serves the immediate need .
However , it is necessary to set up a permanent crisis resolution mechanism with strong built-in disincentives for activation .
Establishing ex ante clear , credible and consistent rules and procedures for the provision of exceptional and conditional support for a euro area country in serious distress will bolster the fundaments of the EMU .
The proposals for enhanced economic surveillance and coordination in the euro area are an important complement to the EU 's comprehensive 2020 strategy for growth and jobs .
The Commission will ensure the efficient articulation between the two frameworks .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your reply ; allow me to come back to the subject of surveillance and imbalances .
What I was hoping to learn from my question is whether divergence will now become a serious item on the agenda ; not only financial imbalances , but economic divergence , and not only the surveillance mechanisms , but also action to address divergences .
International crises , the Greek crisis , have brought all the weaknesses in the euro area to the surface .
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I would also like to apologise to the interpreters but I am in a somewhat exceptional situation .
You could also interpret that I tried to answer all the questions within the timeframe of 20.30 .
With respect to the additional question , I think you should go back to the origin of the crisis in your country , which is , in fact , that these imbalances have been created over time .
There is a very big imbalance with respect to competitiveness .
Wages went up much higher than did competitiveness and this is , of course , in the first instance , also a matter of national policies .
Regarding whether it is better to have closer monitoring , the answer is yes .
That is why we are proposing a new scheme for that .
You should not forget that in 2002 , the European Commission made a proposal that auditors could be sent to a Member State to check the numbers , for example , but it was not accepted by the Member States .
So the Commission has always been aware that monitoring was a very important part of the national budgets being compatible with the European Monetary Union , especially in the case of Greece .
All I can tell you is that Olli Rehn owes you a big one , apparently !
So you have something to negotiate with him next time there is a Question Time , perhaps when it is your turn to stand here .
Establishment of a European Asylum Support Office ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Jean Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Council position at first reading ( 16626 / 2 / 2009 - C7-0049 / 2010 - for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Asylum Support Office .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am not sure that inspiration is going to be what is on offer but this is obviously a very controversial topic that many Members in this House were terrified to come and speak about , so those of us who are brave enough to be here must seize the moment .
I want to start firstly by thanking very much all the shadows who worked on this report for their very active involvement and our ability to find a common negotiating position and act as something of a team .
I also want to thank the two Presidencies involved - the Czech and particularly the Swedish Presidency - for their more open attitude on this than we have seen in some negotiations , as we were able to negotiate rather than feel we were there to do what Council wanted - well , sometimes anyway .
So , what did we achieve ?
The aim of the common European asylum support system is to deliver consistent high-quality decision making for those in need of protection , and it really can be a matter of life or death for those in need .
It is well known that the system is not delivered in a consistent way across Member States .
Differences at times are so great between the best and the worst that there is a lack of confidence which can lead to those who try to deliver objective decisions feeling undermined by those who do not .
And those who suffer at the end of the day are those in need of protection .
There is also a very strong feeling from some Member States under particular pressure that there is a lack of solidarity from others , that their need for support is not given a real practical response .
Under the refugee fund , there has been a funding strand for cooperation between Member States which has led to some positive developments , but it has also become clear that there are limits to this more piecemeal approach .
The Asylum Support Office is therefore being set up to provide ongoing support to enhance a consistent approach and to provide active support for countries under particular pressure .
Specific tasks are already being assigned to it via other legislation .
The key points for the European Parliament during the negotiations have been the role of the European Parliament itself in relation to the Asylum Support Office , how to achieve greater solidarity between the Member States , and the role of civil society and UNHCR with the Office .
The issues about the role of Parliament have centred around our relationship with the Director in terms of his or her appointment and ongoing links .
We have eventually settled on the European Parliament hearing the recommended candidate , offering a confidential opinion and receiving feedback on how that is being taken into account .
The Director will also present the annual report to the relevant committee - I cannot quite believe we had to fight for that , but still - and we can also invite the Director to report on the performance of certain tasks .
The role of Parliament in relation to agencies is now a topic for discussion in the interinstitutional working group , and I am now a member of the European Parliament team on that - partly due to my experiences and a certain sense of frustration with the negotiations on the Asylum Support Office .
As regards solidarity between the Member States , Parliament wanted binding mechanisms , Council wanted to entrench the voluntary nature of cooperation , and the final language is more neutral , but we do have an external evaluation of the Asylum Support Office to look forward to , which will cover the Support Office 's impact on practical cooperation on asylum .
On the role of the consultative forum , there is a lot of real expertise available to Member States , and it seemed obvious to us that such expertise could be valuable .
We know that some Member States have active relationships with NGOs , and we wanted as well to make sure that local authorities , which often deliver much of what is required under the common system , also had an opportunity to be included .
So we are pleased to have been able to breathe a little more life into this body .
In conclusion , we feel that the Asylum Support Office could play a very valuable role in developing a common system .
We hope it will be of high quality - even if we could not quite get that into the final text - and help engender a sense of mutual confidence and support .
I would also ask the Member States involved to be more open to what other institutions , elected authorities and civil society can contribute , because , while this is about cooperation between Member States , it is not entirely intergovernmental .
It is a European institution we are creating .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am really happy that we are now very close to a final adoption of the regulation establishing the European Asylum Support Office .
The Commission proposed this back in February 2009 , and the Council and Parliament have been extremely committed to this .
The establishment of a common asylum system has been an objective of the European Union for many years and the Commission and myself remain very committed to this objective .
We must establish a system which is fair and efficient , based on common standards and common principles .
This system should also be based on solidarity , and that means solidarity with the migrants , with the countries of origin and transit , and it also means solidarity between the Member States .
In order to strengthen the solidarity between the Member States , practical cooperation between the different authorities in the area of asylum is important as a part of forming the European asylum system .
To enhance this practical cooperation , the establishment of the Asylum Support Office was requested by the European Pact on Asylum and Migration of 2008 and agreed in the Stockholm Programme in 2009 .
The Support Office will therefore be a cornerstone in the building of a common asylum system .
The Support Office will , as you all know , be located in Valletta .
It will provide concrete and operational support to Member States ' authorities , and will facilitate the development of the necessary cooperation between the Member States and the development of common practices .
This will be achieved through training of individual persons dealing with asylum applications and through exchange of information and best practices .
The Support Office will also provide assistance to Member States under particular pressure by sending expert teams which can help with the registration of asylum applications .
I would very much like to thank the European Parliament and all the rapporteurs responsible for this - Mrs Jean Lambert , of course , for her work , as well as Mr Moraes for the necessary amendments to the European Refugee Fund , and all the co-rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
Your full and constant support has been extremely valuable and I am looking forward to working with you on the final steps before this Office opens - hopefully very soon .
Mr President , I would also like to begin by congratulating Jean Lambert for her report and for the success of this dossier , as well as for the loyal manner in which she cooperated with us , the shadow rapporteurs , on the subject .
The European Popular Party has a positive outlook on the establishment of the Asylum Support Agency because it considers it to be an important step forward in the establishment and implementation of a common asylum policy within the European Union .
On a personal level , as a Maltese MEP , I am obviously not just satisfied but also proud that this Office is to be established in my country 's capital city , Valletta .
I would like to point out that this Office must recognise that a common asylum policy needs to be built upon one word , as has already been mentioned , and that is solidarity : solidarity towards asylum seekers travelling to Europe who are entitled to protection , which the said office must ensure , and , as rightly stated by the Commission , solidarity towards those countries who have been shouldering the burden alone , without any assistance .
Therefore , this concept of solidarity must be understood in its entirety ; indeed it is as though we are looking at two sides of the same coin , in showing solidarity to those who deserve protection and solidarity with those Member States carrying a disproportionate weight .
I would like to say that , so far , it seems as though the message on the importance of solidarity has been understood .
However , we have not yet taken it a step further .
I would now like to see words being translated into facts , and to see this principle being activated on a practical level .
This is where the Support Office will have a major role - to flesh out this principle , to implement it and to ensure that the specific initiatives it undertakes will indeed succeed in extending solidarity to all those who require it .
Therefore , I hope that this Office will be up and running as soon as possible and I would like to assure others that we , as Members of Parliament , will be closely monitoring its operation method in the months and years to come .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by congratulating both Mrs Lambert and Mr Moraes on their excellent work , which will allow us in the next few days - as soon as the airspace situation has returned to normal - to formally adopt the regulation on the creation of the European Asylum Support Office .
I imagine , therefore , that we will all agree on one point : that we welcome the imminent creation of this Office .
Resolutely aimed at practical cooperation , the Office will help reduce the significant gaps that still exist between the asylum practices of the various Member States , and this despite a first , so-called harmonisation phase that began at the Tampere European Council .
This body will allow us to ensure the consistency that is lacking in current practice .
I also wish to stress the important role that civil society will play in this Office , through its participation in consultative forums .
Civil society 's grassroots involvement will provide a clearer insight into the difficulties encountered by asylum seekers , and into the failures of the national systems .
However , we must recognise that this matter leaves a slightly bitter taste in the mouth .
For Parliament , it is regret at not being able to play a full role in the appointment of the Director of the Office , for example , and for the Office itself , it is the impossibility of contributing to the introduction of a system of compulsory solidarity between Member States to provide relief for the countries located at the gates of the European Union .
In practical terms , this voluntary solidarity is empty talk .
The fact is , if we refuse to even mention a more binding system , how will we ever achieve it ?
This remains a topical issue in our debates and we will continue to remind our partners , the Council and the Commission , of it .
The creation of this Office perfectly illustrates the need to put in place a common European asylum system .
All the Member States are very much in favour of this when it is a case of declarations such as the 2008 European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
Strangely , however , these same Member States seem to suffer memory lapses when it is case of shifting from words to actions and translating their commitments to common rules into texts .
It is , for example , most regrettable to see how willingly the Council adopts a whole series of measures to combat illegal immigration , as it did during the February Justice and Home Affairs Council .
However , it proves more cautious during the negotiations on the asylum package , which has been at a standstill for several months now .
Rather than putting on a purely and opportunely political display achieved through repressive measures , I call on the Member States to build a real Europe of solidarity .
On the one hand , we know that these repressive measures are a significant threat to the right of asylum in Europe for individuals who , because of the increase in screening and other barriers , are undertaking increasingly dangerous journeys .
On the other hand , Europe could finally boast genuinely harmonised asylum procedures based on the granting of proper guarantees to asylum seekers .
We can see that the Member States are very resistant to the asylum package and that the tendency is towards keeping national practices .
This resistance is echoed resoundingly in arguments over the budgetary costs of such a common policy , which would seem to be unsustainable in a crisis context .
Nevertheless , Europe has a huge responsibility where asylum is concerned .
We should emphasise the fact that , to date , it is more often than not third countries that are less well-off than us that have played their part in accommodating refugees .
Let us hope , therefore , that this asylum package is as successful as the Office was , and that its success comes quickly , because there is an urgent need to act .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the right to asylum is one of the European Union 's fundamental values and nobody dares question it publicly , in their speeches .
Nevertheless , the reality of European policies and those of its Member States in this area raises questions .
It was in 1999 that the European Union started to harmonise its policies on the subject , and there seems today to be a sense of satisfaction at the spectacular fall in the number of asylum seekers .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left could also be pleased about this if that figure reflected an improvement in the human rights situation across the world .
We all know that it does nothing of the sort .
Our debates will prove it , if necessary , when they take place on Thursday afternoon .
Since 2004 , in particular , we have been seeing the downwards harmonisation of reception procedures and conditions .
There are significant differences between countries ' practices , and we know that some of the applications have been outsourced and that , today , some asylum seekers no longer even have the opportunity to register their applications .
Once again , the prize for the biggest reduction in the number of asylum applications goes to France .
As a human rights activist in France , I am well placed to know what has caused these results .
To have accompanied an asylum seeker just once to the services of the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons is enough to know what the cause is .
It is unbearable to watch the way in which these men and women are summoned to submit evidence of the acts of torture that they have suffered .
The proposal that we are examining today therefore seems to be a breath of fresh air .
It helps improve the implementation of a European system on the right to asylum .
It aims to promote practical cooperation between Member States , in particular , by improving access to accurate information on countries of origin , which is a good thing .
The majority of the proposals made by Parliament at first reading have been adopted by the Council .
We know that we owe this result mainly to the Swedish Presidency , and we are grateful to it .
I would add that , in my opinion , Sweden is , as it were , a model , and I would very much like other states to align themselves with it in this area .
We have supported our rapporteur at both first and second readings in committee , and I too am keen to congratulate and thank her .
We will do the same in plenary and we express our sincere hope that this small step forward will constitute a new turning point in European policy on this matter .
We hope that , instead of Europe withdrawing into itself in what we in this House dare to call fortress Europe , we can instead welcome these men and women who have a right to asylum , as is proclaimed in the international treaties and in the European Convention on Human Rights , which we will soon be ratifying .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have heard it suggested that this measure relies on solidarity .
In my humble opinion , something else is lacking - and that something is security .
And yet , you only have to talk to those involved with these issues , for example , the police - on this occasion , I was lucky enough to be travelling with members of the law enforcement agencies , Carabiniere officers from the supply office in Turin , whom I would like to mention by name , Romanini and Tavano .
They confirmed to me that in many cases , these asylum seekers show false cards and documents ; cases of this have been reported by various police forces and other bodies .
Would it not be a good idea to look at this question from a security angle as well ?
I do not think that the question of security is very pronounced in this document and yet it is very important , because we must avoid contaminating an important principle , an important institution of such great humanitarian value , in other words , the entitlement to asylum , with the grubby interests of those who traffic in illegal immigrants and who often use asylum as a way of infiltrating people who have no rights and no relationship to those actually being persecuted .
Secondly , Article 2 of the regulation states that the Office shall facilitate , coordinate and strengthen practical cooperation among Member States on the many aspects of asylum and help to improve the implementation of the Common European Asylum System , including its external dimensions .
Article 7 should specify this , but it only does so very vaguely , saying that the Office can establish methods of cooperation with third countries on technical aspects .
I believe that we must go much further , and I wonder why - despite many people , including us , proposing it - no one talks about or examines the suggestion of setting up these offices in third countries as well ?
What is preventing it ?
I think it is very important to filter , partly in order to lighten the workload and the situation of countries that have to deal more directly with this .
Someone spoke of these countries ' needs , but these countries must be supported , and I believe that offices should be established in third countries , for instance , in North Africa , in the sub-Saharan area , where there is a concentration of asylum applications and asylum seekers .
Here , we need to filter , perhaps using the European Union 's External Action Service , carrying out operations that would involve certain developing countries taking some responsibility ; we need to give them a sense of responsibility where the asylum issue is concerned .
I believe that these issues are very important and that we should not neglect them , nor should we ignore the needs of European Mediterranean countries affected by these issues , not merely by talking about them or by sending along a few officials ; we already have our own bureaucrats in Italy .
What we need in order to deal with this situation is money , resources , and real support .
It has been said that in Sweden , things are going very well .
That may be so , but Sweden is very far removed from the needs of Malta , Italy , France and the Mediterranean : this is where the problem is , and it needs to be addressed - and we must make the countries of the European Union responsible for this .
Privileges and burdens go hand in hand , and since we have the burden , we should also have the means of dealing with it .
( DE ) Mr President , it is definitely not a bad idea to apply the regulations on asylum uniformly in order to reduce secondary immigration within the EU and to support those Member States with a very heavy influx of asylum seekers .
However , there are serious doubts as to whether it is necessary to establish this support office to bring about improvements and whether the office will interfere too much in the powers of the Member States .
Establishing this agency is another step towards centralising EU asylum policy .
The aim is to achieve a high level of protection based on the actions of the most generous Member States , such as Austria .
Existing differences are to be removed , with the more generous countries staying on the same course and the others making the necessary changes .
That is all very well , but establishing large numbers of new EU agencies ( the figure has tripled since 2000 ) and expanding their remit clearly goes against the attempts of the Lisbon Strategy to introduce more deregulation and subsidiarity .
I believe that the widely discussed objective of circular migration - a bit here , a bit there , occasionally somewhere else - is totally wrong .
It does not work in practice and circular migration often turns into permanent migration .
There are , of course , other criticisms that can be made .
Unrealistic conditions for detention pending deportation are put in place at the expense of security and at the expense of our executive .
Extending the concept of the family to cover everyone including grandmothers will result in a further influx and improving access to the labour market in a period of high unemployment is unsustainable .
It will not be possible to finance the extension of basic welfare provision to the same level as countries such as Austria and Germany .
The new asylum support office is therefore not fit for purpose and should not be established .
We must develop a common asylum strategy from scratch , because what you are recommending will not work in the countries that are affected .
( EL ) Mr President , the establishment of a European Asylum Support Office is indeed extremely important and thus , symbolically , I consider it to be important that it is being set up in Malta , a country in the south of Europe which is under a great deal of pressure from asylum seekers and also within the framework of illegal immigration issues .
It is very important that we strengthen and coordinate cooperation between the Member States on asylum issues still further and , ultimately , that we try and arrive at a uniform approach from among the various national practices , especially as we all recognise the huge differences which exist .
For example - this information is at the Commission 's disposal , but I believe that it already knows that an Iraqi asylum seeker may have a 71 % chance of his application being accepted in one Member State , but just a 2 % chance in another Member State , and , of course , there are also different problems between the Member States .
The Dublin II Regulation will , inevitably , put a heavier burden on some Member States compared with others , and , of course , this Asylum Office will also support the solidarity mechanisms available through the European Refugee Fund .
I refer to the transportation and reallocation of refugees both from third countries in Europe and to the so-called internal ' reallocation ' of refugees .
As far as reallocation from third countries is concerned , we are making small steps , but we are progressing .
However , as regards the internal reallocation of refugees , I wish to stress that , despite the fact that we all acknowledge that there is a greater burden on some Member States , especially in the south of Europe , compared with others , we have not made any specific proposal ; we have not taken any initiative on these issues .
We await the Commission 's proposals ; we have also sent a letter on the matter within the framework of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and , if nothing else , we must be bolder on these issues , because the pressures are great .
To close , I have this to say : it is very important that we develop mechanisms in the European Union for receiving refugees , for accepting asylum seekers , not just for humanitarian reasons and for the reasons already referred to by numerous members , but also so that we can combat illegal immigration .
We must give everyone seeking a better homeland , a better future , the message that , in Europe , anyone taking the legal route ultimately has a better chance than if they take the route of illegal immigration from which , unfortunately , there is a great deal of pressure .
Mr President , the establishment of a European Asylum Support Office goes totally against the British opt-out on immigration and is at odds with the UK rejection of the Schengen acquis .
The proposal that EUR 40 million will be spent establishing and staffing an entire office in Malta to deal with asylum seekers across the EU suggests that this Commission wants to make the decisions that should be left to national governments .
Any common European asylum policy threatens British sovereignty over border control .
Repeated appeals to let the UK decide who comes in and out of the country , and who can be accommodated , arise from the fact that we have a huge population problem that is quite unlike the situation anywhere else in Europe .
The Commission does not offer help and support when the UK is struggling .
Instead , it will take the money of the British taxpayer to cover the cost of making our decisions on our behalf .
EUR 40 million would be better directed towards building new schools , hospitals and houses in the UK as well as affording critical services such as clean water , desperately needed if we are to continue providing a decent First World quality of life for everyone .
One in four births are to mothers who themselves were not born in the UK , that is 170 000 births a year .
Where is the money to help the British taxpayer afford all this ?
In your pocket or spent on setting up a new asylum office which will no doubt pile more pressure on to the UK ?
In our election campaigns , all the parties in the UK are promising to do something about immigration because the people back home are demanding something should be done .
But what can Westminster do as long as we are in the EU , because at exactly the same time , the European Commission wants all the powers over asylum seekers passed to them ?
Time and again , this Commission has shown only disregard for the wants and needs of the UK people .
Is it the Commission 's intention to repeal the UK opt-out in this area too ?
The people back home deserve your honesty because this issue is extremely important to them .
You are supposed to represent them and they deserve to know what you have planned .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must not shroud in solidarity an office that must support a procedure for establishing the true conditions of asylum seekers .
We believe that this is important and useful , but that it must ensure , on the one hand , that those who actually have the right to asylum are granted it more quickly , and , on the other hand , that those who do not have the necessary rights and try to abuse this system are firmly dealt with , because it is clear that not all those who have the right to asylum are granted it .


I would like , very briefly , to echo the statements of Mr Borghezio : certain countries , such as Italy , and particularly southern Italy , where I come from , provide natural entry routes for immigration and are particularly affected by asylum applications due to their historical traditions of welcoming immigrants .
Europe must take charge of this , and the European Union must focus its attention and efforts , including its economic efforts , in those areas that receive the most immigrants .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am grateful for the strong support for creating this agency by a majority of this plenary .
As you know , there has been a unanimous demand from Member States to create this agency , even those under opt-out , who know that the Commission has no intention of forcing any changes in the UK opt-out .
That is the decision of the UK people .
But there has also been a strong support in this plenary for an agency , and I am very glad that it is going to be created now .
We know that , especially in certain seasons , there is a great pressure on the countries in the Mediterranean , and this agency can help and support .
There are also migrants coming to northern , eastern , western and central Europe , so this is an agency for the whole of Europe , even if it is no coincidence that it is located in Valetta .
It is not just another agency .
It is , in fact , a cornerstone in building a common asylum system and it will be an important instrument in supporting Member States , in helping develop practices and common standards , and in supporting Member States under particular pressure .
It would gather information , it would put up a portal , it would have experts , etc .
Ultimately , it is always up to the Member States as to who can stay , but there are certain procedures which need to be harmonised .
As some of you have said , this is part of developing a common asylum system in Europe .
This is just one part : as I think the rapporteur said , we are stuck when it comes to the rest of the asylum package .
The Commission counts on the help and support of the European Parliament in moving on with these issues so that , within the not too distant future , we can indeed establish a common asylum policy in the European Union .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to just take an opportunity to clear up one or two questions which have arisen , although it is a pity that some of those asking the questions are not around for the answers .
Asylum obligations are clearly set out under international conventions which all Member States have individually signed up to .
That is not the same as an immigration policy , and people really should recognise the difference .
For those who are concerned about the money - if I may make a party political and national political point here - if certain of our Member States stopped creating asylum seekers from Iraq and Afghanistan , I am sure we could save a lot more money and indeed save people a lot more misery .
As regards some of the other points which were raised , it is hoped that improving the quality of the system in certain Member States will be able to increase confidence between Member States and deblock some of the other parts of the asylum system , as well as helping Member States feel that there is support when they are facing particular burdens .
As others have pointed out , while some of our Member States do have considerable geographical pressures on them from the flows which arrive , many of the over-burdened countries are actually not in the European Union at all but are elsewhere .
I was very interested to hear a colleague arguing for additional support out there , in terms of the Asylum Support Office , but I am afraid I missed the amendments which he tabled on that topic .
I also want to be clear that the Asylum Support Office is not there to determine status ; it is not taking over the role of Member States in that field .
All in all , I welcome the kind comments made by colleagues , I welcome the active involvement of those who have helped me very much on this report , and I am sure that we are all looking forward - or most of us anyway - to being there in Valletta when the ribbon is cut on the Asylum Support Office and we can begin work .
I am going to close the debate .
I will not do so , however , without saying with great feeling that I am not unmoved by the fact that the person who chaired this debate enjoyed the right of asylum because of the generosity and hospitality of the governments and people of France , Austria and Belgium , to whom I would like to pay a tribute of thanks here today , because there is no time limitation on gratitude , even though this happened more than 40 years ago .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the part-session in the first week of May
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Setting up the European Asylum Support Office is an extremely important step in establishing a European Common Asylum System , as provided for in the European Immigration and Asylum Pact and the Stockholm Programme .
The Office will help increase cooperation between European institutions , local authorities and civil society , and will identify common practices in asylum matters .
I am confident that this will bring Member States ' positions closer together with regard to asylum-related policies .
This matter is an absolute necessity , given that some Member States are facing large influxes of asylum seekers .
Cooperation and solidarity are also needed between Member States not only to help these countries cope with the problems they are facing , but also to improve the European Common Asylum System .
I must mention that this system will be based , from a legal and practical perspective , on the full , overall application of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
General provisions on the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund as regards simplification of certain requirements and as regards certain provisions relating to financial management ( debate )
The next item is the report by Evgeni Kirilov , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1083 / 2006 concerning general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund as regards simplification of certain requirements and as regards certain provisions relating to financial management - C7-0003 / 2010 - .
Mr Kirilov , the rapporteur for the report , has not been able to come as a result of the air transport situation .
Mrs Krehl , who is replacing Mr Kirilov , has the floor .
Mr President , I am very sorry that Mr Kirilov cannot present the report himself .
He has worked very hard to draw up a report for Parliament on a subject which is very important for the regions and the citizens of the European Union .
Therefore , I would like to read out his notes .
They are in English , which is very surprising for a Bulgarian Member .
However , it is a good thing that I do not have to speak Bulgarian .
I am very pleased that I can represent him here in Parliament , even though he was unable to get a flight in Sofia .
Mr President , I am glad that this evening we have the opportunity to discuss important amendments to the Structural Funds general regulation .
These modifications are a substantial element of the common efforts at European and national level to overcome the consequences of the economic crisis .
They are a logical continuation of the documents which we adopted last year .
Then , as the rapporteur on the role of the cohesion policy for investment in the real economy , I called on the Council and Commission to work for simplification of the Structural Funds rules and thus facilitating access to these funds when they are more needed by the Member States .
I am happy that Parliament 's main recommendations for further simplification have been taken on board .
I am convinced that the new changes to the general regulations , simplifying some of the existing procedures , deserve our support .
Reducing unnecessary administrative burden , red tape and unclear rules will contribute to more transparency , better control and fewer irregularities .
This also means improved implementation and correct spending on EU money .
Here is just one example .
Through the amendment of Article 88 , the Member States are further stimulated to detect and correct irregularities before they are found by the EU controlling institutions .
In this case , the Member States will not lose the affected money but will be able to use them again for other projects within the relevant programme .
The second group of amendments concern financial management rules .
Advance payments for countries worst hit by the crisis will be increased for 2010 .
All Member States will receive more time to spend 2007-committed funds for projects which have not been approved or implemented within the deadlines .
Both groups of measures are important because of their message to the beneficiaries and because of their practical utility .
Anti-crisis measures are a clear demonstration of solidarity .
They will bring fresh money for the Member States to get out of the crisis .
All measures will commit realisation of more projects , especially now .
This is crucial for the creation of jobs , investment and infrastructure and adaptation of workers and firms to the economic change .
Both types of measures are useful and more valuable if they are implemented at the right time , but they are still awaiting final approval .
Unfortunately , there was a huge delay in the Council for reaching an agreement when it was the leading body for the adoption of the amended regulation .
I strongly believe that now , when Parliament has the same power as the Council , we will not postpone any more the approval and entry into force of these long-awaited and needed measures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Krehl , thank you very much for your report .
I would also like to ask you to pass on my thanks to Mr Kirilov .
He has worked very hard to ensure that we are able to discuss these proposed amendments to the general regulation today , after they have passed so quickly through all the institutional stages , and also , I hope , to enable us adopt them shortly in Parliament with a broad majority , so that the relevant items can be implemented quickly .
This is a good indication of the positive dialogue between the Council , Parliament and the Commission and a good example of the fact that the interaction between the institutions is working effectively .
What is the aim of these amendments ?
In the long term , we want to simplify the regulations , but in the short term , we also want to help those Member States which have been hit hardest by the current economic crisis .
We accept the Council 's compromise proposal , which has gained broad agreement in Parliament , because it is important for us to provide rapid and targeted help and to get the programme under way .
The common overall objective of this initiative is to accelerate the implementation of the programmes .
We have recently presented the first strategy report and have identified those things which did not work particularly well and those areas where there were positive developments during the first few years of the current programme period .
We must be self-critical and take a look at the rules which , in some places , are complex .
In my opinion , the current third series of amendments to the ongoing programme has succeeded in resolving this problem .
In addition , we want to help to overcome the crisis .
What can be done ?
To give you a few isolated examples : standardising the thresholds for large projects at EUR 50 million , simpler regulations for modifying operational programmes if - and this is a very important point - this is necessary to overcome the crisis , making it possible to subsidise energy efficiency measures in the construction and renovation of housing , which will not only result in energy savings , but will also have a positive impact on the sectors associated with the building industry .
The current regulation is aimed in particular at the existing liquidity problems of the five countries affected - Romania , Hungary and the three Baltic states - and is intended , as has already been said , to speed up the absorption of the funds as a result of increased flexibility .
It will be possible to implement many projects more quickly using the promised funding of EUR 775 million which can be made available earlier than planned .
Finally , against this background , I would like to refer to the EUR 6.2 billion that has already been paid out in advance in 2009 .
It shows that , although the Structural Funds were not originally intended as emergency funding and should not , in future , be regarded as such , if necessary , they can be sufficiently flexible to make a suitable contribution in times of crisis .
I would like to thank everyone and I am looking forward to the discussion .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Kirilov , even in his forced absence , and highlighting the way in which he was able to draw up this important report and promote its main objective .
I would also like to thank Mrs Krehl for the presentation she has given us .
The main objective , to go straight to the point , is to simplify procedures and to speed up implementation of the programmes financed from the Cohesion Fund , the Structural Funds and the European Regional Development Fund .
In the current financial , economic and social crisis , pressure on national financial resources has been growing .
That pressure will be reduced through better use of Community financing and swifter delivery of those resources to the beneficiaries worst affected by the economic downturn .
More than 20 million Europeans are unemployed , or 4 million more than a year ago , and unfortunately , the forecast is for the number to rise further .
This situation demands that we ensure that cohesion programmes are properly implemented , since they are an important , powerful lever for helping the real economy , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises and for jobs .
SMEs are the motor of the European economy and producers of sustainable growth , creating numerous quality jobs .
Further simplification and clarification of the rules governing cohesion policy will undeniably have a positive impact on the pace of programme implementation , particularly by providing national , regional and local authorities with clearer and less bureaucratic rules that will allow more flexibility in order to adapt the programmes to the new challenges .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having cooperated constructively for months with the rapporteur , Mr Kirilov , I am keen to express my heartfelt thanks to him here .
I also wish to highlight the quality of the work carried out by the Council , in particular , since the start of the Spanish Presidency .
This is all the more important because this evening , we are debating a regulation whose measures are awaited by thousands of actors on the ground .
I am convinced that , for these actors on the ground , it is regional policy that is the most tangible expression of the European Union in their area or region .
Nevertheless , although it is intended to help them , regional policy is too often seen as complex and restrictive .
It is therefore time to change its image through an in-depth simplification of the rules on its application .
The EUR 350 billion of European funds are for the benefit of our fellow European citizens .
Today , we are demonstrating the responsive approach awaited on the ground , in these times of economic and social crisis that we are all experiencing .
If I had to pick out only certain aspects of this important text , I would say that it gives us greater flexibility and solidarity in Europe .
Greater flexibility , because the proposed simplification measures allow for a reduction in the amount of information to be provided , for fewer controls , and for greater flexibility on revenue-generating projects .
However , it also increases solidarity , because exceptional measures are being taken to combat the economic crisis , such as financial advances - as the Commissioner and Mrs Krehl were saying - and a new calculation system .
The final vote at the start of May will , therefore , allow us to be of great help to the recipients of European funding as well as to planning departments , but let us not forget that there is still much to be done in the field of simplification .


Mr President , Mr Hahn , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that Mr Hahn has summed up the purpose of our debate this evening , which is to provide rapid and targeted help .
We urgently need to speed up the implementation of these programmes .
I believe that the third amendment to the general structural funds regulation is a response to the financial crisis and should , as has already been said , allow for rapid and , in particular , easy access to these funds .
We know from past experience that money from the Structural Funds has made a significant contribution to improving quality of life , creating jobs and giving people a future in the regions .
I believe that in times such as these , the solidarity of the European Union is needed in order to provide emergency funding .
As we have said , both flexibility and solidarity are required .
Measures to combat the crisis are indications of this solidarity and we need the flexible advance payments so that these projects , which improve quality of life and create jobs , can be implemented .
As the rapporteur - or in this case , this evening Mrs Krehl - has already mentioned , there was an almost unpardonable delay in adopting this regulation .
From this perspective in particular , future cohesion policy should be designed in such a way that it does not put procedural and technical obstacles in the way of quick and efficient implementation of regional policy .
Therefore , I support the rapporteur 's call for this amendment to the structural fund regulation to enter into force quickly .
We must provide rapid and targeted help .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Hahn , let us speak plainly .

The simplification that everyone here is so much in favour of will mean that large sewage plants and huge waste incinerators will no longer , as is currently the case in the regulation , have to be approved by the Commission when the investment is greater than EUR 25 million , but only when the amount exceeds EUR 50 million .

For projects with a value under EUR 50 million , the Commission will no longer evaluate cost-benefit analyses and it may be that these analyses will no longer be carried out .
In contrast to the current situation , no checks will be made to determine whether or not these projects comply with EU environmental legislation .
On account of the fact that these projects are partially financed by loans , there will also be no investigations to establish whether it makes sense to burden the citizens of the region with heavy borrowing and to identify whether the credit burden is in proportion to the benefits of the project for the citizens .
These are attractive transactions for the banks , because they can charge high fees during the initial years of the project .
This is why in the past , ex-ante evaluations of large projects were essential in order to ensure the efficient use of European funds .
This is why we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are of the opinion that checks on large projects must be increased , rather than reduced as specified in this proposal .
Therefore , we are against raising the evaluation threshold .
In addition , we want cost-benefit analyses and compliance with EU legislation to be transparent to the public and not to be fudged , as has been the case in the past .
The Structural Funds regulation continues to suffer from the fact that large projects which receive finance can only last for five years from the time when the investment is made .
Therefore , we Greens have already called for an extension of ten years to ensure the true sustainability of the investments and to create permanent jobs in the regions .
If projects are based in the regions for a longer period , this will prevent those responsible for the projects from pocketing European subsidies and then simply disappearing after five years .
The case of Nokia in North Rhine-Westphalia demonstrates the damage that can be caused to regions when subsidy hopping becomes widely accepted .
In our opinion , the sustainability clause should therefore remain in place for small and medium-sized businesses for five years and not for three years , as proposed in the amendment .
We Greens are also opposed to this , because a combination of larger investments without checks and a shorter duration for projects is highly likely to result in money being poured down the drain .
We believe that it is not possible to justify this to European taxpayers .
If our amendments are not accepted , we cannot vote in favour of the report .
We will also request a roll-call vote , so that when citizens complain to us at a later date that money has been wasted , we can show them how the Members voted .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr President , I have a question for Mrs Schroedter .
In her analysis , she has chosen to take a rather negative approach .
My question to her is : is it not the case that , thanks to the cofinancing , the local governments which implement the programmes in the Member States within the strategic frameworks agreed for each country and within the rules are required to fulfil their own responsibilities ?
Why is she painting such a negative picture today ?
There is no reason for bringing all that negativity to this proposal today .
( DE ) Mr President , I will be happy to answer the question .
Investment in large projects is being simplified .
This applies to investments of up to EUR 50 million which , until now , have been evaluated by the EU , because we are responsible for taxpayers ' money .
I am of the opinion that the situation should remain unchanged for large projects because , in our experience , these projects often start with excessive investment and end up with the burden being borne by the citizens .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are debating here a compromise proposal to amend the regulation , a proposal aimed at simplifying and speeding up access to European funds .
We definitely have a common interest in achieving this aim , and we should bear that in mind during debates on the future of the cohesion policy after the year 2014 .
The proposed arrangement applies , above all , to large projects connected with the environment and infrastructure , projects which generate profits and support for energy projects and renewables in the housing sector .
The compromise proposal does not , therefore , involve any radical intervention in the architecture of the European funds .
Sweeping changes are not even possible at the moment .
We can only manage a gradual modernisation of the existing system .
The proposal is a compromise .
At this point , I would like to state that I support the declaration submitted by Hungary relating to the use of financial engineering instruments within the framework of the Cohesion Fund for interventions in the area of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources .
On the other hand , I am concerned about the retroactive measure relating to liabilities , because it will not be approved until 2010 , while the resources should have been returned to EU coffers at the end of 2009 .
In this context , it is therefore vital to clarify all of the technical details of this legislation .
However , a compromise has been found and the debate should therefore be concluded .
I consider it vital that the simplification of the European funds , which we are approving today in Strasbourg , is reflected on the ground in the Member States .
In this context , we still have much work to do in our regions .
I must applaud the efforts of the current Ministry of Local Development in the Czech Republic which , in the middle of this year , approved a legislative amendment on the drawing of individual sums from the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund .
This administrative simplification mainly involves approval procedures and financial planning and management , including control activities and the resolution of discrepancies .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague who is unable to be here and I would like to make a few remarks .
The first is that we very much welcome the simplification of the Structural Funds .
There are certainly some things which we would criticise and Mrs Schroedter has mentioned these , but I believe that we should not hold back for this reason alone .
We welcome the simplification and are also of the opinion that the regulation must be implemented urgently .
Too much time has already been wasted .
However , I must speak openly .
The compromise is not exactly how we had envisaged it .
As everyone is aware , the Commission submitted another proposal relating to the one-off 100 % payment of interim payment claims for a limited period and for the purpose of labour market policy measures .
This was not accepted for a variety of reasons which were discussed in detail in the Committee on Regional Development .
However , we must ask ourselves whether we have done enough to put in place what the Commission referred to in its communication of 3 June 2009 as a common commitment to employment which can be used to counteract the crisis .
The objective was to make it easier to use the Structural Funds to help overcome the crisis and this is what we are discussing now .
The European Structural Funds in particular are , as everyone knows , one of the main tools for investing in citizens and for combating the crisis and creating jobs .
If we take a look at Europe , it becomes clear that the crisis has had a huge impact on the labour markets in the Member States and that action really is needed .
There have been massive increases in unemployment , not only in the five countries , but in all the Member States , if we look at the situation in detail .
In addition , unemployment also plays a major role independently of the crisis .
In Europe , we have a very high level of unemployment which is still rising and is unrelated to the crisis .
The alternative proposal submitted by the Commission certainly represents a step forward , which we welcome , because at least five Member States with a GDP that has fallen by 10 % since 2008 will receive a relatively large subsidy .
These Member States will benefit from this and from additional advance payments from the Cohesion and European Structural Funds .
All of this is good , but we would like to see more being done .
You know what our position is from what we have said in the committee .
On the one hand , we are happy and , on the other hand , not so happy , but every step forward takes us forward too and this is where we should be going .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , the only question is why your group , Mrs Ernst , has not tabled an amendment in plenary ?
There was an opportunity to table amendments so that the Commission 's original draft could be reused .
It may also have been possible to renegotiate the 100 % financing of the European Structural Funds with the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schroedter , I think we believed that we had only a limited chance and therefore decided against it .
I assume that my colleague thought the same thing .
When I looked at the Commission 's overall initiative , I was thrilled .
However , after long discussions on these subjects in the last few days , I have learnt a few things .
I would have liked to see more .
It is true that we could have submitted an amendment , you are right .
However , if we are honest with one another , we know what will happen and this is why my group decided against an amendment .
I must take note of that myself .
( NL ) Mr President , exceptional times call for exceptional measures .
Today , this House 's long-cherished dream of a simplified procedure and more rapid results has come true .
What we ultimately want is to retain and create jobs and this week , as Mr Hahn has pointed out , some figures have emerged revealing what that cohesion policy has been able to achieve : 1.4 million more jobs in the previous period .
European funds can now be provided in a faster and more simple way across the board , not just for major projects but for smaller ones , too , so that we can continue to promote innovation , environmental improvements , urban development , etc .
There is one point which Parliament opposed and that was the proposal to scrap cofinancing .
Now , that would be threatening one of the cornerstones of our system , whereby national administrations , local authorities and , where possible , individuals , contribute to the joint project of regional and urban development .
So we now have to concentrate on maintaining funding for a slightly longer period , for three , rather than two , years , which is another point to which you have agreed .
That will leave money on the table , cofinancing will be possible and the good thing about it is that , in the case of any delay , we will still be able to allow those valuable projects to go ahead .
That does not mean money leaving the region : oh no , it means money being spent .
That is the scheme we have operated for 2007 .
I have a question for Mr Hahn : does he not want to follow this good example with another ?
Why can we not repeat this scheme in 2008 and 2009 ?
That would be a very positive step .
Can you answer that ?
To conclude , we could also show some solidarity .
There are some countries which do not use all of the ESF funds granted to them and leave some 30 or 40 % unspent .
Why have they not shown any solidarity and transferred those resources to other countries ?
That is entirely permissible and would allow those countries to get back on their feet .
That would be showing real solidarity , but unfortunately it has not happened .
I therefore feel reasonably positive , at least towards the rapporteur .
This procedure has now taken nine months and I wonder , as indeed did Mrs Krehl , whether it would be possible to complete it during the next joint round of negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission ?
( GA ) Mr President , since 1973 , my country has received roughly EUR 18 billion from the European Union Structural and Cohesion Fund .
Over the years , the cohesion policy has played a significant role in developing and revitalising the Irish economy .
The European Social Fund is particularly important as we attempt to combat unemployment in Ireland and , of course , throughout Europe .
Since Ireland joined the European Union in 1973 , the country has received more than EUR 7 billion in financial support under the European Social Fund .
These monies have primarily been used to help combat youth and long-term unemployment .
Under the EU Human Resources Operational Programme for Ireland for the period 2007 to 2013 , the European Union is providing EUR 375 million to Ireland under the European Social Fund .
The overall budget of this programme is EUR 1.36 billion .
These monies are being used to provide training courses for those who are unemployed , for people with disabilities , for early school leavers and for the marginalised in our society .
We live in the age of globalisation .
To respond to the challenges and opportunities that globalisation creates for the Irish workforce , the European Social Fund in Ireland is also supporting lifelong training courses , which can be adapted to the realities of a globalised jobs market .
So the present economic and financial crisis has proven the relevance and the value of this important fund - the European Social Fund .
Mr Chairman , fundamentally , this report seems to have some very good objectives helping the Member States of the EU , who have been hard hit by the economic and financial crisis , via European funding .
It has the laudable goal of wanting to reduce strains on Member States ' budgets when demands upon them are coming from all directions .
Reducing the project thresholds and simplifying the process will all help , as well as the pre-financing of agreed projects to jump start economies quickly .
When Europe is facing unemployment figures in excess of 10 % , in many Member States much worse , and the economy looks only now to be slowly reviving , there are many things Member States should be doing to rebuild their state finances .
However , this report is fairly limited and does not seem to address many of them .
However , a note of caution : the idea that Member States should no longer have to cofinance projects with any of their own money seems a high-risk policy .
Already , much of European money is not properly accounted for in spending projects due to improper oversight procedures .
Removing a Member State 's vested interest in ensuring its own money is well-spent should not be an invitation to their misuse .
We need to ensure that relaxing the cofinance criteria does not reduce accountability .
However , this problem in itself is unlikely to have much effect on my constituents in Wales as , if the European Union has its own way , we will not , post 2013 , have any more money to spend on any ongoing projects , which are so generously cofunded by the European funding at this moment in time .
While it is all very well to say that some of the new Member States are poorer than the old and so need special help , the colossal amount of debt in the UK and the very low GDP per capita in my region of Wales , which was recently compared , unhelpfully , to the economic performance of Rwanda , hopefully mean it will not be forgotten .
I have discovered by word of mouth that plans may be under way to disqualify regions like Wales , and I do hope that in the future , we will qualify for transitional funding .
( BG ) Commissioner , I first of all want to congratulate Mr Kirilov on his report .
I welcome and support any step which guarantees and facilitates the lawful use of European solidarity funds .
The European Union cannot allow itself to be compared by EU citizens to a volcano ejecting bureaucratic ash , raining down on the desire to reduce the disparities between Europe 's regions .
It is difficult , even impossible to use the Structural Funds with which we want to achieve our economic , social and political objectives .
I believe that changes towards simplifying the procedures must not only be viewed in the light of the current crisis , but must also , in the long term , facilitate access to the European Union 's solidarity instruments .
I think that , in spite of the delay , the proposal tabled by the European Commission , along with the changes featuring in this report , will offer a better opportunity for Member States and the ultimate beneficiaries to improve their situation in the context of the current crisis .
I want to emphasise the significance of the change concerning deferred expenditure of the resources envisaged for 2007 .
This change will offer a second opportunity to all Member States , including Bulgaria , where the level of use of these resources is still very low , to implement projects using resources which would have otherwise been lost .
We must appeal to regional and local authorities , as well as to all other stakeholders , and urge them to take advantage of this second chance .
I believe that the flexibility highlighted in the report , bearing in mind the implementation of programmes promoting the use of funds , is the right approach when drawing up privatisation policy in future .
With regard to simplifying administrative regulations for using the Structural Funds , the report is a step in the right direction towards finding a balance between facilitating the coordination of projects as much as possible by the European funds and controlling the use of these resources .
Reforming the regulations must be instrumental in guaranteeing greater transparency in the eyes of European citizens and taxpayers , as well as in helping set out feasible conditions for Member States .
During the whole process , we must not forget the ultimate goal , which is to achieve comparable social and economic conditions throughout the European Union .
( HU ) Since the outbreak of the economic crisis , the European Union has been criticised on several occasions as being incapable of responding in an appropriate way to the crisis situation .
My view on this is that the current debate and Mr Kirilov 's excellent report are an outstanding refutation of that , showing that the European Union was able to respond to these processes .
I do not understand colleagues who worry that the current simplifications will mean that the processes will not be monitored , since the great value of the cohesion policy is precisely that it has a very accurate supervisory mechanism .
Therefore , no one should worry , and if my fellow Members worry about this , I hope that this is not a deficit of solidarity on their part with those Member States - for instance , with my country , Hungary - which , in their opinion , will not use these funds appropriately .
We will indeed use them very properly .
This debate is also very important in order to confirm that the cohesion policy is needed .
I am pleased that Mr Hahn and Mr Cioloş are here .
I am very worried that Mr Barroso 's first document does not even mention the common agricultural policy , and even the cohesion policy is mentioned only very superficially , even though these are extremely important cohesion and Community policies which are indispensable for green growth , innovation and job creation , in other words , in order to realise the EU 2020 strategy 's new objectives .
Therefore , cohesion policy should not be weakened , but strengthened instead .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a result of all the amendments made to legislative frameworks at Community and national level aimed at tackling the effects of the crisis , its impact on the real economy and labour market is being felt strongly at the moment on a wide scale .
High unemployment is having a severe impact on Member States ' economies , but there are still great difficulties in providing finances .
The effective implementation of the cohesion policy programmes is essential as it provides a significant boost in granting aid to the real economy in the form of the EUR 347 billion allocated for the 2007-2013 period .
Additional efforts must be targeted at the beneficiaries who have been hardest hit in order to speed up the flow of finances for funding the investments in the Member States ' regions .
I think that one important change which has been made is the opportunity to fund a single major project from various programmes in the case of projects which cover several regions .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on the job he has done .
However , I need to make one remark that , although the report was much awaited , progress on it was slow .
I suggest that we need to find solutions and give a much higher priority to the objectives in order to avoid situations where excellent measures are delayed too long .
Simplifying administrative procedures in general will help boost the ability to absorb these funds , including in countries faced with this problem , in other words , my own country , Romania .
The eruption of a volcano has turned the world upside down in five days and may trigger another crisis .
How long will it take us to have the capability to respond ?
One thing which is very clear to me is that from now on , we need to make decisions much more quickly .
( Applause )
( SK ) I would like to begin by applauding the work of the rapporteur , Mr Kirilov .
It is a very good thing that , with the aim of responding to the economic crisis , European institutions have decided to speed up the process of financing regional development projects , and also to simplify rules regulating the use of structural funds .
There is also to be an extension of the time period for using EU funds approved in 2007 in order to give Member States more time to make use of them .
In Slovakia , we have a saying that help given quickly is twice as effective .
The Member States most affected by the economic crisis are looking forward to the regulation which we are discussing today .
The Commission presented the first draft as long ago as July last year .
We will not decide until May .
The whole legislative process has taken nine months up to today .
Perhaps it is time to start thinking about a simpler and shorter legislative process in concrete , specified cases .
The crisis , unemployment , poverty and deepening regional divides are precisely the kind of cases where it is necessary to act more quickly and more flexibly .
We will find it difficult to explain to the unemployed that it took us more than three quarters of a year to pass the legislation which is supposed to help them now , in their time of need .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all in agreement today in welcoming the measures to simplify the awarding of the Structural Funds proposed in Mr Kirilov 's report .

Nevertheless , as Chair of Parliament 's Work Group on the European Social Fund , I am indignant at how long the review procedure that is currently in progress has taken .
The Commission 's initial proposal dates from June 2009 .
Even though the purpose of this review was to help Member States combat the economic and social crisis , it took the Council six months to reach an agreement .
That is unacceptable .
It is true that the legislative procedure has been modified along the way to give Parliament the same amount of power as the Council .
However , as the elected representatives of the European Union , we cannot today justify these delays to the public .
I will now make a brief digression to welcome the responsibility shown by Parliament in agreeing as far as possible on the Council 's position in order not to delay the procedure any further .
However , I would like to express my disappointment once again .
We need a European Union that can take swift decisions that have a real impact on the ground .
Now let us turn to the future for a moment .
The simplification measures proposed today to combat the economic crisis are positive , but I would like to add that they could have been even more ambitious if the measures being applied to the current programming period , 2007-2013 , had not been so clumsy and complicated .
Therefore , looking ahead to the negotiations for the multiannual legislative framework for 2014-2020 , I call on the European Parliament to demonstrate boldness in its proposals for the simplification of the administration and application of the Structural and Cohesion Funds .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also voice my appreciation for the report by Mr Kirilov , and I am sorry that he cannot be here today .
Further simplification of the mechanisms relating to the Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund is a good idea , and will be good for expenditure .
At a time when these funds are also being used to combat the crisis , we must put the paying agencies in a position where they can spend all their money ; but this measure of ours also means that there is one less excuse .
One less excuse for whom ?
For the regions which , for example , spend the Cohesion Fund and which often cannot spend all their money because they unable to do so but still hold the chaotic nature and the excessive bureaucracy of European procedures responsible for their lack of expenditure .
Today , this excuse is no longer valid ; today , all the bodies in charge of distributing European funds are put in a position where ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) The effects of the economic crisis have been felt since 2008 .
The main problems we are currently facing are unemployment , a decline in living standards and poverty .
In terms of the European Union 's policies , constant efforts have been made to expand and improve the instruments available for tackling these effects , which also means encouraging economic growth in Europe .
Mr Kirilov 's report is a good example of this .
It has been drafted on the basis of some excellent , welcome proposals from the Commission intended to simplify the application procedure enabling Member States to access the relevant funds .
I welcome and support the report drafted by Mr Kirilov in terms of both pooling the amounts offered for major projects and of adapting specific technical criteria and conditions in order to facilitate the management of the funds available .
These amendments are in line with the Europe 2020 strategy , which encourages job creation and supports investment geared towards environmental protection .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Hahn , those who have spoken before me have already mentioned the benefits of cohesion policy , and I do not want to repeat this here .
I just want to stress that my country of Poland and my region of Wielkopolska are also benefiting from cohesion policy .
I am very glad about this , and this is how I understand the amendments to the regulation .
I am glad about the constant effort for better absorption of funds - better absorption of funds as part of cohesion policy .
For implementation and absorption to be better , it is essential to have continuous simplification and continuous liberalisation of the legislation which governs implementation of this policy .
This is why I understand the regulation as the next step , to simplify implementation .
I am pleased about this .
I would also like to say that this effort must be continuous .
We must fight excessive bureaucracy all the time , and all the time we must try to ensure that legislation is favourable to beneficiaries .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Hahn , cohesion policy is an important political tool .
It gives us the opportunity to help to combat the crisis , to stimulate demand in the short term and , at the same time , to invest in long-term growth and competitiveness .
It is important to make it very clear that cohesion policy and , in particular , the advance payments and more rapid local implementation in 2009 made a very significant contribution to boosting purchasing power which benefited the economy and helped to limit the fall in private consumption .
Cohesion policy also forms a very important part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Therefore , I do not understand why your fellow Commissioner , Mr Rehn , has linked sanction mechanisms for a failure to comply with the regulations of the single financial market to restrictions on regional policy .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the vote will be taken on the Kirilov report in the next few weeks and I welcome this , as the need is urgent .
The public and our elected representatives have been waiting nearly a year now for tangible and permanent measures from the cohesion policy in response to the crisis ; national and local actors have spent a year calling for greater flexibility and adaptability in the awarding of European funds .
Today , with Parliament reflecting on new measures aimed at greater transparency in the use of the Cohesion Fund , we need , more than ever , to succeed in our move to simplify these requirements .
The Kirilov report is a first step towards this simplification .
It must call for others , because the credibility and visibility of European action in day-to-day life are at stake .
This report is also proof of Europe 's solidarity , that in these times of doubt about our unity , it can provide those members who need them with measures adapted to their situation .
In these dark and overcast times , the Kirilov report may be a breath of fresh air .
I hope that this report will be only a first step .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank everyone who made their way to the Chamber from nearby or from further away for showing such commitment during the debate .
I would like to thank you , because you have given your broad support to cohesion policy and to the realisation that it allows us to help our regions and the people in the regions .
The Czech Member referred to the saying that help given quickly is twice as effective .
I would say that this is a European insight .
Despite all the difficulties and mistakes , we have adhered to this principle in the initiative .
My brief response to Mrs Schroedter is that you do not need to worry that the control mechanisms will suffer simply because we have standardised the thresholds so that we can evaluate projects , which often cover both areas , in a uniform way .
There are also control mechanisms at local and national level .
This is the concept behind shared management .
We are also governed by other regulations , for example , in public procurement and in the State aid system .
These also involve certain deadlines which we , as regional politicians , cannot simply ignore .
As far as the extension of the N + 3 regulation is concerned , I believe that we should take a very restrictive approach .
We should ensure that the rules are not relaxed and that the regions do not think that they can sit back and do nothing .
Instead , they must be committed to using the funds that are available .
Please could you pass on to Mrs Swinburne that there are no indications at all that what she is afraid of will happen , provided that the budget is sufficiently large .
We will be providing the available regional funds to Wales and to all the other regions in future .
For this reason , I do not approve of using the money from the Structural Funds in difficult times to apply apparent sanctions that have no effect .
Thank you once again for your broad support .
I include in my thanks the members of staff of the Directorate-General for Regional Policy who have worked very hard in this area .
Mr President , I will be happy to pass on all the praise and the positive assessments from today 's discussion to Mr Kirilov .
I would like to highlight two points once again .
We only have European taxpayers ' money to spend and therefore we must make the access to the funds as simple and as transparent as possible .
That is the aim of this report .
However , I also believe - and this request is directed at Mrs Schroedter - that we should not imply that the individual Member States are not doing everything possible to comply with European law .
This is what I understand from reading between the lines today and I do not think we should imply this about anyone .
I work on the assumption that all the Member States and all the institutions do everything they can to ensure that European funds are used efficiently and correctly .
I would like to make a second remark to Mrs Swinburne , but not just to her .
This is not about handing out charity to poor regions .
We are subsidising regions to increase purchasing power and create jobs , because the purchasing power in these regions forms part of the overall contribution to ensuring that Europe can begin manufacturing and selling products again .
This will strengthen the internal market .
In other words , it is not simply an act of general solidarity .
Anyone who knows something about the economy and the world of business will understand , not only from a social perspective , but also from a business and economic point of view , why we need regional policy and why we can use it as a rapid and efficient measure , in particular , in times of crisis , for stimulating the European economy in all of Europe 's regions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the part-session in the first week of May
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
This report amending the general regulation on the implementation of Structural and Cohesion Funds is of particular importance to the European Union 's citizens .
A number of Member States , including Romania , have had a low uptake of European funds to date .
A large number of citizens , companies and local authorities have criticised the complicated procedures obstructing them whenever they attempt to obtain funding for their projects .
Drafting this report demonstrates the European Parliament 's desire to resolve the problems highlighted in this regard .
I support the proposals aimed at simplifying the procedures for accessing European funds .
Reducing the amount of unnecessary administrative procedures and red tape , along with establishing clearer rules , will help raise the absorption level of European funds .
I welcome these measures , especially at the moment when Member States are being affected by the economic crisis .
Five European countries , including Romania , will take part in a process for accelerating the absorption of European funds .
Implementing a new procedure for making advance payments will enable more projects to be completed more quickly .
Furthermore , Romania will benefit from the amendment to the rules concerning the reduction in the risk of losing funds not used quickly enough .
The economic crisis has demonstrated the need for public action to support private activities that are in difficulty .
The European Union 's cohesion policy plays an essential role in this regard .
By providing financial support for those affected by the economic downturn , the Structural Funds constitute a lever with which to stimulate activity .
Nonetheless , accessing European funding remains difficult for a number of potential beneficiaries .
The procedures are complicated and the delays too long , even though the urgency of the crisis requires simple and rapid measures .
As part of this concern for clarification , I welcome the Commission 's initiative aimed at simplifying the financial management of the Structural Funds .
The various proposals are along the lines of a more effective cohesion policy , but one that does not have too pronounced an impact on the Community budget .
I welcome this pragmatic approach .
The Commission must not stop there , however .
This reform , necessitated by the crisis situation , must be the first stage of a radical simplification of the way in which European funds are managed .
Cohesion policy must become an instrument for more effective public intervention with a view to providing real support for economic activity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for the work he has done .
I also welcome the agreement being finally approved within the Council and Committee on Regional Development .
I believe that it is of paramount importance for us to adopt this report as soon as possible so that we can offer the Member States which have been hardest hit by the crisis the financial support required for economic recovery .
One of the key aspects highlighted in this report is the simplification of the procedures for accessing and implementing European funds .
We need measures to facilitate a rapid recovery , especially now during an economic crisis .
Consequently , I think that making advance payments of 2 % from the European Social Fund and of 4 % from the Cohesion Fund is the ideal solution for Member States which are facing significant liquidity problems , thereby allowing them to benefit from consistent assistance .
The finances from the European Social Fund should make an active contribution to the economic recovery of the Member States which have been hardest hit by the crisis , helping their efforts to preserve jobs , improve the level of professional qualifications and , by extension , prevent and combat unemployment .
in writing . - ( EL ) I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Evgeni Kirilov , and all the members of our Committee because , thanks to their persistence and decisiveness , we have managed to hold a debate today and proceed directly to the adoption of this exceptionally important report without wasting any more valuable time .
I wish to emphasise the decisive role of the amendments in increasing the take-up of appropriations , reducing the bureaucracy and complexity of the rules , maximising the impact of financing on the economy as a whole and thus multiplying the benefits to citizens .
In his audience , Commissioner Hahn quite rightly pointed out that , despite the fact that it is perhaps the most successful European policy , political cohesion has enemies as well as friends .
The adoption of these amendments which we are debating today is an important step , but there is an even more urgent need for the European Commission to immediately take the next step , which is to bring its vision for political cohesion for tomorrow to the table , together with its ideas and proposals for the necessary changes to the framework , operation and competences , new tools and so forth .
It is high time for this next step now before new unattributed documents surface .
Specific measures for agricultural markets ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Paolo De Castro , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on specific measures for agricultural markets - B7-0208 / 2010 ) .

As Mr De Castro is not present , Mr Le Foll , who is replacing Mr De Castro , has the floor .
Mr President , it therefore falls to us to close these debates this evening , and it is already late .
I would like , first of all , to excuse the Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr De Castro , who is unable to be here with us this evening for reasons that you know .
Like other Members of this House , he has been unable to leave his country to come and participate in our debates in Strasbourg .
The issue with which we are concerned results from the general crisis being experienced by the entire agricultural sector .
As we know today , we are experiencing a crisis and , above all , seeing a fall in prices and agricultural revenues that is affecting cereal producers , livestock producers , whether pork or beef producers , and also - and I say this on behalf of Mr De Castro - olive oil producers , and which is hitting and has hit dairy producers extremely hard .
Faced with this crisis and this price fall , it goes without saying that Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wishes to find out from the Commission what we can do right now and in the future to escape this crisis and , above all , what measures could be adopted in the coming months to support farmers and to ensure that the agricultural markets are less volatile .
The first question that I would like to ask the Commissioner is more specifically about the dairy crisis : what is the situation with regard to the measures adopted by Parliament and the Council concerning this dairy crisis and , in particular , to the application of the famous EUR 300 million milk fund that had been agreed ?
That is the first question because I think that , if we are going to take legislative decisions , then we must know how they are being applied .
As I was saying , all types of production are currently being hit by a price fall and a deep crisis in the markets .
That brings us to a question and to seek answers on what we might call market regulation and the way in which we can limit this infamous price volatility .
Nobody complains when prices are rising , especially not farmers .
It is European consumers who fear agricultural price rises , which limit their purchasing power and impact on their ability to buy agricultural products .
It is when prices are low and when they are falling for long periods that producers are penalised in terms of their incomes and , above all , and most seriously for European agriculture , in terms of their abilities to invest and to prepare for the future .
Agriculture is a hard industry ; the investments are substantial and it takes a long time to obtain a return on those investments .
We need to stabilise prices .
Commissioner , the question from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its Chair , Mr De Castro , is composed of two points .
Firstly , you have announced a number of dairy-related measures to be implemented before the end of the year .
This is important . Can you give us some details of these ?
Secondly , there are specific measures that need to be taken on all the markets , not just dairy .
Finally , the question that we wished to ask you is how the Commission plans to anticipate and prevent these price falls in the medium term .
What market regulation mechanism can be used to limit sudden increases and , above all , sudden price falls ?
What work is the Commission currently doing and how does it view this issue ?
Those are the three elements that I wished to mention : the milk fund , perspectives on the dairy crisis and , more generally , the way in which the Commission intends to deal with this issue of price volatility and price falls .


Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr De Castro and Mr Le Foll , from Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for having raised these problems for discussion here in this House .
It is true : I , too , must acknowledge that farmers ' revenues fell spectacularly in 2009 , which was nothing more than a continuation of the trend recorded in 2008 .
Therefore , this is a situation that we have seldom encountered on the European market .
It coincides with this market increasingly opening up on the world market and follows the recent reforms of the common agricultural policy .
This crisis has affected the dairy sector in particular .
Last year , we saw the sector 's producers endure a difficult situation , particularly those in rural regions in which dairy production is essential not only to the agricultural sector , but also to economic activity and employment in general .
It is in this context that the European Commission took measures last year , firstly by mobilising mechanisms for intervening in the markets to halt the fall in prices .
It released significant funds , more than EUR 400 million , to finance these interventions in the markets .
However , as Mr Le Foll pointed out , a EUR 300 million fund was also mobilised to enable the Member States to come to the aid of the dairy sector 's worst-affected producers .
This decision , then , was taken last year .
It gave the Member States the opportunity to set criteria on the basis of which funds would be distributed , channelling them , above all , to those producers who needed them most .
I must also make it clear that these criteria were set by the Member States and did not require the Commission 's approval .
The Member States were simply obliged to inform , to notify the Commission of which criteria they had chosen .
I can announce to you that , as far as I know , all the Member States informed the Commission of their decision to apply the measures .
They have therefore set the criteria on the basis of which they will distribute these funds , and the process of distributing the aid will begin .
The Member States have until June to distribute these funds .
So , as I was saying , firstly , there has been a phase of intervening on the markets to put them back on an even keel .
I think that the current situation shows us that this intervention has been successful , because prices have stabilised .
There are still variations , of course , but they are within reasonable limits , within the normal limits of the market .
Secondly , there are support measures that will be reaching producers soon .
Those , then , are the measures that have already been taken .
I am keen to restate here what I recently told Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development : as Commissioner , I hope to learn lessons from the specific situation that we experienced last year .
I do not wish to wait for the common agricultural policy post-2013 reform , when we will certainly come here with more solid answers for the entire agricultural sector .
I will not wait for the conclusion of the common agricultural policy 2013 reform to make specific proposals for the dairy sector , on the basis of the conclusions of the high-level group that was created last year in the wake of this crisis and whose work is now under way .
This group will present its findings in June .
Immediately afterwards , in July , I will propose a debate to the Council of Ministers of Agriculture and to Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the basis of these findings .
So between now and autumn or the end of the year , I will come here with proposals that will allow us to foresee and , as far as possible , prevent this sort of crisis - especially in the dairy sector , because it has experienced the most difficult circumstances of all - and thus to propose solutions , not just for the short term , but also for the medium and long terms .
We will , of course , learn lessons from this for other agricultural sectors in which we will have to intervene .
Perhaps I could now take the opportunity to give you some information to follow on from the debates that we will have today .
The Commission pays close attention to the development of the markets in other sectors .
Using the intervention methods that we currently have at our disposal - mechanisms for intervening in the markets , used in particular as safety nets - we will do our best to prevent a repeat of situations similar to that which has hit the dairy sector .
Thank you very much .
I will listen closely to the questions and problems that you are going to raise and I will take the floor again at the end to say a few things .

Mr President , Mr Cioloş , ladies and gentlemen , the fundamental reorientation of agricultural policy to focus more on the market economy is the right approach to take .
The decision to increase the links between European agriculture and the world market is also correct .
The initial success of this policy was very obvious until 2007 or early 2008 .
European agricultural policy offered better value for money .
There were hardly any market interventions and farmers had stable , rising incomes .
However , we are currently seeing the downside of this reorientation which includes large price fluctuations and falling farm incomes .
Both farmers and agricultural policy makers must be able to accommodate major producer price fluctuations in all areas in future , not just in the dairy sector .
In order to manage serious falls in the market more effectively , agricultural policy needs tools which allow it to react rapidly , consistently and without a lot of red tape .
Therefore , I am calling for measures such as interventions or export subsidies not to be abolished altogether but to be included in the budget with a figure of zero .
These instruments should only be used in exceptional circumstances and not for constant market interventions .
However , when we need the instruments , they must be ready for use .
We also need to identify measures for the farming profession which will create equality on the market .
These include , in particular , strengthening the legal position of producer groups .
I hope that the Commission will keep its promise to consider better basic legal conditions and then take measures quickly when they are needed in order to prevent farmers and consumers from suffering serious harm .
Mr President , Commissioner , I support your first steps as Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development because , since your hearing and on several other occasions , we have been pleased to hear you expressing your wishes , as you have understood that the extreme volatility of prices is a serious threat to agriculture and its future .
The same is true for farmers , who can no longer plan for the long term because , clearly , investments - particularly for the youngest amongst them - are calculated over periods of 20 or 30 years .
Barely six months ago today I , along with Mr Le Foll and a few other colleagues , signed an amendment on this issue and on serious volatility , which aimed to reduce the 1 % increase that had been decided on , in particular , for milk production , since we are , in fact , in a period of overproduction .
The amendment was rejected by almost 250 votes to 350 .
You said that in the future , we would consider a regulation .
The high-level group is meeting and its members are , as I understand it , high-calibre individuals : it is not just producers who are represented , but distributors too .
I would not like the actors who find themselves in between the two , between producers and distributors - namely , processors - to be forgotten .
I hope that we do not forget them , because it is also and , above all , through them that the profits are made ; more so than through the distributors , in my opinion .
I would like reassurance , then , that they will not be forgotten in the discussion .
Beyond the dairy sector , all agricultural sectors are being affected by volatility , and I would also be so bold as to say that prices are high .
Let us be careful ; this is not necessarily good for agriculture , as processors - users - are turning to alternative products .
When prices return to a more normal or lower level , these users will not necessarily return to the original product .
Commissioner , this being so , I would like to know - even if it is a little premature - if you really do intend in the future to implement , in all other areas of production , the regulatory mechanisms that are keenly awaited by producers .

Mr President , Mr Cioloş , things are relatively peaceful at the moment in the countryside , not because farmers are contented , but because many farmers are currently very frustrated .
We cannot fob all of them off by saying that we will identify the important solution to the agricultural crisis in 2013 .
We need to give them answers now .
We are in agreement on this .
The protests could very quickly move back to Brussels , so we have to provide some answers .
In the dairy sector , a fundamental change in policy is needed .
I attended the conference of the high level group and found the responses given to the dairy crisis interesting , but by no means adequate .
If a change in policy has to be made , then the recent decision to remove the regulations must be called into question .
At the conclusion of this process , we could say that ending quotas resulted in a very hard landing , not a soft one .
We now urgently need to consider how we can put a new policy in place , how we can set new benchmarks and how we can bring the state , in other words , the European Union , back into the game , to give us clearer rules for the market .
Markets do not function without assistance .
That is the answer to the financial crisis and also to the crisis in agriculture .
We must provide rules .
We are currently faced by a crazy process of concentration in agriculture .
I feel very concerned when I read in the paper that units which will accommodate as many as 8 000 cows are being built in the south of England .
On the other hand , many small farms in disadvantaged regions are having to close .
These are changes which will not produce a European but an American agricultural model with larger and larger enterprises , which will finally lead to the loss of many small dairy farms in Europe .
We have to remember that this also means losing jobs .
Mr Jahr , we agree on one point , even if we do not agree that it is right to focus our agricultural policy on the world market .
We need a clear legal position for farmers .
They are the weakest link in the business chain .
They are the first to be hit by dumping prices , which are becoming increasingly common in many areas .
We agree that we urgently need a clear policy statement about how we can regulate markets better in future .
We need to look outside Europe 's boundaries to see how other regions are resolving this problem .
No one will tell us how and when to regulate our markets .
In recent years , we have taken things too far with the removal of many of the market regulations .
Let us take a look at other countries - the high level group should do the same - to see what rules are being applied elsewhere .
It is clear that Canada has what many farmers and many consumers believe is a tried-and-tested model .
We should not exclude this from the discussion right at the outset .
Instead , we should also provide some answers .
As part of the change in the direction of our policy , we must make sure that we put policies in place for regional markets .
The focus should always be on the regions and not on the 5 % of products that are sold on the world market .
We must not regard export subsidies and interventions as the normal rules for influencing the market in future .
We must finally put an end to this process .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , I welcome the opportunity to have this debate .
I think it is very timely , and the recent crisis in the dairy sector , which crippled so many of our farmers across the European Union , certainly demonstrated the serious volatility which can affect our agriculture markets .
Significant price fluctuations are occurring from year to year , and indeed from month to month , and are often due to factors beyond our control , such as the global financial crisis and , indeed , the price of oil .
The effects of the dramatic drop in the price of milk in 2009 were compounded by the EU 's inability to react swiftly enough to the situation .
While we were eventually able to implement a mixture of market management and income support measures , such as intervention in the milk fund and export refunds , which eased the pain to a degree , many dairy farmers ended up going out of business and many are suffering serious financial loss .
In my opinion , we need to adopt a two-fold approach in order to attempt to mitigate the effects of depressed prices on our farmers .
Firstly , we need to agree upon a set minimum safety net for all sectors which are vulnerable to price fluctuations .
Secondly , we need to ensure that , whatever tools we introduce , we are able to respond rapidly and effectively to whatever crisis presents itself .
There is a lot of discussion at the moment in Parliament and beyond about farmers receiving a fair and stable income for what they produce .
The ins and outs of food supply and the food supply chain in general is a topic which is relevant to both farmers and consumers alike .
The imminent reform of the CAP gives us a real opportunity to address these issues .
Of course , it is important not to undermine the competitiveness of Europe 's agri-food industry .
However , a reformed CAP must be able to respond to various crises in agriculture in order to stabilise the markets and ensure a fair income for our farmers .
( EL ) Mr President , I am starting from the assumption that there is a great deal of instability in the agricultural markets .
There has been a significant drop in the prices of basic agricultural products .
At the same time , there has been an increase in consumer prices and a substantial reduction in agricultural incomes .
In my opinion , the CAP , following the reforms and the uncoupling of aid , is sufficiently market-oriented .
My main proposal - and I wish to make this clear - is that the agricultural sector cannot be left solely to the rules of the market .
It produces public goods and it needs public European financial support .
I cannot follow the contradiction in the arguments of members who propose a market orientation here , in countries which maintain , cultivate and step up consumer ethnocentricity , consumer patriotism .
However , the current market management measures do not provide the necessary safety net , as the previous speaker , Mr Nicholson , said .
We need supplementary measures , more flexible and effective measures , measures that guarantee market stability in times of crisis .
Also , in my opinion , we need to ' arm ' the CAP with a financial mechanism to deal with crisis situations , a sort of crisis management fund .
Guaranteeing producers ' incomes depends , above all , on safeguarding transparency in the food supply chain .
To close , we cannot confine ourselves to designing future market tools for after 2013 .
We know that the situation - over and above the milk sector - is also critical in other extremely important sectors , which differ from one geographical area to another within Europe .

( HU ) The debate so far has shown that this is a very complex problem .
To a certain extent , Mr Tarabella and Mr Nicholson , and others as well , have mentioned that on the one hand , the problem has to do with the food chain as a whole , which the José Bové report also addresses , namely , that the European Union has been unable so far to resolve how to bring about a fair balance between producers , processors and retailers .
As far as Mr Cioloş is concerned , I agree entirely that it would be good to find a medium- and long-term solution .
There are four theoretical options .
One , which Mr Jahr has also mentioned , is to examine the neoliberal standpoint which has so far rejected and tried to dismantle interventionist systems .
So I agree entirely that we need to think through whether these interventionist systems can be discarded , or whether they can , in fact , be used to regulate the market .
The second option , proposed by the French Government on the American model , is counter-cyclical regulation .
The question is whether this is workable in Europe , but we need to examine this , too , since the whole market is so volatile that every option must be considered .
The third is the stock market option .
Not long ago , there was a conference on the Borsa Merci Telematica Italiana , an online stock market system , and so we have to examine to what extent the stock exchange systems can be used .
I would add right away , for Mr Cioloş ' sake , that for Eastern Europe and the Baltic countries , the stock market system is unfortunately not very workable .
The French Presidency also raised the possibility of creating a European Union price monitoring system .
We need to think this through as well , and we need to think through - something that , if I am not mistaken , is close to Mr Cioloş ' way of thinking - the possibility of setting up some sort of fund , on the model of the fruit and vegetable reform , which could be used in risk management .
Unfortunately , in the case of grain , this would require extremely large sums .
In other words , I agree fully with the Commissioner that we have to think through every option , because at present , the EU is incapable of properly regulating the markets .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as you well know , agriculture is an economic sector that comprises specific features that mean that public intervention may occasionally be necessary , if not desirable , in the interests of producers , consumers and the public .
There are at least three reasons why public intervention in this economic sector is as justifiable in the European Union as it is in other countries of the world .
The characteristics of supply of agricultural goods and the demand for foodstuffs make agricultural markets unstable .
Agriculture also produces non-market goods and helps ensure a certain degree of social stability in our countries and our countryside through the jobs that it creates .
Above all , agriculture is the basis of an abundant , varied and healthy food supply .
Can we be satisfied , then , with the current economic situation of our rural areas and our farmers ?
A few days ago , Commissioner , a senior official gave me the following figures for his département - as it happens , this is a French département that you know well , a livestock farming department .
The administrative centre holds 2 500 agricultural accounts .
Of those , 800 have a debt ratio in excess of 80 % , and 20 % have a debt ratio of 100 % or more .
Faced with such figures - which , I admit , surprised even me - the issue to be dealt with today is not just one of revenue but of the decapitalisation of European agriculture .
Less aid , less public intervention and more restrictions on production : that is a truly explosive combination .
It is true that the general economic crisis is aggravating the situation .
However , we must also question certain decisions taken by the Commission , certain decisions taken by your colleagues , Commissioner .
Agriculture remains a bargaining chip in trade agreements .
Despite the situation in Europe , meat , certain cereals , fruits and vegetables are all affected .
The recent agreement between the European Union and the Andean countries , in particular , Peru and Colombia , will sacrifice the producers of the outermost regions .
We cannot continue with such a policy .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I come from southern Italy .
In my region , in our regions , production revolves around Mediterranean crops , oil , arable crops and vegetables .
Little has been said about this , as the focus of Europe and of the Commission has always been predominantly on dairy farming and stock rearing ; yet we also need to draw attention to Mediterranean crops .
I assure you that we are witnessing a phenomenon of rural abandonment in our areas , in our regions , due to the effects of climate change and desertification .
For us , desertification manifests itself in the weeds that grow where vegetable crops , vegetables and fruits , were once cultivated , where olive groves are no longer nurtured and the soil is no longer ploughed .
I can tell you that in 1995 , before the euro came along , olive producers were paid ITL 170 000 , which is equivalent to about EUR 90 .
This year , olive producers have been paid EUR 30 per hundred kilograms .
Thirteen or fourteen years have gone by and the price is now a third of what it used to be .
Our producers sell oil wholesale for EUR 2 per litre ; such takings do not even allow them to cover their costs , and we are putting farms in debt because they are selling at less than cost price .
We are also seeing a strange phenomenon : oil is bought wholesale for EUR 2 and we find that it is retailing in supermarkets for EUR 2 or less .
There is clearly a need to introduce more controls .
I would be happy to meet you to outline the problem of updating Regulation ( EC ) No 2568 / 1991 ; there are new control systems and we must fight against sophistication and adulteration , for the benefit of consumers and producers too .
We cannot contemplate nationalising aid in the next CAP , nor can we contemplate reducing direct aid , since the absence of direct aid or the reduction of its funds would lead to a farming crisis in southern Italy and the Mediterranean .
Commissioner , I will conclude by telling you that those who own land today own it not because they won it in a lottery , but because it was handed down to them by their father or grandfather , who cultivated that land , who poured their sweat and blood into it , and left it to their son .
Today , those who leave their farm to their children risk leaving them with a handful of debts .
Europe must provide an energetic and strong response to help and aid the revival of our agricultural sector .
( FI ) Mr President , stabilising the market must be one of the shared central objectives of economic policy .
On this matter , we in this Chamber seem to be of the same opinion .
In the common agricultural policy , we need the safety net of market measures , both for the protection of farmers and also for the protection of all those who are involved in the food chain .
The period after 2013 seems particularly alarming , for example , because of the withdrawal of export subsidies and milk quotas , as well as the increase in imports from other countries .
It therefore seems good that the Commissioner is saying at this stage that he plans to take measures before 2013 .
Now we need to examine how we will be able to put the new administrative tools for the market into use : for example , the many different measures for developing an income insurance system , making producers and businesses stronger and improving the transparency of the market .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Cioloş , I have in front of me an analysis of the economic situation in the German agricultural sector .
The analysis involved the evaluation of 19 100 sets of accounts from full-time and part-time farms .
The results have been projected on the basis of the distribution of farms from the Farm Structure Survey of 2007 .
In the financial year 2008-2009 , the overall situation deteriorated significantly .
The figures for the 18 200 full-time dairy and arable farms fell from EUR 45 400 to EUR 34 400 .
That represents a reduction of 24 % .
Particularly large losses occurred in 2008-2009 .
Operating results fell to EUR 29 300 ( minus 45 % ) and to EUR 43 000 ( minus 18 % ) .
In contrast , mixed livestock farms ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I think that the debate that we have just heard demonstrates the extent to which we should learn lessons from this dairy crisis .
Moreover , as Mr Le Foll said at the start of his speech , we should consider implementing mechanisms for regulating the markets as part of the common agricultural policy post-2013 .
I firmly believe that the CAP must be able , at the same time as respecting the diversity of European agriculture , to propose measures relating to our common objectives at European level that will allow us to fulfil the role granted to it under the Treaty of Lisbon .
In other words , it must guarantee the stability of farmers ' revenues and ensure that the markets are well supplied .
The future instruments of the CAP should therefore make it possible for us to achieve , among other things , these objectives .
There are other objectives of course , but those are the fundamental ones that we must take into account .
Measures to regulate the markets that will enable us to avoid situations of price or market volatility or to intervene in such situations will be the focus of our concerns and of the proposals that the Commission will make as part of the CAP post-2013 .
I can assure you that we are currently working on this .
I am firmly convinced and conscious of the fact that market management mechanisms must be able to play a role alongside direct aid , which we must keep , albeit by adapting the criteria for awarding them .
The market must be able to function , of course .
We must leave the market to function when it is able , but I also agree with Mr Dantin when he says that the specific nature of the agricultural sector justifies public intervention .
This must , of course , be targeted and must aim to solve problems with the functioning of the market and to ensure that it functions properly .
It is in this spirit that we will be making proposals for the CAP post-2013 .
I fully understand that sectors other than dairy are also experiencing difficulties at this time .
Thus , the fruit and vegetables sector is also often subjected to major market variations : variations in price and amounts marketed or sold .
This sector underwent reform a few years ago .
We will also learn lessons from how that reform , which gave greater negotiating powers to producers within producer organisations , was applied .
I think that , at this level too , we could learn some lessons that could be applied to other sectors .
Indeed , I am of the view that , apart from public intervention , producers must also be given the opportunity to negotiate contracts better and thus to negotiate prices better , whilst ensuring some stability in what products are placed on the market by means of private contracts .
I therefore think that , in addition to public intervention , we can find other ways of allowing the market to function well , whilst giving the public authorities the power to intervene when the market is unable to play its role , since agriculture must not only supply the markets , but also continue to produce public goods .
We are in agreement on that .
Therefore , in order for agriculture to be able to fulfil all of its functions , we will have to help it .
As for issues relating to the food chain , in particular , the powers to negotiate a better distribution of added value , Parliament has carried out some work , the Commission has issued a communication and debates have taken place within the Council .
On the basis of all these elements , I think that we will make some proposals in order to find mechanisms that will allow producers to negotiate their margins better .
I think that I have more or less covered all the speeches and all the problems that were raised .
I would like to thank you once again for the opportunity that you have given me to explain myself .
The debate is only just beginning .
I also launched a public debate before making proposals on the CAP post-2013 reform .
I think that following that debate and the work under way within Parliament , we shall be able , between now and the autumn , when I shall return with a Commission communication on the future of the CAP , to make proposals that will give farmers greater confidence in their activities .
We need these farmers , not only for what they supply on the market , but also for what they do on their land .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
There has been a fall in prices in various agricultural markets in recent months as a result of the economic and financial crisis that has affected the EU , which , in turn , has affected demand for those products .
Lower prices benefit consumers and , in the medium term , will lead to increased demand , but in the meantime , many producers are being badly hit .
It is therefore crucial to draw up a European agricultural policy that will respond to the key issue : the need to ensure sustainable food security at reasonable market prices .
What is required is an agricultural model that is competitive and economically viable and which responds to the citizens ' food , environmental and social needs .
Even if the common agricultural policy is market oriented , it has to contain a series of instruments to address the need to compensate for the production of public assets that the market does not remunerate and to control the extreme volatility of the market .
It must also have appropriate regulation , a strong safety net and sensible risk management .
It also needs to improve the food supply chain , by means of greater transparency and better contractual practices that are not damaging for producers .
To conclude , it is essential to ensure equality of treatment for imported agricultural materials and produce .
in writing . - Firstly , let me say that I welcome the moves of my colleagues , especially Senor de Castro , who has taken the initiative to start the debate on this issue .
It is a fact that today , our farmers are faced with overwhelming obstacles when it comes to achieving a fair price for their produce .
The effect on prices during the recent dairy crisis is just one example .
Stock intervention had its role to play in stabilising the market , as did the Emergency Dairy Fund . But we are not out of the woods yet , so to speak .
Supermarkets present their hurdles when it comes to a fair deal for farmers .
We all know how the average supermarket likes to present itself to the consumer as a ' slasher ' of prices .
We need to be careful however , that the supermarket does not also continue slashing the prices going to our farmers .
If the current system was allowed to continue indefinitely , there would be no incentive to farm and where would our rural society be then .
This has to change .
I hope the Commission is as concerned about this as Members of Parliament are .
In 2009 , European farmers experienced significant difficulties .
Incomes fell by almost a quarter , and the crisis affected the majority of agricultural markets , including milk , cereals , pork , beef , olives , etc .
The most difficult situation was definitely that facing the dairy market .
As a result of a worldwide price collapse , European milk producers suffered huge losses .
Farmers publicised their difficult situation at a variety of meetings , and there were also mass protests of farmers in many countries .
Currently , price fluctuations are no longer so large , but this does not mean the problems have disappeared .
We are still faced with low demand and price fluctuations in many sectors of agriculture .
The present mechanisms of intervention in the dairy sector and the establishment of the Dairy Fund are proving insufficient .
We can already imagine what will happen when these instruments expire .
We can certainly expect further falls in income and market turbulence .
I agree with the statement of Mr Cioloş that the difficult situation in the dairy market should be solved immediately , and that we should not wait for 2013 , when a major reform of the CAP is planned .
In June , we expect a decision of the High Level Group , which will present its reflections and thoughts on improvement of the situation in the dairy sector .
I hope that body will fulfil our expectations and present a balanced programme of stabilising measures .
I am pleased that Mr Cioloş shares our fears and has taken account of our suggestions .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
The next sitting will take place tomorrow , 21 April .
The debates will be held from 09.00 to 13.00 and from 15.00 to 19.00 .
I do not know if everyone is aware that tomorrow , the sitting will be closed at 19.00 .
( The sitting was closed at 23.25 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.05 )
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
2008 Discharge ( debate )
( FR ) Mr President , I note that the Court of Auditors is absent from this House .
We need the position of the Court of Auditors to make matters clearer for us .
Do we have an explanation for this absence ?
I also note that the Council 's seats are empty , even though we are going to be dealing with discharge to the Council , about which we have a number of concerns .
Do we also have an explanation for the Council 's absence ?
Colleagues , it is not necessary for the Council to be here .
They are not obliged to be here , but we did of course expect the Court of Auditors ' highest representatives .
They are not here and we are very surprised , as it is certainly not a problem of transport .
It is not so far from Luxembourg and they can travel by car without any problem .
Nevertheless we should start our discussion , not knowing yet why they have not arrived .
We will start the discussion without them .
We know that the votes are postponed and will be held in two weeks ' time in Brussels .
We have already decided about that .
So there is only one possibility for us : we have to start the discussion , not knowing whether they will be able to be here in the next half-hour or hour .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to say to you that , without knowing the reason why , we understand that the Court of Auditors is absent , that it does an outstanding job of auditing the European institutions .
I do , however , object to the Council 's absence because we need debates with it , particularly where discharges relating to its activities are concerned .
Therefore , I object to the Council 's absence today .
Ladies and gentlemen , we can , in any case , begin the discussion .
What is important is that we can start our work .
Mr President , I would like to mention that we should not only be blaming the Council .
The Secretary-General of Parliament is missing .
The discharge has something to say to the Secretary-General about Parliament , so we would be extremely happy if he were with us today as well .
I am sure the Secretary-General will be here - there is no doubt about that .
Good morning Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I would like to repeat that , in my opinion , it is rather difficult to conduct a debate in the absence of those to whom we are supposed to grant discharge , with whom we want to discuss the reasons why we are granting discharge or are postponing discharge or whatever else we have to talk to them about .
I know many of the honourable Members of this House from the committee .
We also know our respective positions .
It is fine that we will exchange them once again this morning , but it is not really helpful .
In this context , I would like to propose that in committee , we deliberate formally inviting the institutions we are discussing to the next discharge debate and postponing the debates accordingly if they are not present .
Discharge to the European institutions comes at a difficult , but important moment .
A consequence of the financial crisis is that all governments are having to review their respective budgets and ensure that they are meeting their requirements .
We are in the first year of a new legislative period of the European Parliament and are dealing with a newly assembled Commission .
In terms of the discharge , we are , however , considering the 2008 budget , which was under the responsibility of the previous Commission .
This opens a multitude of new perspectives .
Among these new perspectives , we should expect a new way of thinking and a new approach on the part of the Member States since , for the first time , the Treaty of Lisbon names them as being co-responsible for the implementation of the EU budget .
In terms of the 2008 budgetary review , it was the rapporteur 's intention to ensure that the Commission concentrates entirely on possibilities for improvement in budgetary control and that the Member States are on board for that as well .
As the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the Committee on Budgetary Control , it is our goal that in future , every discharge report - on the basis of the judgment of the European Court of Auditors - is better than the previous one .
It all depends on the Council assuming its new key roll in the light of the importance of the Member States .
It would be equally helpful if the European Court of Auditors looked for ways of redressing the imbalance that is , on the one hand , the result of annual reporting and the multiannual duration of many EU programmes and the logic of their implementation by the Commission and the Member States .
As the budgetary authority , we continue to have great concerns regarding some specific areas of responsibility , and , in particular , those in which the EU intends to implement its political priorities .
For example , cohesion in the European Union is essential and therefore , the funds that flow into structural policy are particularly important .
Here , we need to continue combating sources of errors decisively through simpler rules and recovering funds wrongly paid .
We need finer instruments to measure results and we call on the Court of Auditors to develop these instruments , in order to be able to identify precisely the sources of errors .
We know that the action plan for the structural funds that provides for recovery is finally being implemented and we must now wait for it to have an effect .
Pre-accession aid has the goal of enabling fundamental processes of change in these states and problems in target setting and implementation must be remedied .
What will not do , however , is the fact that the goal of the accession process is effectively being torpedoed through the back door .
Therefore , I call on the House to reject the attempt by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to use amendments to turn the position of the European Parliament on Turkey 's accession process on its head , as recorded in the resolution on the progress report .
We are looking forward to the appointment of a new Director-General of the European Antifraud Office ( OLAF ) to end the ongoing debate , and also the Commission 's proposals on the reform of OLAF , in order to improve the crucial work of this office .
Finally , to external policy actions .
We need a demonstration of the determination of the EU to contribute to the resolution of problems worldwide .
These actions must be highly effective , even under the most difficult circumstances .
In the coming months , we must discuss the current management of EU funds in this area with the Commission and how these funds will be managed in future by the European External Action Service .
We are , however , making some progress .
Our group is particularly pleased with the steps the Commission is taking as regards the annual management reports of the Member States , for example , since we are thereby getting closer to the realisation of an old demand of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats .
The same is true for the financial corrections and recoveries , since this is also an opportunity to reduce an unacceptably high rate of errors .
These points give us , among other things , the opportunity , some considerations notwithstanding , to call for the discharge of the Commission .
I thank you and look forward to your comments .

Mr President , we have here today an important task to perform for the discharge of the Seventh , Eighth and Ninth European Development Funds ( EDFs ) and the part of the Tenth EDF corresponding to 2008 .
This is , moreover , a critical time , when major institutional changes are taking place and also when various global disasters have shown that European aid is increasingly important .
They have also shown that it needs to be coordinated , it needs to be effective and , above all , it needs to be transparent , so that all Europeans continue to maintain their support and their positive view of this aid .
In addition , this is a crucial time in institutional terms .
The implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon and the creation of the office of High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , as well as the European External Action Service , provide us with a dual opportunity .
On the one hand , we have the chance to improve substantially the application and effectiveness of our external aid ; on the other , however , there are also major question marks , because we are concerned at the high risk that the growing effectiveness that we have achieved with difficulty for European development aid , in conjunction with the Court of Auditors and the Commission , may be undermined by further reorganisation , ambiguity in decision making and the chain of responsibility , and , especially , by fragmented management .
We need greater certainty from the Commission to avoid such setbacks , and therefore we need clear , specific information as soon as possible on what the new system will be like and how it will affect development aid .
First , with regard to the current financial year , I would like to express the need for the EDF to be fully incorporated into the budget - that , I repeat again , is our demand - in order to enhance its consistency , transparency and effectiveness and to strengthen its oversight system .
We therefore insist that it is vital for the Commission , together with Parliament , to keep this demand firmly in mind for the next financial framework .
It is also important to strengthen joint planning so as to achieve greater concentration , coordination and vision in the work .
Consequently , we need to focus the Tenth EDF on a limited number of sectors .
It is important to avoid the adverse effects of proliferation , although we must be very careful not to underestimate the capacity and effectiveness of non-governmental organisations on the ground , as they are effective .
It is a complex exercise in squaring the circle , but we hope that we can take it forward , together with the Commission .
We are also pleased that in this financial year , the statement of assurance has been positive , except for the method of estimating the provision for the Commission 's costs .
Then there are no material errors in the underlying transactions , although we are still finding - and therefore need to improve - a high incidence of non-quantifiable errors in both budget-support commitments and payments .
We are also hugely concerned that the Court of Auditors has again been unable to obtain important documentation on payments amounting to 6.7 % of annual expenditure relating to cooperation with international organisations .
We need a definitive method and an ad hoc calendar to ensure that information and documentation on this joint financing is not undermined by this lack of transparency .
In addition , we consider financial implementation to have been satisfactory , since the Seventh EDF has been closed and its balance transferred to the Ninth EDF .

We also welcome the speedy implementation of the Tenth EDF since 1 July 2008 , and we hope that the Commission 's efforts will culminate in the settlement of the remaining old and dormant payments .
Resources are another of the important items .
We are also concerned , although there has been some discussion , that the resources of the Ninth and Tenth EDFs managed by the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) are not covered by the statement of assurance and should therefore be the subject of regular reports by the EIB .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been asking myself what discharge really is .
Discharge is a parliamentary procedure , a public procedure ; it is a critical scrutiny , in public , of financial management .
I was responsible for carrying out this exercise in respect of the European Parliament for the 2008 financial year .
This scrutiny facilitates MEPs ' and also citizens ' understanding of Parliament 's particular set-up , governance structure and working methods .
After all , ladies and gentlemen , citizens have the right to know what is happening to their taxes .
A great deal of money is involved .
We are talking about a parliamentary budget of EUR 1.4 billion for 2008 ; the budget for 2011 is likely to be EUR 1.7 billion .
This is an extremely large amount of money .
The procedure is important , as is the work of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
After all , a critical approach by this committee ensures progress , as has indeed been demonstrated in the past .
For example , a critical stance by the Committee on Budgetary Control ensured the introduction of a Statute for Members of the European Parliament and of a Statute for Assistants , it ensured that we carried out a critical examination of the purchase of buildings here in Strasbourg , and it ensured the accomplishment of an EMAS procedure that has reduced the environmental impact of our work .
This is all good news , ladies and gentlemen .
Thanks to our critical stance , we have managed to reduce electricity consumption by 25 % over three years .
We have managed to use 100 % green electricity .
We have succeeded in cutting CO2 emissions by 17 % .
We have managed to reduce , compost or reuse 50 % of our waste streams .
My report also introduces a new concept : that of ' reputational damage ' to Parliament .
This means that even the smallest impact of financial resources can cause enormous damage to the reputation of this House .
We should be alert to this .
The appointment of a risk manager within the administration on 24 February is to be warmly welcomed .
I would invite that person to approach the competent committees and join us in discussing ways of reducing the risks of misappropriation in this House .
A critical approach is essential , as I have said .
That is why I am calling for transparency and openness , for the establishment of a system of checks and balances , and for responsibility and accountability .
Mr President , I propose granting you discharge , as I have not discovered any serious cases of fraud or misappropriation or any major scandals : let that be quite clear .
Nevertheless , my report is critical .
I wanted to show that we can do even better .
The report aims to ensure that , as we approach the next elections in 2014 , we are free from all scandals , big or small , and that we are not plagued by that kind of unsavoury report in the press .
In my report , I have endeavoured to hand the Secretary-General and Parliament 's senior administration a number of means of protection against certain criticisms .
I have discussed a number of concerns .
One is the fact that the Secretary-General draws up his annual report on the basis of declarations by the Directors-General , when I should much prefer there to be a second opinion .
I propose we take an even closer look at the whole difficult system of public procurement , as this constitutes a major risk factor .
I propose ensuring that no public taxes are used for the voluntary pension fund , with its actuarial deficit of EUR 121 million .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to conclude with a few words about the production of my report .
I strove for positive cooperation with my shadow rapporteurs , and some very constructive amendments have been tabled .
However , I regret that , at some point , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) tabled a mere 50 or so amendments seeking to delete important parts of my report .
I can only think that there has been some interference between certain of Parliament 's structures and the MEPs who wanted to do that .
I find this regrettable in that , as a pro-European yet critical MEP , I sought primarily to present a very constructive , very positive approach in this discharge report .

Mr President , Mr Šemeta , it has to be said that in all the institutions with which I have been involved - the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , which is absent today , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor - there has generally been a significant improvement , but this does not mean that everything is ideal .
Let us say frankly that the situation is least transparent with the finances of the Council .
Moreover , cooperation with the Council on the matter of budget discharge leaves a great deal to be desired .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has endorsed my proposal to postpone a decision on granting the Council 's Secretary-General discharge in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2008 .
The situation is analogous to the one from last year .
The Coordinators of the Committee on Budgetary Control met the representatives of the Spanish Presidency 's Council assuming a positive view should be taken of the progress on cooperation which was made last year and which resulted from the protracted discharge procedure .
This year , unfortunately , the answers given to the questions put by myself and the coordinators were completely unsatisfactory and gave rise to a great many doubts .
For this reason , and with the support of the coordinators of all the political groups , I have decided to postpone the decision on discharge .
Matters relating to the financing of various aspects of common foreign policy and security , annual financial reports and the closing of extra-budgetary accounts still remain unclear .
A definite improvement must be made on the matters of verification of invoices and publication of administrative decisions used as the legal basis for budgetary items .
In addition , it is paradoxical that much of the data presented by the Council concerned the former budgetary period .
As for the Court of Justice , we can discern certain weaknesses in internal tender procurement procedures , as can the Court of Auditors .
In relation to this , we support the suggestion of the Court of Auditors concerning the need to improve tender procedures in this institution .
We are pleased about the reduction in the duration of proceedings but , on the other hand , we have observed a persistent backlog of cases .
We are pleased to note the opening of the Internal Audit Unit .
We welcome the practice of including in the activity report information on progress made in relation to the discharge of the year before .
I stress very strongly that we regret the permanent reluctance of the ECJ to publish its members ' declarations of financial interests .
As for the Court of Auditors , the external audit did not give grounds to state that the financial resources assigned to the Court are being used improperly .
I repeat the suggestion to consider the possibility of rationalising the structure of the Court , for example , by capping the number of members and not treating the Court of Auditors as a specific kind of political group .
In the case of the Economic and Social Committee , the audit conducted by the Court of Auditors did not reveal any serious improprieties .
It should be recommended that provisions concerning financial aspects of staff be interpreted and implemented by all EU institutions in the same way , so that the staff of none of the institutions are treated in a more privileged way .
It is very good that the Administrative Cooperation Agreement between the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions has been adopted .
We encourage both institutions to communicate the progress made as regards harmonising their internal control standards .
We do not have any serious reservations concerning the Committee of the Regions or the European Ombudsman .
We note that the European Ombudsman has greatly increased its number of posts .
The question is whether it should increase the number of posts at this pace , although it does also have more work .
To sum up , there is only a problem with the Council .
There are no problems with the other six institutions .
We must keep to the allotted time .
I have some information .
We have had contact with the head of cabinet of the President of the Court of Auditors , and we also checked our last debates at the European Parliament in 2008 and 2009 .
The Court of Auditors was not present during our discussions and neither was the Council .
The Court of Auditors and the Council were not present during our discussions .
Mr Caldeira , the President of the Court of Auditors , also remarked that the position of the Court in its technical functions is to attend the Budgetary Control Committee meeting , but to stay in the background in political debates at plenary .
President Caldeira will contact me during the day and explain the position of the Court of Auditors on our discussions .
We checked for the last two years and the Court of Auditors was not present .
If we want to organise it for the next time , they could maybe be present next year .
They were , of course , informed about our meeting , but were not present over the last two years .
They will certainly be present in October and November when they will present their report .
( NL ) Mr President , I can fully accept that the European Court of Auditors is not here today , but what you have just said about the Council 's absence , including in recent years , merely demonstrates that this is a structural rather than an occasional problem .
This is typical of the Council 's behaviour when it comes to the responsible use of European funds and , in actual fact , your message only serves to cast the Council 's absence in an even worse light .
For this reason , and as a crystal clear signal from Parliament to the Council , I wish to propose that we postpone today 's debate on the Council 's discharge and refrain from discussing that subject today .
Mr President , thank you very much for your careful presentation of the facts concerning previous years .
However , I would like to underline very firmly that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , and this increases the European Parliament 's role .
In relation to this , we are entitled to expect , for reasons which are not so much formal as practical and political , that representatives of the Council , as the previous speaker has just said , should be present during this extremely important debate , a debate which is perhaps the most important one from the point of view of European taxpayers and European electors .
The absence of the Council is a complete misunderstanding , and I am inclined to agree with the proposal of the previous speaker that in this situation , we should postpone the part of the debate which concerns the Council and wait until representatives of the Council get here .
I stress yet again what I said earlier , that the Council did not show the will to work constructively with us as representatives of the Committee on Budgetary Control or as coordinators from the Committee , and today 's absence would appear to be another element of that lack of cooperation .
Mr President , when we go through the discharge procedure and vote on it , the European Parliament will take full responsibility for the year 2008 .
This is the moment when we take the responsibility from the Commission , the Council and other institutions onto our shoulders .
It is not only a formality but a very important moment .
However , I think that we have agreed that we will continue the debate and we will go on .
Do not forget we have an objective reason , namely , that it is not so easy to arrive here from Spain .
I know this because I came from Azerbaijan , through Baku and Madrid and then by road .
I am very aware that today is not the right day to pursue this .
I think it is enough for us to ask those institutions and the others which are involved in the discharge to show an interest and be present at the vote in May .
That is what I would suggest .
( FR ) Mr President , we are used to the Council 's seats being empty .
It is therefore not the first time ; let us not be hypocritical .
Once again , I find this regrettable .
As regards the debate , I am in favour of it going ahead .
Moreover , subject to your administration 's assessment , I do not think we have the power to amend the agenda , since it was set on your authority when you resumed the plenary session .
Therefore , I am in favour of the debate going ahead , albeit voicing my regret once again that the Council is absent .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will contact both the Court of Auditors and the Council today .
I will present our expectations for the future in relation to the Council and the Court of Auditors very firmly , and say that they should be present at such meetings .
I will also speak to Mr Zapatero in person about this , because he leads the rotating Presidency .
I will , today , find a solution to this for the future .
Mr President , Mr Šemeta , Mr López Garrido , I am very pleased to see you and to address you - welcome .


In the period 2000-2010 , we have seen a 610 % increase in EU contributions to the decentralised agencies .
The contributions have increased from EUR 95 to 579 million , even though the staff numbers of those agencies increased by around 271 % .

In 2000 , the agencies employed 1 219 people , whereas , today , they employ 4 794 .
These figures do not take into account the European Agency for Reconstruction , which was closed in 2008 , and on the last discharge of which we will vote today , or rather at a later date in Brussels .
This general increase is certainly impressive .
Nonetheless , in the period 2000-2010 , the European Union has had to face many challenges .
Firstly , two enlargements , in 2004 and 2007 , with 12 new Member States , and other challenges such as employment and vocational training , immigration , the environment , air safety and many others still .
In this context , the decentralised agencies that were set up to respond to a specific need make a direct contribution , through the skills they develop , to the European Union 's progress in the face of these huge challenges .
Similarly , the Member States must cooperate closely on these issues , and the agencies are a powerful vehicle for these exchanges .
Lastly , establishing the agencies throughout EU territory makes Europe closer to its citizens and permits a certain degree of decentralisation of EU activities .
The scope of the tasks entrusted to the agencies and the increase in their number , size and budgets does , however , require the institutions to fulfil their own budgetary authority responsibilities .
The budgetary control remit of Parliament , like that of the Internal Audit Service of the Commission and of the Court of Auditors , must also be strengthened to ensure that these agencies are monitored properly .
However , that does not exempt them from having to comply with the rules in force .
With regard to the 2008 discharge , I would point out here what are , unfortunately , recurring problems facing many agencies : the weaknesses in procurement procedures ; the unrealistic recruitment planning and the lack of transparency in the procedures for selecting their personnel ; the large volume of carryovers and cancellations of operational appropriations ; and the weaknesses in the scheduling of activities , with a lack of specific objectives .
We note that , despite the agencies ' efforts , some of them still have difficulty in applying EU financial and budgetary regulations , not least because of their size .
The smallest agencies have more difficulty in following the onerous procedures imposed by EU legislation .
On this point , I expect the swift conclusions of the interinstitutional working group to ensure that the same problems are not repeated year after year .
Nevertheless , these difficulties do not jeopardise the granting of discharge for the financial year 2008 .
The situation is different for the European Police College ( CEPOL ) .
Although one may note some improvements in the management of CEPOL when compared with the situation in 2007 , the audits carried out reveal some blatant irregularities in the application of the administrative and financial rules .
That is why we are proposing that discharge be postponed .
To conclude , I should like to highlight the efforts made by some agencies to improve their management .
Some have taken it upon themselves to go further and have introduced rules that are worthy of praise , and I shall mention just a few of them .
The European Food Safety Authority , which I would add was very effective in its agency coordination role , has introduced a risk assessment process .
The European Environment Agency has implemented a management control system for monitoring the progress of its projects and the use of its resources in real time .
Lastly , the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions has created a system for monitoring the information it provides .
To conclude , I do , of course , encourage the agencies to follow this example .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , allow me to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Liberadzki , and his fellow rapporteurs on the reports they have produced and for the recommendations to grant the discharge to the Commission for the 2008 financial year .
I would also like to thank Mrs Ayala Sender for her report on the implementation of the European Development Fund and Mrs Mathieu for her comprehensive analysis of recurrent issues for agencies .
The 2008 discharge procedure is now reaching its end .
It was an intensive period but , most importantly , the start of a new constructive dialogue between our institutions .
Achieving an unqualified statement of assurance from the Court of Auditors remains the Commission 's collegial objective .
I believe this has been clearly demonstrated in our recent efforts .
Progress is already under way , with simplifications introduced and better management and control systems under the 2007-13 programming period and the various action plans gradually showing their positive impact on the error rates .
A substantial step change will be possible with a new generation of programmes for the next financial period currently under preparation ; these should aim at better balancing targeted eligibility criteria , cost of control and quality of spending .
However , with my fellow Commissioners , I share the wish expressed in your discharge resolution : we want to see , soon , a measurable acceleration of the progress made over the last years in improving the financial management of the European budget , including the reinforcement of the main stakeholders ' responsibility and accountability .
Close and intense cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament is instrumental in this respect .
However , we all know that it will not be sufficient to accelerate concrete and sustainable progress on the spot .
In order to succeed , we need a new partnership with all stakeholders , not least the active involvement of the Member States and the European Court of Auditors .
The Commission will not wait until the amendments to the Financial Regulation enter into force to invite the Member States ' authorities to fully resume their responsibilities as reinforced under the Lisbon Treaty , anticipating measures which are essential to improving financial management .
I also consider that the Court of Auditors has a crucial role in expressing its independent assurance statement on the Commission 's financial management .
Any change in the splitting of the DAS by area would change the share of the budget associated with the different colour areas .
The Commission would very much welcome it if , in the near future , the Court of Auditors were to consider a distinction between areas where the risk of error is different and informs us about the actual added value of the management and control systems introduced in the 2007-13 legislation .
I hope as well that , when the colegislator has agreed on a tolerable risk of error , the Court of Auditors will consider this new concept in the way it finds appropriate .
As requested , the Commission will prepare and send to the Parliament a new agenda for 2010 onwards .
The Commission will do its utmost , together with the other actors involved , to accelerate the reduction of error rates so as to ensure that a further 20 % of the budget can be given a green classification by the European Court of Auditors in 2014 .
The involvement of all stakeholders in the common objective of improving financial management and protecting the Union 's financial interests will be at the heart of this new agenda , which I will share with you already next month .
Your considerations expressed in the 2008 discharge resolution will be duly taken into account .
I am looking forward to constructive discussions .
Mr President , in the financial year 2008 , payments to the tune of around EUR 5 billion were made in areas of policy that the Committee on Foreign Affairs is responsible for .
In retrospect , the continued underfunding of category IV is clear .
The Court of Auditors established some inaccuracies and considers the Commission 's supervision and control system for external aid , development aid and pre-accession aid only partially effective .
The Commission refers to the specific , purely annual approach of the Court of Auditors that can only ever evaluate part of the Commission 's work and claims the reason lies in the multiannual character of most programmes and their related control systems .
The important thing in my view is that the Court of Auditors is not talking about fraud or embezzlement .
It is much more about handling the EU 's external aid carefully , promptly and as effectively as possible , as well as about detailed documentation and accountability , since it is annoying when projects are not completed on time or there is a lack of clarity about their outcome .
It jeopardises the success of our foreign policy .
The fact that the Court of Auditors has established that error rates are in decline is therefore praise for the work of the previous Commission in external aid , in development cooperation and in enlargement policy .
Obviously , amendments to the legal framework are also beginning to have an impact .
The special report on pre-accession aid for Turkey provides the first references to improved control of the use of funds that has become possible since 2007 through the new Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance .
Future accounts reports and reviews must indicate how responsibly and successfully recipients handle EU aid .
We must be able to adapt our foreign policy flexibly , so that we can defend our external policy interests effectively .
We therefore call on the Commission to proceed with the improvement of financial regulation , the new financial framework , budget reform and , above all , with the development of the European External Action Service .
All in all , I can , however , recommend discharge for the financial year 2008 for the area of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have already had an interesting morning together .
Actually , I wanted to make a completely different speech .
I will not do this now because I believe that we cannot simply ignore what happened today .
We are dealing with the fact that neither this House nor the other institutions are taking discharge seriously in any form .
The only institution that has to take it seriously is the Commission .
It is the one we are talking to and is the one that is subject to discharge in the treaty .
For all others , namely the other institutions , the matter of discharge has not been regulated in the treaty .
That is a problem for us .
Now we must imagine how , in two years , the European External Action Service may not sit here if it becomes an institution .
Then we will experience what we already have now , namely , that all other institutions do not even feel it necessary to appear here and listen to what the Parliament as budget legislator has to say to them .
The Council is now making this year a commendable exception , as the Swedish Presidency did last year .
If we take what is happening here as a fundamental parliamentary right as a basis for discharge , then I can only warn you not to put the proposal currently on the table into action , namely to transform the European External Action Service into another institution , because that would herald the end of our influence , because it is so easy to escape this influence .
The only other institution that is represented is Parliament .
I would like to offer the President of Parliament my particular thanks for defending our rights this morning and for indicating that he will enter into talks with all of the others .
What is the use in us having a discharge right if we do not take it seriously and if we do not compel others to take it seriously ? Therefore , we must consider the discharge procedure itself very thoroughly .
We cannot go on as we have up to now .
I would like to seize the initiative and turn once again to the Council .
Following the Treaty of Lisbon , the Council is now one institution and the President of the Council is one institution .
We expect the immediate legalisation of this state of affairs in budgetary legislation .
You yourselves must ensure the proper anchoring of your own responsibility in budgetary law , and this even applies to the President of the Council .
You must legalise your responsibilities and I call on you to do this as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to address one point , a point that really is a scandal .
I am talking about the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , the ECDC in Stockholm .
Since May 2005 , highly qualified people there have had to work in an absolutely hostile environment .
Until now , the Swedish Government has been unable to conclude an accord de siege with the ECDC , although they desperately wanted this agency , like all Member States always badly want an agency .
To this day , none of the employees have a personal identity number , the so-called Folkbokföring number .
However , this number is used by public administrations , institutions and private companies to identify their customers .
Consequently , children born in Sweden cannot be registered , for example , providers of electricity , gas , telecommunications and television withhold their services , landlords refuse long-term tenancy agreements and there are problems accessing doctors and hospitals .
For spouses , it means it is impossible to become self-employed in Sweden .
There are also enormous difficulties in getting a job .
The list could go on .
One thing is clear : certain fundamental rights anchored in European law are simply being denied to the staff at the ECDC in Sweden .
As a result , all of this has landed before our Committee on Petitions .
In any case , the situation is untenable ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( NL ) Mr President , there is not much left to say about the 2008 budget of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection ; the discussion in committee and in the reports has already shed a good deal of light on matters .
We saw a rather substantial under-execution with regard to Solvit in 2008 , but this will correct itself in 2009 and 2010 .
Nevertheless , I would urge the Commissioner to simply ensure that the budget for Solvit is used sensibly .
I understand that budgets have to be spent responsibly , but I see now that the provision of information in this field is still insufficient .
Following on from this , perhaps I could just make an observation on the Services Directive , which was introduced in December 2009 .
There is simply a great need for information on this directive in the European Union .
Mr President , another point concerns actual customs checks by Member States .
This is not exactly a subject that needs to be discussed here , but we have seen that Member States are not carrying out enough checks on imported goods , and I would make a renewed appeal to the Commission to get together with the Member States to give this further consideration , so as to ensure that goods imports are properly checked without fail .
Finally , as several of my fellow Members and the Commissioner himself have already remarked , the budgetary rules are still very complicated on a number of points , which also means that the associated control mechanisms are very complicated .
Therefore , I wish to add my voice to all the calls for these to be simplified , and , at all events , improved .
Mr President , I ask you to treat the first part just as a point of order , because I would like to know before the end of this debate whether Parliament invited both the Court of Auditors and the Council to attend this debate , and I would like to know about or receive the documentation .
I would also like to know whether last year - although Mrs Gräßle has said that the Swedish Presidency was present here - the Council was at the discharge debate .
Would you now please start the clock for my speech on discharge with regard to transport ?
We would first like to highlight our satisfaction at the high utilisation rates that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has seen in commitment and payment appropriations for Trans-European Networks , both of which have reached almost 100 % .
We , of course , need the Member States to ensure that adequate funding is made available from national budgets , and I would like to point out again that Parliament has always supported a higher level of funding for these networks .
We trust that the review of the network projects this year , in 2010 , will be an opportunity to assess whether this expenditure has been sufficient and effective .
In any case , monitoring certainly has been .
We also welcome the fact that the annual accounts of the Trans-European Transport Network Executive Agency are legal and regular , although we are concerned at the delays in recruitment .
The Commission 's Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport has informed us , however , that this will be brought up to date .
On the other hand , we are concerned at the low uptake of payment appropriations for transport safety , the even lower uptake for the Marco Polo programme , which enjoys Parliament 's support , and also the exceptionally low uptake of appropriations for passenger rights .
Given the size of the project , we are also concerned at the inadequate utilisation of payment appropriations in the Galileo programme and regret the total lack of data on tourism .
We hope that this lack of data will be remedied in the new institutional framework .
( FR ) Mr President , I am in two minds about whether to take the floor .
I am sorry for these points of order .
I should like first to welcome the Council and to thank the Minister for joining us .
I believe , Mr President , that it is customary to invite the Council to take the floor after the Commission has spoken .
However , the Council did not take the floor before the political debate , even though it spoke at the end of the debate .
It might perhaps be a good idea to offer it the floor in particular so that it can respond to the position of our rapporteur , who is proposing that the granting of discharge to the Council be postponed .
We will reach an agreement with the Council on whether it thinks there is a need to speak .
Discharge is a legal act , and I think that the Committee on Regional Development has no reason to argue against giving a discharge .
At the same time , discharge is also a political evaluation . It clarifies whether we have reached the goals which we set for ourselves in 2008 , and whether we have obtained sufficient value for the expenditures .
There are quite a few misconceptions in circulation concerning the process of evaluating cohesion policy , including in this House .
I would like most emphatically to draw your attention to the fact that not every error constitutes fraud .
We often overestimate the criticisms made - otherwise quite rightly - by the Court of Auditors or in any other audit .
I would like to point out that we do not have transparent measurement figures .
We need a unified methodology to measure efficiency , effectiveness , and even absorption capacity , which plays a key role in determining how we should proceed with the cohesion policy .
In 2008 , only 32 % of the expenditure came from this planning cycle , while the rest was taken from the spending of the pre-2006 cycle .
It is difficult to judge , therefore , how successful we were in 2008 in meeting the targets of the new cycle .
Certain Member States did not even reach 32 % .
Everyone bears part of the responsibility for the delays in using up the funds .
The recommendations made by the Commission and Parliament in the interest of simplification , which we made since 2008 in response to the crisis , have all served the purpose of making improvements on our part .
The ball is in the court of the Member States ; that is where significant progress has to be made .
I would like to call to mind that according to Article 8 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , promoting the equality of men and women is one of the fundamental values of the European Union , one which every EU action must respect and that should , therefore , also be capable of being monitored in the discharge procedure for the implementation of the EU budget .
To this end , it is indispensable that the statistical data on the use of the budget be available in an appropriate breakdown .
We note with regret that in spite of all our efforts , the data that would make it possible to track budgetary spending by gender is still not available .
This applies first of all to those areas which are especially called upon to put an end to discrimination , for instance , by means of the European Social Fund .
I would like to mention one topic in particular : the delay in setting up the European Institute for Gender Equality .
This Institute was supposed to begin operations in 2008 , but in fact , its official opening will only take place this June .
Clearly , this raises various problems in the budget process as well .
Given that the mid-term review of various multiannual programmes is to take place in 2010 , I would like once again to ask the Commission to develop a monitoring and assessment system that would make it possible to implement the principle of equality in the various budget items , and to be able to track the effects of the use of the various budget items on the development of unjustified differences .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , from a development perspective , the importance of budgetary discharge is in assuring taxpayers across Europe that the money is being spent efficiently and effectively in the developing world , in terms of aid effectiveness , as well as matching our 0.7 % target for ODA contributions .
We need to use our current aid budget effectively , that is not just more aid , but better aid .
We need to use EU money as a seed to grow local solutions .
We need to look at opportunities to give people in the developing world ownership of their development , for example , and specifically to the promotion of land ownership for individuals , families and communities .
Countless women die giving birth every year .
AIDS , malaria and TB still claim some four million lives a year .
We have close on a billion illiterate people in the developing world .
That is why we set the target between Parliament , Commission and Council of spending 20 % of the basic spending on education and health .
I am interested in seeing whether we have met those targets .
Whenever I visit the developing world , I am struck by the intelligent and willing young people I meet .
These young people are every bit as capable as young people everywhere .
They need opportunity and encouragement to be enterprising .
Investing in education is the key to this .
That is why Parliament , Commission and Council agreed to those targets .
We must now ensure by the audit system that we are meeting those targets .
I want to say to the House here in the couple of seconds available to me that , in my view , one of the ways of relieving people from the terrible poverty they face is by investing in bringing about land ownership in the developing world .
I can give an example of where that worked . It is in my own country in the 18th and 19th centuries .
If you look at why Ireland is divided , it is because the successful people were given small pieces of land .
It is time to stop just thinking of people in terms of aid , but to start thinking in terms of people as having the enterprising ability to do things for themselves if they are given the support .
Mr President , to begin with , I want to thank the Council , and I appreciate the fact that the Council is present , because the question is whether the Council really wants to take responsibility for spending taxpayers ' money , and whether the Council wants to show some respect for Parliament and for cooperation .
Therefore , it is important that the Council is present .
In my speech , I will concentrate on Parliament 's discharge , and I want to thank Mr Staes for his very high level of cooperation .
I agree with him on the very sound basic idea that Parliament can only work well if decision making is sufficiently open and transparent .
In this way , we can make sure there are no scandals .
We know that , however small the amounts of money we are talking about , if malpractice starts to appear , our reputation will be damaged for a long time .
It is extremely important to prevent this from happening .
We are not talking about Parliament 's money , but taxpayers ' money .
The system must therefore be watertight , so that we can , in the end , take responsibility for this .
There were many good principles in Mr Staes 's report , but my own group took the view that the report should be shorter and more concise , and because of this , we removed some material from the report .
In addition , we believe that there should have been concrete items in the report dealing with the activity of MEPs and Parliament as a whole in actual legislative work .
For example , we have added some items concerning real estate policy , in which there is still a lot of room for improvement .
We need to obtain an accurate and clear explanation of why there are problems in this area .
This is the reason for the long debate .
We want to know why the visitors ' centre is already a few years late according to the timetable .
What could the problem be here ?
We want answers to these questions .
We should give congratulations here , regarding the fact that at last , Parliament has quickly got new regulations both for Members and for aides too .
It is true that this has been a big improvement , but there is still a lot to change here .
Let me give an example .
According to the new regulation , I first have to fly from here in Strasbourg to Finland , and only from there can I fly to Brussels .
Even if I had a visiting group in Brussels or a report to prepare tomorrow , this would not make any difference : I cannot go from here straight to Brussels .
If I did so , I would not be paid travelling expenses or any other compensation .
I do not understand why our lives need to be so inconvenient , when we know that the journey from here to my home town of Turku in Finland takes a day , and it takes another day to come back from there if I want to go to Brussels to do some work there .
When I asked why this is the case , the administration answered that I could fly to Finland via Rome or Athens .
I do not have an office in Rome or Athens , or any work to do there ; these are in Brussels .
If we have two workplaces , then it is reasonable for us to be able to work in both places .
There are still areas where we need to get back on to the right track .
We will return to these in next year 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin with a word of thanks .
The outstanding and thorough work by Mr Staes and the Court of Auditors of the European Union have made it possible for us to prepare a careful accounting for the use of the 2008 budget as regards Parliament .
I also owe thanks to my fellow Members whose proposed amendments contributed to refining the report .
There was general agreement among us on the assessment of the facts ; the differences that emerged mainly concerned the ways in which the identified errors could be corrected .
Now , when we are voting on the discharge , we , elected MEPs , assume full legal responsibility for the 2008 budget .
We certify to the citizens of Europe that Parliament used the monies spent for the purposes for which they were designated and in accordance with the rules .
These days , when the crisis places great burdens on each citizen , we must be particularly careful in spending taxpayers ' money .
The standards we impose on ourselves must be higher than those we impose on others , as this is the key to our credibility and integrity .
At the same time , we must also be clear that the oversight we exercise is not in itself sufficient to guarantee that funds have been spent intelligently and in compliance with the rules .
That is possible only if we also put in place a reliable , solid , internal control system .
We socialists consider this to be the most important .
Therefore , I would like to focus on this point .
We need to place great emphasis on the appropriate functioning of the internal control system of the institutions under supervision , because our conviction is that it is better to prevent problems than to have to find solutions for them later on .
Institutional independence is an important guarantee of a properly functioning internal control system .
This is the guarantee of objectivity and the way to ensure compliance with international accounting rules and best practices .
The standards in themselves do not , however , guarantee an effective internal control system .
There were improvements in 2009 in this regard .
There is no internal control system - no matter how complex - that is free from error , since it is the work of human beings , and that is why we give a discharge every year
It is important to stress , in my view , that we supported all those proposed amendments that were concrete , attainable and realistic , but we rejected every generalisation that does not improve but rather obscures our standpoint .
We rejected all proposals that would reduce the political groups ' independence .
We are convinced that the independence of the European Parliament 's groups is inseparable from their financial responsibility .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats performs its work in full awareness of this responsibility .
If the other political groups wish to improve their own activities , let them do so .
Offering these thoughts , I would ask that you accept this report and give a discharge on behalf of the European Parliament
Mr President , I am a great fan of the British rock band Genesis .
They have a fantastic track called ' Dance on a Volcano ' , and this track came to mind this week , which has been rather dominated by volcanic ash .
Not that the song made me want to go dancing in Iceland ; instead , it came to mind in connection with this morning 's debate on the substantiation of expenditure in 2008 , another year for which the European Court of Auditors was unable to give its approval .
It is there that I see the parallel with dancing on a volcano ; a volcano filled not with lava or ash but with distrust .
Europe is subject to intense pressure of all kinds , such as pressure on the euro and the pressure of the conflict between EU and national perspectives .
This is already enough to bring this metaphorical volcano to a head , so we can do without poor financial accountability and public distrust causing the volcano to erupt .
How can this be prevented ?
To my mind , there is only one way , and that is through transparency ; optimum transparency in all the institutions .
Transparency within the Council - and thus the Member States - precisely because this is the main source of the irregularities detected each year .
Incidentally , I am pleased that the Council is still here .
I would also call on the Member States to establish transparency in their expenditure of European funds at long last by giving a public account of this expenditure on an annual basis .
I am at a loss to understand why they persist in obstructing this .
I am convinced that , if the Member States were to handle their own money the same way , their citizens would consider this unacceptable .
Fair is fair , however , and greater transparency is also needed in our own Parliament .
Mr Staes has rightly drawn up a very critical report and , after the many improvements seen in recent years , it is now time to throw open the windows once and for all and show the European public by means of this transparency that we are able to handle their money responsibly , as that is what this is all about .
My final point concerns mutual relations between the Council and Parliament .
Some 40 years ago , a gentlemen 's agreement was deemed necessary to enable the two parties to work in relative peace and quiet rather than fighting in the gutter .
The agreement proved very useful back then , but it would be fair to say that it no longer works , as we are now fighting in the gutter .
As I see it , however , a more important point is that the Council and Parliament are now strong , mature institutions and , as such , should be able to monitor each other in a mature way even without a gentlemen 's agreement .
I should like to ask the Council , now it is here , whether it can give its response to this , and whether it agrees that it is possible for the two institutions to monitor each other effectively without a gentlemen 's agreement .
With mutual openness instead of a gentlemen 's agreement , the Council and Parliament can dance together in harmony without fear of the ground giving way beneath their feet or of further public distrust leading to an eruption .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , I am now speaking on behalf of my group and not as rapporteur for Parliament 's discharge .
I shall have another opportunity to do that later .
I should like to raise a few issues .
The first concerns the Commission 's discharge .
This is a question to both the Commissioner and the Council , and relates to the fact that 80 % of our funds are actually spent in the Member States , and that Parliament has been advocating national management declarations for many years .
Rapporteur Mr Liberadzki sets forth the new options very clearly in a number of paragraphs .
We have a new treaty , and the new wording of Article 317 ( 2 ) of this treaty enables the Commission to produce proposals for introducing mandatory national management declarations as soon as possible .
Commissioner Šemeta , I would ask you to address this in your reply .
Are you prepared to take up this option ?
Four Member States are already doing this , which is to be welcomed , but they are doing it in four different ways , so let us coordinate these efforts somewhat .
The Council will say : fair enough , but there are practical objections .
Some Member States are federal states with mutual entities , such as Belgium with Wallonia , Brussels and Flanders , so how is the Belgian federal minister supposed to come up with a national management declaration ?
Yet this is no problem , ladies and gentlemen .
This national minister simply needs to come to an agreement with his regional ministers , await their regional policy statements and management declarations and then present them all to this House and to the public .
Then he will be able to say , for example , Wallonia and Brussels are doing well and Flanders is not , or the other way round , and so on .
The second aspect concerns Mr Liberadzki 's resolution , which discusses the Court of Auditors ' special report on the European Commission 's management of pre-accession assistance to Turkey .
In my opinion , the wording used is not very good ; in certain respects and in certain paragraphs , it has been somewhat misused to interfere in the accession negotiations .
Together with Mr Geier , I have tabled a number of deleting amendments .
I have also presented a proposal to improve the text , and I would ask my fellow Members to consider this .
Finally , addressing the Council , I should like to say that I hope you are paying attention , President-in-Office .
Are you prepared to say in your reply a little later on whether or not you will comply with the request made by the rapporteur , the Committee on Budgetary Control and this House to reply before 1 June 2010 and produce the documents requested in paragraphs 25 and 26 of the resolution ?
Are you prepared to give an answer already as to whether or not you will comply with this ?
This is of the utmost importance to us in determining whether or not relations between the Council and Parliament are as they should be .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I speak on behalf of the British Conservative Party , who will again this year vote against discharge of the budget .
This is a position that we have consistently taken , and we will continue to do so until we see greater urgency applied to the achievement of a positive statement of assurance by the Court of Auditors .
I do , however , wish to publicly acknowledge the progress that has been made in improving the financial management standards by this past Commission .
The Court of Auditors particularly notes progress which has been made in the fields of agriculture , research , energy , transport and education .
I commend the Commission for the improvements they have made .
This is most encouraging .
However , a great deal needs to be done .
The Court of Auditors has yet again adversely commented on the weaknesses of controls , on numerous irregularities and the slow rate of recovery of monies due to the European Union .
It is also clear that , while responsibility ultimately rests with the European Commission , it is the Member States and the Council - in particular the Council - who need to be far more conscientious in their application of European funding and who need to demonstrate far greater urgency in their efforts to achieve a positive statement of assurance .
We operate under the Lisbon Treaty and , as Members of the European Parliament , we owe it to European taxpayers that we can assure the public that the budget delivers value for money , and assure the public likewise that there is integrity in the accounting procedures of the European Union .
Until the Court of Auditors feels able to give that positive statement of assurance , I and my party will continue to vote against discharge of the budget .
Mr President , this debate is about us , as EU parliamentarians , taking responsibility not only collectively , but also individually , for how the EU 's funds were used in 2008 .
When the debate is over and the votes have been cast in May , it is us that our citizens will hold accountable .
Let me state one thing straightaway : our group is critical of the way in which the EU administered our taxpayers ' money in 2008 .
Of course , there are a lot of good things that need no further comment .
In some areas , there has even been some progress compared with 2007 .
However , there are still too many areas for which we must say that things are not acceptable .
One example is the Commission 's accounts .
Where the structural funds are concerned , the Court of Auditors concludes that at least - I repeat , at least - 11 % of disbursements from the funds were contrary to the rules .
Part of this is due to errors and omissions ; part to fraud and misappropriation .
That does not change the fact that billions of euro in this area alone should not have been paid out .
Is this acceptable ?
We know all the excuses .
The Commission says it is the fault of the Member States , because they are responsible for control .
The Member States say the Commission is to blame , because the rules are far too complex .
The blame is passed from pillar to post .
The question we must ask ourselves is as follows : would we approve the accounts of a sports club , a trade union or a political party where 11 % of the expenditure in a central area had been paid out in contravention of the rules ?
I agree with those who say that fundamental structural changes are needed to change this situation .
We must therefore use the discharge to push through such changes .
Such pressure must also be exerted on the Council .
In April last year , Parliament refused to discharge the Council 's accounts for 2007 by a large majority .
We said that we could not accept responsibility for the accounts before the electorate until the Council agreed to meet formally with the relevant committees in Parliament and to answer our questions publicly .
Nonetheless , to demonstrate our goodwill , we voted in November to grant discharge to the Council 's accounts - on the clear condition that changes would be made this year .
Today , we have to state that these changes have not taken place .
Let me give a specific example . Year after year , the Council transfers millions of euro from the translation account to the travel account .
In other words , in addition to the funds already in the travel account .
We must therefore ask the Council the obvious questions . Why are you doing this ?
What is all this travel money spent on ? Which countries are benefiting from it ?
The Council is happy to answer informally , off the record .
Up until today , however - though this may change - the Council has refused to answer openly and publicly .
That is simply not good enough .
We are therefore of the opinion that any discharge must await an interinstitutional agreement that clearly sets out the Council 's obligations in respect of transparency and cooperation with Parliament .
Our criticism of the Council and the Commission is clear .
It is shared by many of our fellow Members in other political groups .
Precisely because our criticism is so clear , however , we also have a duty to be critical of ourselves as regards our own - Parliament 's - financial administration .
I therefore find it regrettable that the report by the Committee on Budgetary Control ended up being less critical than it had been in the Chair 's original version .
We therefore also support the re-insertion of the critical passages .
I hope that at the vote in May , there will be broad support for the fact that our willingness to take a critical view of ourselves is precisely what gives our criticism and demands of the Council and Commission added strength and authority .
Finally , I would simply like to thank all my fellow members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , who this year have once again worked towards greater transparency and responsibility in the way the EU looks after its citizens ' money .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the discharge is one of the most important acts that we are responsible for .
We are effectively being called to approve the way in which the European taxpayer 's money has been spent and we have to base our decision on the report by the European Court of Auditors .
The auditors ' report for 2008 only clears 10 % of the budget .
The rest is affected by different levels of errors .
Would any board of directors approve the management of a company in such a state of affairs ?
Of course not .
The situation has been the same for the last 15 years , and this Parliament has always granted discharge , on the basis of the improvement in the use of European Union funds .
I am sorry to say that what the taxpayers want to know is if their money has gone to the right person for the right purpose and for the right amount .
We should be making the decision on discharge in view of this .
Over the years , the only progress achieved by the Commission , Parliament and the Council is the shifting of responsibility to Member States .
While it is true that programmes are implemented in Member States , the institution to which the European taxpayers entrust their money is the European Commission .
This is the institution that releases the money and that should , therefore , be performing the necessary controls before doing so .
To make matters worse , the Commission and Parliament are now discussing a tolerable risk of error .
Why tolerate any error - the new name for irregularity - when the financial complexity of the European Union is that of a medium-sized bank ?
Last year , the Council discharge was postponed from April to November because this Parliament said it was not satisfied with their financial management , even if the auditors did not criticise their financial management .
When the situation had not changed by November , this Parliament took the decision to discharge the Council .
Now again , all cannons are directed to the Council and postponement is being proposed .
Are we being serious about our responsibility or are we playing politics here ?
Is discharge an interinstitutional game , as has been said in the past ?
Can taxpayers tolerate this game anymore ?
This is about their money .
Colleagues , I call upon all of you to exercise your responsibility with due care and withhold discharge to the Commission , to Parliament , to the Council , to the European Development Fund and to the Court of Auditors , that does not publish the declaration of financial interests , until all of these institutions give proof of sound financial management .

Mr President , there is a problem , because on the notice board , I see the name of Mr López Garrido , who is going to speak on behalf of the Council , but he is going to respond to what I said about the Council 's budget and their failure to implement the budget and other documents - words which he did not hear , because he arrived very late .
Mr Czarnecki , I ask you to take the floor on a point of order .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) I wanted to say , very briefly , that I would like to give the minister a chance to respond to my criticisms , and that I would like to have a minute to repeat them .
You were right when you said that Mr López Garrido is on the list of speakers .
We shall see .
He has just the same freedom to speak as you do .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that all members of the Committee on Budgetary Control are agreed on one point , to be precise , the fact that we need solutions for the EU agency system .
For that reason , I would like to propose eleven approaches to a solution .
They could enable us to save EUR 500 million every year , without affecting the quality of administrative performance .
My eleven approaches to a solution are as follows : 1 ) There needs to be a sufficient primary legislative base .
The Treaty of Lisbon has also failed to create this base .
2 ) An immediate freeze , until an independent analysis has established the added value of this decentralisation once and for all .
3 ) The closing of seven agencies and the merging of the administrative tasks of individual agencies .
4 ) In future , every agency must be the direct responsibility of a single EU Commissioner and , above all , the EU Commissioner for interinstitutional relations and administration should be responsible for horizontal issues .
5 ) A reduction in the members of the administrative board .
The number of full members should not exceed 10 % of the positions or a total number of 20 .
6 ) There needs to be a catalogue of location criteria that must be taken into account when determining the location of agencies - as we have already heard in Mrs Haug 's speech , this is urgently needed .
7 ) EU agencies should be freed from EU Staff Regulations .
8 ) All agency directors should be elected for a fixed period of time at the proposal of the Commission and only after consulting and after receiving the approval of the European Parliament .
9 ) A clear performance agreement between the Commission and the agencies with clearly defined quantitative criteria that are summarised by the EU Court of Auditors in an annual performance ranking .
10 ) All agencies should transfer financial data to a database .
Then it would be quite straightforward for us as budget rapporteurs to do statistical analysis .
Until now that has been impossible , as data comes in paper form .
11 ) The principle of subsidiarity .
The requirement for justification has yet to be taken into account by the Commission .
So , the solutions are on the table .
Mr Geier , Mrs Gräßle , it is time that you also allowed this solution here in the House .
Mr President , I am delighted to be here at this debate , even though I was not formally invited .
I was not formally invited by Parliament to attend this debate .
Despite that , when I learnt that this House and some of its Members were asking for my presence here , it was my great pleasure to come straight away to attend this debate .
I believe that the Council budget for the 2008 financial year was correctly implemented , as can be deduced from the annual report of the Court of Auditors .
There have been one or two speeches - Mr Søndergaard 's , for example - that have mentioned transparency , lack of transparency or not enough transparency .
I want to be perfectly clear on this : the Council believes that it is absolutely transparent in the way in which it implements its budget and therefore that it correctly applies the requirements that have been made , as demanded by the Financial Regulation .
In addition , as you know , the Council publishes a report on the previous year 's financial management on its website .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the Council is today the only institution to have published a preliminary report on its 2009 accounts for the general public to see .
Similarly , a few days ago , on 15 March to be precise , the Chair of Coreper and the Secretary-General of the Council met with a delegation from Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control .
At that meeting , they gave all the information requested on the topics and issues put forward by Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control relating to implementation of the Council 's budget for 2008 .
Mr Gerbrandy asked about the need to move forward with mutual control by both institutions on budgetary issues without a ' gentlemen 's agreement ' .
That is what Mr Gerbrandy said .
If Parliament wished to review that agreement , the Council would be willing to consider it and discuss a new agreement based on reciprocity between the two institutions .
There is therefore no problem in discussing that situation and perhaps reaching a new agreement that , if possible , improves on the one we have had until now .
That is what the Council would like to point out with regard to the debate held this morning .
I am very grateful to you for the oral invitation to come here but , I repeat , I was not formally invited to this sitting .
Thank you Minister .
Thank you very much for so kindly complying with our request .
That gives me cause to say that the Commission never receives a formal invitation to this sitting either .
I have been a Member of this House for a while and I have noticed that in cases like yours , when the Council is represented here - even when it is not really necessary - it contributes greatly to the success of a Presidency .
In this respect , I should like to thank you again very much .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Šemeta , Mr López Garrido , thank you once again for joining us .
My first words will be to thank my fellow Member , Mr Liberadzki , since I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) concerning the granting of discharge to the European Commission .
I should also like to thank the rapporteurs for the other political groups , as well as the Court of Auditors and , in particular , its President , Mr Caldeira , who is doing a tremendous job of clarifying these extremely complicated procedures for us .

Our group is going to vote in favour of granting discharge to the European Commission , Mr Šemeta , and I would like to mention the part played by your predecessor , Mr Kallas - who did a great deal of work with us , particularly under the previous term of office - in achieving these positive developments .
Firstly , on the annual accounts , the Court of Auditors has issued a positive Statement of Assurance .
Therefore , Mr Ashworth , perhaps the Conservatives will vote in favour of the annual accounts at least .
May I take this opportunity to thank Mr Taverne and his predecessor , Mr Gray .
On the subject of the accounts , I cannot help but voice concern , once again , in the face of the EUR 50 billion of negative own capital , and I still do not understand why we do not enter into the accounts the claims we have on the Member States , which add up to approximately EUR 40 billion and represent the pensions payable to staff .


As for the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions , some people are saying that the Court of Auditors ' statement is negative .
The fact is , we do not have a clue .
I have read and reread that statement .
We do not know whether or not , under Article 287 of the treaty , we have a positive opinion on the underlying transactions .
The Court has issued some opinions - five paragraphs - to us , but we do not know .
Moreover , the resolution proposes that the Court fulfil this task stipulated by the treaty .
It is in this context that we must come together to review all these discharge procedures on the cost of control .
As regards the methods , we are asking our governments for national statements of assurance that we will never have .
I propose that national audit bodies be involved in the audit chain so that they may issue certificates to their governments , which would be included in the discharge procedure .
I also propose shortening the deadlines .
Can you believe that this is April 2010 and we are talking about the 2008 accounts ?
The deadlines have to be shortened .
I propose a study on the consolidated accounts .
I do not agree with postponing discharge in respect of the Council because the Court of Auditors has not made any comments regarding the Council .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by proposing an interinstitutional conference with the Commission , the Council , all the national parliaments , which control the executives , and the national audit bodies , in order to develop our discharge procedure in very technical areas and to make matters much clearer than they are today .
( DE ) Mr President , representatives of the Commission and , above all , the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we hear this every year in the debate on improvements in the implementation of the distribution of European funds : more accurate and more efficient control of expenditure in all bodies and institutions , more transparency for Parliament and also for citizens .
The presence today of the Council is the first indication that something is changing in the Council as well .
Marvellous , we are pleased - as you have heard - but that is certainly not enough for us .
It is precisely the difference that you mentioned - you believe you have created complete transparency , while we believe you have not yet answered our questions from the debate at the end of November - that shows that we are not yet cooperating with each other as well as we should be .
You spoke of the 1970 agreement that you want to amend and develop .
That is all well and good , but this expectation of ours is hardly new .
We have mentioned it a few times and now you have acted as if it were a new thing entirely .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats will support Mr Czarnecki 's report .
We share his criticism and that of the other groups .
We will not grant discharge to the Council , either today or next month .
I am therefore surprised by the request by Mrs Andreasen , since I obviously believe that the Member States are responsible for 80 % of the funds .
That does not exempt the Council from its responsibilities , since the Council is not a fourth or fifth institution in the EU , but works together with the Member States .
However , our criticism , I agree , has no real consequences .
As Mr Audy has pointed out , we must develop our tools .
Every year , we show the Council the yellow card of discharge refusal and nothing happens .
We must therefore develop our tools : not only tangible criticism , but also consequences - what happens if the Council does not work with us .
That will possibly also mean constitutional change .
Thank you very much , Mrs Weiler .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have just checked again in the rules of procedure : we are not supposed to sing songs in plenary , without first asking the Conference of Presidents .
However , we are allowed to congratulate a colleague .
Mr Chatzimarkakis , whose birthday it is today , has the floor for two and a half minutes .
Many happy returns !
( DE ) Thank you , Mr President , that was very kind .
Commissioner Šemeta , the adoption of the reports on the budgetary management of the European bodies and institutions is one of our most important obligations as representatives of the European people - it is our sovereign duty .
The question of what Europe has done with taxpayers ' hard earned money is crucial for the acceptance of the European integration project .
I would first like to thank all the rapporteurs for their efforts .
However , I see light and shadow in the reports .
I see light in budgetary management overall .
Meanwhile , it is the case that everywhere the EU controls and manages funds itself , it runs things in accordance with the rules .
Whether or not it is efficient is another matter altogether .
As the European Parliament , we should pay closer attention to the efficiency of policies , political issues and implementation , in particular , with regard to the 2020 agenda .
There is shadow in the area of cohesion policy .
Eleven per cent of things do not comply with the rules and this percentage is too high .
Therefore , it is very important that the EU tries harder to recover funds paid out incorrectly .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has therefore adopted an amendment tabled by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
We want 100 % of the money back .
For 2010 , I have the honour of being the rapporteur for the European Commission discharge .
Due to the delayed entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , this will be no easy task .
We must monitor very closely whether the new responsibilities of individual Commissioners lead to even less transparency and more concealment of responsibilities .
We must and will examine this very closely .
Allow me to single out two areas : firstly , the so-called non-governmental organisations and secondly , the gentlemen 's agreement .
Between 2008 and 2009 , the European Union paid NGOs over EUR 300 million in funds .
These include honourable organisations like the Deutsche Welthungerhilfe .
However , there are also some that want to destroy the reputation of the European Union , namely Counter Balance , which has attacked the European Investment Bank .
This is not acceptable and we must deal with it .
We need a register and a definition of such non-governmental organisations , as they receive a lot of tax money .
With regard to the gentlemen 's agreement I would like to thank Mr López Garrido .
I would like to thank you for coming .
I would also like to point to the historical element : questioning and revising the gentlemen 's agreement after 40 years is a huge step .
Given the importance of Parliament due to the new Treaty of Lisbon , it is also a necessary step .
We must ensure transparency , here and in the Council .
Mr President , yet again , this Parliament is being presented with substandard accounts and being asked to discharge them .
These are accounts which the Court of Auditors has refused to give a positive statement of assurance - accounts which still fall short of being legal and regular .
The auditors have said - again - that these accounts are riddled with irregularities , yet we are expected to rubber-stamp them .
I am pleased that Mrs Mathieu has recommended a postponement of discharge for the European Police College accounts .
We will support that recommendation , as OLAF needs more time to conclude its investigation .
Allegations have been made of fraudulent activity at that College , including the use of taxpayers ' money by staff to buy furniture for their personal use .
I can tell Parliament that the British Conservatives will not accept these irregularities .
We shall refuse to grant discharge until such time as the Court of Auditors gives a positive statement of assurance .
Trust in politicians is at an all-time low , and we will reduce our standing further if we are seen to condone such waste .
Every time we discharge substandard accounts , we encourage more waste and more fraud .
Every time we vote to grant discharge , we send a signal to the Council , to the Commission and to our constituents that we do not treat this issue seriously .
My party will look particularly carefully at how Labour and Liberal Democrat MEPs decide to vote on this issue .
They cannot argue at home that they want to bring change to politics - to clean up and reform politics - and yet , year on year , vote to accept these substandard accounts .
Anyone who is serious about reforming this system and about protecting the taxpayer should vote against granting discharge .
( NL ) Mr President , given the high error rates , I do not approve of granting discharge to the European Commission .
We are still not doing enough to simplify the rules , particularly those for the Structural Funds .
Four independent advisory boards have presented a proposal , to which the Commission has yet to give a satisfactory response .
Independent , external verification within the Commission 's Impact Assessment Board is truly indispensable .
If Dr Stoiber 's high-level group lends substance to this , that group should also be given sufficient resources for the necessary secretarial support .
In addition , a broader mandate is required .
We need to reduce not only the administrative burdens but also the costs of substantive compliance , nor should the mandate remain confined to the existing legislation : new legislation , too , ought to be subjected to critical analysis .
This , Mr President , would represent a contribution to a structural reduction in the burden of rules unduly hindering the functioning of authorities and enterprises .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to discuss the problems with development aid that are nearly always emphasised by the Court of Auditors and to thank Mrs Ayala Sender for her good cooperation that was remarkably pleasant .
Firstly , there is often the problem of budget support .
That means that there is even suspicion that in countries where we are trying to help the population a little , budget support is partly being used by corrupt and totalitarian regimes to suppress undesirable population groups or even critics .
I am extremely critical of this budget support .
It should be reduced or stopped for countries in which we clearly have problems with the use of budget support .
Secondly , now as before , we have the problem that the payments often contain errors , that there is a lack of coordination and targeting of development aid projects between the different institutions and levels in one country and there is no recognisable setting of priorities .
It is essential that this is made a matter of priority , so that we can improve the sustainability and effectiveness of projects in those countries where people really are in dire need .
Furthermore , now as before , I consider it essential that development aid and the European Development Fund in general are integrated into the overall budget .
On pre-accession aid for Turkey I would like to say that I was surprised that the completely normal criticism which , in other countries , would have long since led to the blocking and withholding of financing , has led so quickly to a hiccup in the cooperation between Turkey and the Commission .
I consider it completely normal that we firstly lay down the strategy and the goals , then the timeframes , the project orientation , the yardsticks for measuring and then the method of performance monitoring .
However , if all of this is lacking and projects are implemented that are then declared successful , I have a problem with the way the programme is implemented .
For this reason , I personally consider it necessary that at least part of the funding is withheld until it we have suitable assurances that the funds will be properly spent .
We have now reached a compromise , but I consider it necessary to monitor the problem , since other countries like Bulgaria , Romania or Greece will be affected .
I think it is necessary that everyone be treated in the same way and not differently .
Therefore , I ask that in the area of buildings policy , provision be made for a medium-term building strategy by means of clear construction and financial planning .
Large projects should receive their own budget lines and a reporting system related to construction progress , and we should not pay any more costs for bridging lenders .
As we are such large institutions , we need buildings and they must be planned carefully and transparently .
My last point is that I believe it is necessary to simplify the programmes as a matter of urgency , since that is how problems in the respective countries arise , and this must not simply remain a rhetorical demand , but must finally be implemented .
( Applause )

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , I am delighted that you are here and so demonstrate the Council 's recognition of this important debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , we all know this little trick : if you want to embarrass someone , ask them a question with a wording like , do you still actually smack your children ?
Even if the person says no , they have implicitly admitted that in the past , they did smack their children .
The discharge report for Parliament by Mr Staes , who I would like to thank for his work , is a critical report , and to me , in some areas at least , it has followed this logic .
Self-criticism is good , but it should then be accurate .
I have had many discussions in my group on how we might reject this or that wording in the report on Parliament 's discharge .
Some of us have come under more than a little pressure in our home countries regarding this .
However , I do want to convey to you my answers to these questions as to why we have rejected some wording or other in the report on Parliament 's discharge .
There are proposals that are already a reality .
We could re-table them , but why ?
There are proposals that are not helpful , such as the idea of making the Committee on Budgetary Control a sort of alternative internal audit authority or an intermediary between the Bureau and plenary .
There are many good proposals in this report that were , however , all adopted .
Then there are proposals in this report that only represent a partial reality , as , for example , in Amendment 26 now on the table .
This amendment demands the establishing of an internal control system in groups of this House .
Nothing should be more obvious .
In the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats , however , this has long been a reality , precisely for that reason .
If my group were to agree to this , we would be acting as if we had some catching up to do .
Therefore , we can , in this example , only agree if this reality is also illustrated in the report .
I therefore propose adding the following phrase to this paragraph : as it is the fact in the S & D Group .
( SV ) Mr President , although many problems remain , control and auditing of the EU 's funds has improved and is becoming increasingly thorough .
We are seeing the results of this , which is pleasing - but more can be done .
Our motto should be not to waste a single cent .
Where the development funds are concerned , the EU is the world 's largest giver of aid .
It is good that we are making a difference in the world and demonstrating our solidarity with the poorest people in the world .
I believe EU citizens are happy to go along with this , but the money must be used in the best possible way .
It must not go to corrupt leaders who are lining their own pockets , nor must we waste money on projects and initiatives that are not forward-looking and of adequate quality .
We here in Parliament have a particular responsibility in this respect .
I submitted a number of amendments to the Committee , which were dealt with relatively benevolently by the rapporteur .
The fact is that the EU must be clearer and must demand that those countries that the EU supports uphold the most basic human rights , such as freedom of expression and freedom of the press .
Unfortunately , that is not currently the case .
Allow me to give a very clear example : EU aid to Eritrea .
In Eritrea , critics of the regime are thrown into prison without trial and without even being told of what they are accused .
They have languished in appalling prison conditions for years .
What have they done ?
They have criticised the country 's leadership and president .
We should be clearer about this .
The EU must be able to make its aid conditional upon the recipient countries respecting the most fundamental human rights and I believe that the report should have been more forceful and clearer in this respect .
I believe this is what the taxpayers of Europe would expect of us .
( NL ) Mr President , the Staes report contains a very important paragraph entitled ' Members as public persons ' .
This title is very apt .
Each Member of this Parliament is a public person , and must be able to answer to the public at any moment for how he or she works and , in particular , must be able to justify how he or she has spent the budgets provided by the taxpayer .
Indeed , all of us here handle taxpayers ' money , and so citizens have a right to know how we are spending that money .
There has been a great deal of improvement in terms of accountability in Parliament in recent years , but MEPs are not yet required to be accountable for all their funds .
I refer in particular to the maximum of EUR 4 200 per month at the disposal of each Member for general expenditure .
I now have to pay a substantial sum each year to employ an external accountant to provide that accountability .
This is odd ; we should simply be providing it in the presence of Parliament 's services as we do for our travel and subsistence expenses .
Therefore , I would urge you to support Amendment 33 to paragraph 65 on this subject .
( PL ) The European Personnel Selection Office , or EPSO , is an interinstitutional unit responsible for selection of staff for the European Union institutions .
I am very pleased that the discharge reports have taken up this topic .
Efforts are necessary to investigate and eliminate the geographical disproportions among candidates and among successful candidates for positions in the civil service of the European Union institutions .
Particularly unacceptable is the continued under representation of citizens of the new Member States , including Poland , and not only in the European Union 's civil service .
This phenomenon is especially flagrant , in my opinion , among middle and higher level managerial staff .
Doubts are also caused by the long recruitment process and the management of lists of successful candidates .
Often , successful candidates who have been chosen in competitions - those who were successful in a competition - accept a job outside the European Union institutions because they simply cannot wait so long , and the entire recruitment process is wasted .
I am pleased that the EPSO has set up a corrective programme and accepted the Court of Auditors ' comments , and that it has already accepted some of the European Parliament 's comments .
I will certainly follow the effects of the corrective programme carefully , always remembering that the EPSO 's objective should be , above all , to reach the best possible candidates with the offers of EU institutions , to select the best possible candidates and to create the best possible list of successful candidates , with proportional representation of all the Member States .
( BG ) Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my view on the discharge of responsibility by European agencies .
Allow me , first of all , to pass on the apologies of my colleague , Georgios Stavrakakis , who was unable to come to the debate on this matter , even though he worked on the report during the last few months as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
He cannot come due to the well-publicised transport problems .
In the view of the S & D Group , issues relating to the transparent and legal use of the European Union 's budget are a priority and the management of public finances as a whole depends , to a large extent , on the successful resolution of these issues .
For this reason , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Mathieu , as well as the members of the European Court of Auditors and the heads of the agencies with whom we worked very extensively .
I wish to point out that the auditing of budget agencies is an extremely complicated and arduous procedure as there is significant variation among them in terms of their practices and competence .
Allow me to begin with the general statement that 2008 proves that the agencies are continuing to improve the implementation of their budgets from one year to the next .
I would like to digress and say to any fellow Members not expecting any comments from the Court of Auditors in support of the budget that the time when the Court of Auditors stops making comments will be when confidence in this body will decrease .
The fact is that the number of errors is on the decline and the level of transparency and discipline is on the rise with the implementation of budgets .
This progress is also taken into consideration by the European Court of Auditors , while agency heads are making ever-greater efforts to improve accounting and control systems .
There are obviously still shortcomings . These were mentioned by Parliament and the Court of Auditors .
The causes of these shortcomings are both objective and subjective .
The good news is that they can all be remedied and action is being taken to do this .
The main problem arose with the European Police College CEPOL .
The problems in this organisation have been going on for several years and are due to various reasons : the change to the accounting system , unclarified matters relating to the host state , omissions regarding the notification of contracts and the use of public funds for purposes other than those intended .
Even though concessions have been made for a few years , producing a result somewhat more slowly than expected , I support this year the postponement of discharge in respect of the implementation of this agency 's 2008 budget until a new audit has been carried out and the College 's new management assumes clear responsibility for ensuring that the irregularities and legal inconsistencies are eliminated in the shortest time possible .
The second problem was linked to Frontex , especially to the agency 's ability to use the resources allocated to it .
The head of the agency gave satisfactory answers on this matter during the Committee hearings .
There are a number of actions we need to take in future in the area of budget control within the agencies .
I will boil them down to three measures .
Firstly , agency heads must continue their efforts to observe stricter compliance with budget discipline .
Secondly , measures must be taken to simplify accounting rules , especially in the case of cofinanced and self-financed agencies .
Lastly , we must examine a proposal tabled by the Court of Auditors for the introduction of criteria indicating how successfully these agencies perform their tasks .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few comments about the use of European funds in the enlargement process .
Here we had to evaluate a special report by the Court of Auditors on the use of pre-accession aid for Turkey .
As the Committee on Budgetary Control , we are very disappointed by the findings of the report by the Court of Auditors .
In the previous period , funds were spent by the Commission without any strategy or effective audit and , above all , projects had no concrete relation to progress towards accession .
Even with the new Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) , which entered into force in 2007 , the Court is not in a position to assess the effectiveness of the funds spent .
Yet here we are talking about EUR 4.8 million up to 2013 .
At first , a sense of helplessness predominated in the committee .
Where and when can we have any political influence on the use of pre-accession aid if the next assessment of the Court only takes place after 2012 ?
The Committee on Budgetary Control therefore calls on the Commission to revise the IPA programme as a matter of urgency .
Until progress is assessed , we also call for the freezing of funds to the annual level of 2006 .
Here , we have the beginnings of a compromise .
In addition , we suggest that generally - generally and without explicit reference to Turkey - the IPA must be applied flexibly , including for special forms of membership or cooperation or neighbourhoods or similar options .
In the process of accession negotiations , focussing purely on EU Membership may prove to be a very poor investment .
Now the criticism of the Greens and the left is that with these demands , we would interfere in foreign policy and Turkey would thus receive special treatment .
No , if we do not react to obvious deficits here , then we are ensuring special treatment .
If we make exceptions with Turkey , we can also cease work with budgetary control for Croatia , Romania , Bulgaria or Greece .
That is , after all , one and the same topic .
I call on the Commission not to turn a blind eye , just because it is Turkey . Rather support Turkey 's accession according to the accession criteria that the Community itself has set .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to talk today about Parliament 's discharge report .
We have in front of us what I believe is the most thorough , most critical and most forward-looking European Parliament discharge report ever .
That is a good thing .
I would therefore like to thank Mr Staes for such a constructive piece of work .
It is unusual for an institution to grant discharge to itself , and indeed this calls for a high degree of responsibility , transparency and control .
However , the report actually helps ensure that we , as Parliament , are able to shoulder this responsibility and demonstrate transparency and ensure better control .
That is , of course , a good thing .
Having said that , there is still room for improvement .
I will merely mention here some of the areas that I think some of the amendments address .
I think we need to do more to allow our citizens to follow our work .
We can ensure this by giving citizens easier access to our reports on the website - including those reports that are critical .
I also think it is important for us to look at the functioning of our procurement procedures here in Parliament .
This is a high risk area and good amendments have also been proposed in this respect .
Moreover , I also think we need to look at whether the leadership structure can be improved and made even more transparent , both for us parliamentarians and for our citizens to help keep checks on Parliament .
Furthermore , though it has often been said before , I do not , of course , think we should spend money on renovating our office facilities here in Strasbourg .
Instead , we should ensure that we have only one seat .
I come from Denmark , a country with a long tradition of transparency , openness and control , particularly as regards the use of taxpayers ' money .
These are values that I prize , and I believe that they should also be more prevalent throughout the EU .
I believe that the discharge report for the European Parliament shows that we in Parliament are taking this on board and are moving in the right direction .
It also puts us in a better position to criticise the other institutions .
( NL ) Mr President , a great deal has already been said in this debate , and so I should like to confine myself to two points .
The first is Parliament 's discharge ; after all , if you want to monitor others , you have to take a particularly critical approach to your own budget .
Mr Staes has presented a report on this that I would have endorsed wholeheartedly six or seven years ago , but in those six or seven years , many things have taken a turn for the better .
Examples include the reimbursement of only those travel expenses actually incurred and the Statute for Assistants .
The funny thing is that Mr Staes mentioned these in his speech a little while ago , but the pity of it is that these achievements do not yet appear in the report .
I hope this can be rectified in the vote in two weeks ' time so that the report is ultimately a balanced one .
I have every confidence in this happening .
The second is a general point , Mr President , as I think we shall be seeing a difficult budgetary discussion in coming years .
Despite the extra tasks that have fallen to us since Lisbon , our budget is not expected to increase in the new period , which means that , in the context of European expenditure , it will become increasingly necessary to achieve several policy objectives at the same time with a single expense .
This requires a Court of Auditors that can actually audit the multiple action of expenditure rather than merely looking at whether the rules are satisfied .
Our Court of Auditors is currently unable to do this .
Thus , if we wish to draw up an efficient budget for the new budgetary period that can also be audited , changes to the Court of Auditors will be required .
Therefore , I propose that , in future , the Court of Auditors does indeed attend debates on budgets and on budgetary control , and I should like the European Commission to tell me how it means to approach this challenge .
Mr President , I wanted to speak on the European Parliament 's discharge and first of all to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work he has done , and the hard work he has done , along with many others .
I think it goes without saying that everyone in this Chamber wants improvements to openness and transparency and wants value for money for taxpayers , but we have to make sure that any changes to our processes actually are improvements .
I am not sure whether some of the recommendations in the current report are improvements .
For example , a recommendation to remove the bathrooms within this building will prove very costly , as will the proposal to replace the whole fleet of European Parliament cars .
There are also some recommendations within the report that are already included in the 2011 budget proposals . Examples include a review of Europarl TV to make sure it is effective and is doing its job , and also the call for a long-term building strategy , which is already in place or is at least called for in the future .
There are also some recommendations within the report that cover issues where improvements have already been made or are in the process of being made .
However , there are , of course , some positives in the report , and these should indeed be supported - for example , the reduction in paper wasted in printing .
We all see piles of paper printed every day and surely there must be some scope for reduction there .
Also welcome is the call for a rationalisation of external studies , and cooperation with other institutions on those studies , so that we can avoid duplication and make some efficiency savings .
I understand some amendments will be put forward again for the 2011 European Parliament budget .
The report also asks for an annual report from the risk manager , and again I think that is a good thing .
All this demonstrates that there is a need for a balance in the discussions we have on the discharge for the European Parliament .
I have no doubt that the Budgetary Control Committee will ensure that it exercises its responsibilities in future and will want to report in the future on how the recommendations in this report are being implemented and dealt with .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to say I was happy that I only had to travel to Strasbourg this week and not to Brussels , because Strasbourg is much closer for me and therefore it was a great advantage to be able to travel unhindered despite the interruption in flight connections .
My second request regards budgetary control .
We still have the same old pack of paper that shows what is going through plenary this week .
I would be pleased if we could receive a computer here in our workstations , particularly since we can view everything electronically , so that when voting , we then have the amendments in our own languages in front of us and the vote can be carried out in a targeted manner .
We have hundreds of votes , always at midday , and it would be good if we did not have to haul the paper around with us , but had the texts provided in electronic form .
After all , the European Parliament should be at the leading edge of technology .
Thirdly , when we travel somewhere , we then have all the accounting to do , which has recently become very bureaucratic .
It is a large additional burden for us as MEPs , but also for the administration of the House .
The additional audit imposes additional conditions .
We should establish a working party here that reverts to what is essential - correct and precise accounting - in order to reduce the bureaucratic burden by 25 % , and not raise it by 50 % , as has happened in recent months .
As far as structure is concerned , I would ask the Commission to check whether , since many countries are currently in crisis in terms of the financial situation , we should focus more on investments in the Cohesion Fund and the Regional Fund and not so much on the consumption of European funding .
Even an increase of funds to 1.27 % of Gross National Income ( GNI ) would be sensible in order to achieve more in investment activities .
( RO ) I would like to begin by mentioning the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2008 , Section III - Commission and executive agencies .
We welcome the voluntary initiatives launched by Denmark , the Netherlands , Sweden and the United Kingdom in producing national management statements .
We firmly believe that progress will be achieved when national management declarations will be received for all the European Union 's funds which are subject to shared management .
In this regard , we urge the Commission to produce recommendations on drafting these management statements .
With regard to the research framework programme , we are concerned that the current programme does not meet the needs of a modern research environment .
We feel that modernisation and additional simplification must be carried out for the future framework programme .
I would also like to mention the implementation of the budget of the European Network and Information Security Agency for the financial year 2008 .
It is indicated in this agency 's accounts that revenue was recorded , which was accrued from interest amounting to more than EUR 143 000 for the financial year 2008 , which highlights that the agency has a high volume of liquidity over long periods .
In this regard , we urge the Commission to examine not only the possibilities for fully implementing cash management based on needs , but also , in particular , the extension of ENISA 's mandate both beyond 2012 and as regards competences .
( DE ) Mr President , if we want a European Union that is accepted by its citizens , then it is crucial that citizens also know what is being done with the money they pay in taxes .
Therefore , Mrs Schaldemose 's demand for more transparency is perfectly justified and I believe this is where the European project stands or falls .
However , it is not just about transparency , it is also about readability .
We are , as it were , paid to deal with such matters full-time .
I think that when they occasionally look at such a document , citizens should also be able to do something concrete with it .
Thus , we must call on the Commission to work on the readability of its documents , in particular , those concerning the budgetary framework .
Then citizens would know very quickly how large or small the EU budget is and how much is always demanded of the EU .
The fact that Member States expect the EU to do something but , on the other hand , are not so ready to provide any money , is a political problem that we all have , and this is a field that the Commission should tackle in the coming years .
( DE ) Mr President , a few words on the particularly critical discussion concerning the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Turkey .
This has increased steadily since 2002 , although Turkey is taking more steps backward than forward .
The latest special report by the Court of Auditors reveals major problems .
Funds were not spent effectively and were not sufficiently evaluated .
I therefore call on the Commission to go out and explain to EU citizens before discharge what exactly has happened to the EUR 800 million a year for Turkey .
Now to the different agencies in general .
The uncontrolled growth , the establishment , reestablishment and expansion of EU agencies , which has almost tripled since 2000 , clearly contradicts the demands of the Lisbon Strategy for less bureaucracy .
This also includes the new European Asylum Support Office .
Although we are talking about 2008 , a word on the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
I would really like to know whether it was asleep when , at the beginning of the year , hard drugs were legalised in the Czech Republic and now , thanks to open borders , we have fabulous drug tourism .
So we are tough as nails with smokers , but are caught napping when it comes to hard drugs .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to address the issue of pre-accession aid .
The Court of Auditors says clearly in its report that it is not in a position to prove the proper utilisation of funds on the basis of current programmes .
The European Commission has therefore established programmes that we cannot monitor and whose effectiveness we cannot check .
In its opinion , the Committee on Budgetary Control delivered a clear position , and now there is unbelievable lobbying by the Turkish side .
With regard to budget discharge , the question here is not whether or not Turkey will join the EU .
It is not about whether or not we want to please representatives of other friendly countries , it is about us checking whether the programmes are really effective , it is about money reaching those it is intended for and not being drained off somewhere .
It is also about us handling European citizens ' tax money properly .
Therefore , I would be very grateful if the majority of the House could make the right decision when it is finally up for the vote .
Mr President , I represent a party that is opposed to the whole EU project and to our country 's membership of the EU .
This might lead people to suspect that we would object to the discharge of accounts regardless of the evidence .
I would like to reject that suspicion .
Whilst our default position would be to object to the approval of almost all future expenditure , I had hoped that we would support the discharge of accounts for past expenditure if the evidence justified it , even if we disapproved of the purposes of that expenditure .
However , we shall oppose the discharge of the accounts as a whole because of the quantity of irregularities .
We would not confuse judgment of the regularity or irregularity of expenditure with approval or disapproval of the purpose .
I hope that all others , whether they approve of the purposes of the expenditure or not , will take the same approach .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing discharge of the 2008 budget , but discharge is always an opportunity to look ahead and I feel that in this context in particular , we must focus on the many agencies that we have introduced .
We certainly must provide these agencies with financial resources but we must also ensure that they can do substantive work .
I am thinking of the European Chemicals Agency ( ECHA ) , which is responsible for the chemical industry and which is to assume additional duties in the coming period and is to be responsible for biocides .
We must ensure that efficient , forward-looking work is done that also corresponds to our policies , and therefore I ask that we all ensure that these agencies are able to work well and efficiently for us in the future too .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to stress once more the Commission 's commitment to pursuing the progress we have made over the last years in order to further improve the quality of spending .
I will , of course , look carefully at the discharge decisions that the European Parliament will adopt in two weeks ' time , and the Commission will ensure appropriate follow-up .
I would also like to thank you for a very good discussion today .
I think that many good ideas were expressed during the discussion , and I would like to look at a few of them .
Firstly , regarding national management declarations , an issue raised by Bart Staes and other Members , I would just remind you that , together with Commissioner Lewandowski , we sent a letter to the Committee on Budgetary Control saying that we will make a proposal regarding national management declarations in the forthcoming revision of the Financial Regulation .
I think that , together with proposals on simplification and with the introduction of the concept of tolerable risk of error , this will allow significant improvements in the situation with the management of structural funds .
Mr Søndergaard was very concerned about this .
The issue of the role of internal audits and internal controls was raised by Mrs Herczog .
I fully share her view on this and would just say that next week , we will discuss the audit strategy for 2010-12 and will pay much more attention to the improvement of internal control systems in the Commission .
I also share the views expressed by Mr Audy and some other honourable Members about the discharge procedure .
I think that we have to launch a discussion on how to improve the discharge procedure in order to ensure that most of the discharge results are implemented as fast as possible .
It is now 2010 and we are discussing the discharge for 2008 , as it was impossible to implement anything during 2009 .
I think that a thorough discussion involving stakeholders and the Court of Auditors is needed .
I fully share your views and the views of other Members who talked about this issue .
I also think that it is very important to address the issue of the efficiency of the spending of EU funds .
In our general audit strategy , we pay great attention to the improvement of auditing in terms of also auditing the efficiency of EU spending .
I think that this will give us results in the future .
On Turkey , the Commission will follow up the recommendations to improve the objectives and the monitoring of progress .
For all areas of spending , we have to improve the quality of spending , from objective setting to impact evaluation .
The results achieved so far demonstrate that the European Union is pursuing its efforts to improve the way that taxpayers ' money is spent and adds value to our citizens .
This progress is also the result of your action as the discharge authority , always being attentive to the way the EU budget is used , critical when it is not satisfactory , but also supportive when progress is made .
This is an important message to convey to citizens of the EU .
Therefore , let me conclude by expressing my special thanks to the European Parliament for its support for the Commission 's efforts towards better financial management of the European Union 's budget .
Mr President , so that the Minutes are correct , I represent rapporteur Bogusław Liberadzki , who , like many others in this House , has been a victim of the transport problems this week .
I am very happy to do so and would like to use the opportunity to go over a few of the remarks made during the debate .
For a start , Commissioner Šemeta , to my great satisfaction , you have stressed that the Commission will take steps to further strengthen the accountability of the leading actors in the management of EU funds .
We all know what that means .
Indeed , we all know that it means that we must remind the Member States of the European Union that manage a large portion of European funds of their responsibility to do so in accordance with good practice , because we also all know that the majority of the errors that are made in the utilisation of European funds are made by the Member States and at this level .
That is why it is also rather unsatisfactory to hear colleagues from the European Conservatives and Reformists Group and the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , all of whom , including Mr Czarnecki , have other commitments , strongly criticising the Commission in the debate and saying that the Commission will be refused discharge .
I would have expected my fellow Members to support pushing for national management statements in this House and also in the Member States , because that is where mistakes are being made and there is insufficient cooperation .
Then it is rather unsatisfactory to hear colleagues from the ECR Group say that everything that happens here is substandard - knowing quite well that responsibility lies somewhere else entirely .
Once again , I would like to mention pre-accession aid , because I feel that a few things have to be put right there .
I would like to remind you that the Committee on Budgetary Control supported the rapporteur with a slight majority .
I would also like to remind you that during the reporting , the representative of the European Court of Auditors sought to remind the rapporteur that his report was about the behaviour of the Commission as regards what was deemed to be worthy of criticism , not about the behaviour of Turkey .
Our fellow Members in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have voted amendments into the discharge of the Commission that we would like to remove straightaway , because here it is obviously less about the utilisation of taxpayers ' money and more about the question of where accession negotiations with Turkey are going .
Deciding that at this point is the wrong way to go .
Mr President , in my concluding speech , I would like to thank Commissioner Šemeta and the Commission services responsible for development aid and humanitarian aid for their diligent and effective cooperation in this process .
I also wish to give the Spanish Presidency due recognition for the efforts it is making in this discharge procedure , especially its offer to launch a debate on renewing the interinstitutional agreement with the Council , since the current one has clearly been obsolete for some time .
However , I must also express my rejection of the improvised procedure of this Chamber , which clearly had not thought of formally inviting either the Court of Auditors or the Council until 09.00 today .
Criticising their absence when we had not even taken the trouble to invite them appears to me to be bordering on the ridiculous and bad faith .
I believe that if we want to be respected and able to meet our new responsibilities , our interinstitutional procedures must be more rigorous and serious , and less opportunistic .
To conclude the debate on discharge for the European Development Funds , I only wish to express my gratitude for the excellent cooperation I have enjoyed with my colleagues , particularly Mrs Hohlmeier , and to welcome the major improvements achieved in the effective and transparent implementation of European development aid .
Of all the positive actions that come out of the European Union 's work , the citizens are particularly appreciative of European development aid and even call for it to be more visible and more extensive .
However , they also become concerned if it is not made clear why we help certain governments with budgetary aid , or if we do not explain the reasons or provide sufficient guarantees of strict control in cases where circumstances change due to coups d 'état , corruption scandals , violations of human rights or setbacks on the road towards democracy or gender equality .
The significant progress we have seen and noted is good reason for us to discharge the Seventh , Eighth , Ninth and Tenth European Development Funds , but we shall have to continue making improvements .
This Parliament will remain particularly watchful to ensure that the new post-Lisbon interinstitutional system and the European External Action Service framework do not jeopardise the improvements that have been achieved , so that citizens can continue to feel proud of European development aid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should , of course , like to thank all my fellow Members who have spoken about my report , particularly Mr Itälä , Mr Gerbrandy , Mrs Herczog , Mr Geier , Mr van Dalen , Mrs Schaldemose , Mrs de Lange and Mr Vaughan .

I believe that everything has been said , although I must express my surprise about the production of this report .

It is the third time I have been rapporteur for the European Parliament discharge , and I sense a change in perception .
The first and second times , it was relatively easy to make criticisms in this House .
The third time it has been harder .
It is clear that , suddenly , this House has become more touchy , and quite possibly lacking in self-criticism .
In the press , I have had some people accusing me , some of my fellow Members challenging me on this , saying : this is all well and good , but what you are writing puts wind in the sails of the Eurosceptics .
I disagree : I am an MEP who is both pro-European and critical , and if I come across things I believe could be improved or changed , or things such as the voluntary pension fund that have been associated with impropriety in the past , it is my duty to say so .
We pro-European MEPs must point these things out , as this is the way to take the wind out of the sails of the Eurosceptics , who subsist on half-truths - sometimes out-and-out lies - of this kind .
It is up to us to tell it as it is , and I shall always do so ; I shall never gloss over abuses .
That is my basic position .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Geier , who has noticed that I sometimes say what I think .
I must say I am going to learn wonderful things from the Council 's representative - a Spanish minister who always disappears when he knows the Council is going to be criticised .
He was not here at the beginning when I spoke , and he is not here now , when I want to speak again .
It is no accident that , of the seven institutions which I have had occasion to assess , six of them are more or less in order , and one is the cause of continual problems .
I will remind everyone that a year ago , it was the same .
The Council was granted discharge only in November .
I do think this will happen earlier this year , but I would not want to allow a situation in which we receive a document , not for the year 2008 , but for 2007 .
This shows either that there is chaos in the General Secretariat of the Council or that they are treating Parliament like an unintelligent schoolboy .
A situation in which all European institutions are equal but the Council thinks it is more equal , just like in George Orwell 's Animal Farm , is a situation which is highly alarming .
I do think , however - and let us be fair - that in what the Council representative said , there was one very important proposal .
This concerns the departure , as I understand it , from the famous gentlemen 's agreement of 1970 , and so is a recognition that the Parliament of 40 years ago , which was then still nominated by national parliaments and not chosen in elections , should now be treated more seriously .
Departure from that gentlemen 's agreement is a very good move , for which I am very grateful to the Council .
I think I proposed such an oral amendment at the vote in May .
Mr President , I wish to thank , firstly , the shadow rapporteurs , who really cooperated very effectively with me in order to draft this report , and , secondly , all the members of the Committee 's secretariat , because this was a very demanding task .
I also wish to thank those Members who have spoken during these debates , and I fully share their concerns .
It was evident from their speeches that they want to increase the transparency and the monitoring of EU funds , which is completely understandable .
I should like , in my conclusion , to also point out that the agencies in question have a political role too - this must be pointed out , it is also very important - and that , in order to carry out this important political role effectively , they have a work programme .
This work programme really must be consistent with that of the European Union and must - this is my hope - be monitored by our three institutions .
Indeed , while certain agencies cooperate naturally and spontaneously with them , others are far less receptive and , in such cases , our institutions ' texts have no binding force .
We need to think very seriously about this , Mr President .
I should add briefly that the services have informed me that they have quickly gone through the minutes of recent years .
During the last legislative period , the Council adopted a position and appeared in the debate once , and that was only in a second reading , because the discharge had originally been postponed in 2009 and the Council was only present in the second round .
In this respect , the perception that we are on the road to improvement is certainly not wrong .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the May part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this House has to be a paragon in terms of financial transparency and internal budgetary control .
We cannot be hard enough on ourselves in this regard .
In such a large parliament , with so many Members and members of staff , things cannot work perfectly all the time .
Wherever there are people working together , things will go wrong .
Even the strictest internal controls cannot prevent that .
Yet we must also recognise that great efforts have been made in recent years to put things right .
I should like to give two examples .
Firstly , the new Statute for Assistants , which is in place at long last following years of discussion .
The abuses that existed have now been virtually eliminated .
The second example is the reimbursement of expenses .
Action has been taken and clear and precise rules introduced in this field , too .
Has this solved all the problems ?
Absolutely not .
It is to be welcomed that internal controls have been further tightened , but giving the vague impression that things are being covered up is unacceptable in my eyes , as it is not true .
I should like to conclude by saying with regard to future budget increases that we must have the courage to explain to the public that the Treaty of Lisbon means a great deal of extra work , and that a higher budget for communication and contact with visitors is indeed justified .
in writing . - Generally , we are pleased to see the current state of affairs regarding the budget of the European Union .
However , there is still room for improvement .
Significant improvement , I would say .
Ceterum censeo , France has decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia ; we believe that She will sincerely regret that action .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.00 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
SWIFT ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on SWIFT .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , last month , on 24 March , the Commission adopted a recommendation to the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations between the European Union and the United States for an agreement whereby finance messaging data are made available to the US Treasury Department in order to fight and prevent terrorism and its financing .
The recommendation was immediately submitted to the rapporteur and certain Members of the European Parliament and forwarded to the Council of the Union .
The Council of the Union remains convinced of the need for an agreement like this one and therefore fully supports the Commission 's recommendation to negotiate an agreement on the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme .
The Commissioner 's draft mandate has been closely studied within Coreper and , in principle , this Commission recommendation will be put to the vote at the next Council meeting and we will vote in favour of it , taking into account Parliament 's position , of course , and the opinions that will be voiced on the subject here in this Chamber today .
The Council agrees with Parliament that the future agreement , known as the SWIFT agreement , must include adequate guarantees and safeguards .
It agrees , therefore , with the feeling shown by Parliament that it is essential in all cases to comply with the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights , specifically Article 8 thereof , the Treaty of Lisbon and the European Convention on Human Rights .
In addition , there are fundamental principles that must be respected when personal data are transferred , such as the right of the person whose data are being processed to be informed , or the right to amend or delete such data if they are incorrect .
All rights relating to data protection must be guaranteed without discrimination ; in other words , citizens of the European Union must be treated in the same way as citizens of the United States .
We believe there can be an agreement on the duration of the agreement to be signed with the United States , which I hope will be approximately five years .
As for exchanging data with third countries , our understanding is that , when the US authorities have grounds to think that there are data that may help authorities in other countries to prosecute terrorist crimes , such data should be used .
That , moreover , is precisely what European legislation permits .
According to European legislation , under similar circumstances where a Member State has obtained information from other Member States , that information may be transferred to third states for the purpose of fighting terrorism .
Then there is the subject of data transfers in bulk and not in all cases tied to a specific assumption , which is something that has to be kept for technical reasons and also for reasons of effectiveness , since it is often important to have a certain volume of data from which to draw conclusions when prosecuting terrorism .
Such data transfers must , of course , be as specific and as restricted as possible and there must always be a very clear objective : the prosecution of certain terrorist crimes , which is the objective that justifies the existence of this kind of agreement .
As a result , we have a detailed draft mandate from the Commission .
I believe it is a good draft , one that safeguards people 's fundamental rights , takes account of the effectiveness of these agreements , is based on reciprocity , is based on proportionality in the collection of data .
It is certainly based on the oversight of the results of the effectiveness of these agreements - as also alluded to in the Commission 's recommendation - not least by Parliament , which is absolutely associated with the whole of these negotiations .
Parliament rightly considers that it , too , must be involved in this agreement , and we therefore agree that it should be provided with adequate information and that the Commission , as the negotiator of this agreement , should pass on that information at each stage in the negotiations .
The Council also understands that Parliament should have easier access to the classified parts of international agreements so that it can carry out its assessment in cases where it has a right of approval .
Moreover , I must mention that in its statement of 9 February 2010 , the Council promised to negotiate an interinstitutional agreement with Parliament on this topic .
On behalf of the Council , I am pleased to confirm that promise today .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the collection of TFTP data is important in the fight against terrorism .
We know that TFTP data has been helpful to prevent terrorist attacks in Europe , like the 2006 liquid bombs at Heathrow Airport .
The TFTP is therefore important , not only for the US , but also for Europe .
I recently met US Home Secretary Napolitano and we addressed this issue .
They are fully aware of the need to reform the intermediate agreement that we had but they are also concerned about a number of leads for known terrorists , which are no longer available .
So we need to address the security gap but also to do this in a way that ensures full respect of fundamental rights and a sufficient level of data protection .
That is why , after our last discussion on this , the Commission promptly started to work on a new mandate for a new EU-US TFTP Agreement .
I think the mandate is ambitious but realistic .
It balances the maintenance of our collective security , while addressing fundamental rights and data protection , based on Parliament 's resolutions of September last year and of February this year .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , for the very constructive cooperation we have had .
The Commission has tried to liaise with her and the co-rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs in this matter .
I am also grateful to the Presidency for the work they have done to try to get this through the Council .
We have tried to take on board the concerns expressed in the European Parliament resolutions .
Data will be processed only for the purpose of terrorism .
A request must be based on judicial authorisation .
Third parties will not get bulk data .
There will be reciprocity .
There will be the push basis for transfer , SEPA data will be excluded and we will also address the issue of judicial redress on a non-discriminatory basis .
I will ensure that the Commission will keep Parliament fully and immediately informed throughout the process of negotiations .
We aim to sign this agreement before the end of June , so that Parliament can vote on it in July .
On the question of ' bulk ' data transfer , I know this is of great concern to the European Parliament but I also know that you do understand that , without bulk transfers , there will be no TFTP .
However , legally binding safeguards will ensure that absolutely no data are accessed unless there is an objectively verified reason to believe that an identified person is a terrorist , a suspected terrorist , or is financing terrorism and that those data transfers are anonymous .
Transfer of bulk data is , of course , sensitive , and we will strive for further reductions in the volume of data during the negotiations .
But we also need to be realistic here .
We are unlikely to see a huge reduction in what are already targeted requests .
Reciprocity is part of the mandate .
The envisaged agreement would place a legal obligation on the US Treasury to share leads with their EU counterparts and allow EU authorities to have TFTP searches undertaken against known terrorist suspects in the EU .
Should the EU develop something similar - an EU TFTP - the Americans should help us in this as well .
The Commission is willing to participate in these discussions with Member States .
The mandate calls for a five-year retention period for non-extracted data .
I believe there is some justification in this , bearing in mind that five years is also the period for financial transaction data that banks are subject to under EU anti-money-laundering legislation , but I am ready to hear Parliament 's views on this and take this matter to the Council by the end of the week .
In conclusion , I believe that the draft mandate is a true substantial improvement .
It takes into account the concerns of Parliament raised in your resolutions .
It takes into account the rapporteur 's call for a double-track approach that might lead to an EU TFTP , even if this is , of course , something that we have to discuss internally in the EU .
It is not part of the negotiations .
It does take account of the EU-US relationship in this area as equal partners , which is , of course , the long-term goal in this regard .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , the first thing that should be said is that this Parliament wants an agreement .
Of course this Parliament does not want an agreement at any cost , and the devil is in the detail .
This is what we shall be discussing today in this Chamber .
After the vote in February , two clear lessons were learnt .
The first lesson is that the European Parliament has new powers , it has clear powers ; it has a say and it wants to exercise those powers .
It will do so constructively and responsibly , but it will exercise its powers .
The second lesson that has been learnt is that the first agreement was not good enough and it needs to be improved .
I very much welcome the Commission 's readiness to come out with a mandate , as it did as soon as possible after the vote in February , and I am also very keen to have this mandate approved as soon as possible by the Council of Ministers .
As I said , the European Parliament wants an agreement and we have put the details of what we would like in the resolution that has found the broad support of this House , certainly of the leading groups in this House .
Madam Commissioner , bulk data is an issue for us and you will know very well that what we want on bulk data will require a rethink , not just on the part of our counterparts in the US but also on our own part .
What exactly do we , here in Europe , want for ourselves ?
Do we want our own European TFTP , and how will we go about achieving that ?
Clearly , bulk data is an issue and it is an issue that cannot be skirted round . It needs to be faced .
Next week , we shall be facing these details when we discuss them with our counterparts in Congress in the US , when a mission from this Parliament goes to the US .
Next week , a mission from the European Parliament will go to the US and we shall discuss this with our counterparts in Congress , but also with the US authorities .
We are keen to do that in a constructive manner .
We want to go there to show the US authorities that we mean business .
We want an agreement , but we have concerns and we want those concerns to be addressed .

Mr President , I would like to contradict those who have spoken so far on one point : I am not interested in arriving at an agreement as soon as possible , but in achieving one that is as good as possible .
Quality must come before timeframe .
I would like to make one other preliminary remark .
The European Parliament has already rejected an agreement once and one aspect among the many reasons relating to content was the lack of European Parliament participation .
In view of current events this week , we have decided not to adopt any decisions here in Parliament .
Then there is the decision to call on the Council to likewise postpone its decisions until we can adopt our decisions .
I am now rather surprised that there are Members of the House , who clearly do not take their own decisions seriously but think : well yes , despite this , the Council can simply decide .
I do not think we can treat our own decisions like that .
I still maintain that the Council should also withhold its decision until after 6 May when we have decided .
I am sure there are no disadvantages to this and that the United States would be understanding .
As for the draft mandate itself , I take a favourable view of the fact that the Commission is committed to meeting our demands .
Nevertheless , I would like to say clearly that there still need to be substantial amendments to this negotiating mandate .
These are necessary if a majority of the European Parliament is to vote in favour of a new agreement .
In my opinion , the current mandate is not ambitious enough to achieve this .
The problem of bulk data transfer remains unresolved .
If the US authorities tell us that every month we are talking about the specific details of five to ten people , then the transfer of millions of pieces of data relating to European citizens is surely disproportionate to this purpose .
Incidentally , I would like to say again to the Commission and the Council that although it is constantly maintained that this agreement will be highly significant as an additional means of combating terrorism , the proof of this is not as clear as we are always being told .
The long period of retention of data in the United States also continues to be a problem .
The mandate does not offer a solution here either .
We need a judicial authority on European soil that not only checks the legality of US applications , but also the extraction of data , wherever this takes place .
The transmission of information to third countries must be regulated with clear directives .
We need an ambitious mandate with our demands .
Only then can we achieve a really good result that meets our demands , taking into account data protection as well as the fight against terror .
Finally , I have another specific question for the Council and the Commission .
How do you intend to ensure that only data that was specifically requested is extracted and passed on ?
How can that work ?
In the United States ?
Or are there other proposals ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I , too , very much welcome today 's debate where Parliament will set out its expectations with regard to the negotiations directives .
The fact that Parliament will not vote on its resolution this week is clearly very unfortunate but it should not , and I repeat , it should not inhibit Council from going ahead with the adoption as scheduled .
Parliament 's views are being put forward as we speak , and it is no secret that Council and the Commission are already fully aware of the resolution and its content .
In this respect , I can only say that I do appreciate the new spirit of cooperation demonstrated by both the Council and the Commission to engage with this House .
Now , following the negotiations directive , the envisaged EU-US agreement is to ensure rights on an equal basis , regardless of the nationality of any person whose data are processed in accordance with the agreement .
Now , my question is , what does that mean ?
What are these specific rights in that case in relation to , for example , access , rectification , deletion , compensation and redress ?
Please enlighten me here .
Furthermore , I would like to underline , like my colleagues did , that the principles of proportionalities and necessity are key to the envisaged agreement .
The fact , and I repeat it once more , the fact that financial measuring data profiles are unable , for whatever reason , to search the content of the messages leading to the transfer of data in bulk cannot be subsequently rectified by mechanisms of oversight and control , as basic principles of data protection law have already been comprised .
To be honest , I do have some doubts whether this issue is going to be solved on the basis of the current negotiations directives .
Furthermore , it is important to know that the agreement on mutual legal assistance is not an adequate basis for requests to obtain data for the purposes of the TFTP .
After all , the agreement on mutual legal assistance does not apply to bank transfers between third countries and it would demand prior identification of a specific bank whereas the TFCP is based on searches for fund transfers .
It is therefore crucial , and I would like to stress that , it is therefore crucial that negotiations focus on finding a solution to make one compatible with the other .
We can , of course , insist on a redesign of the TFTP but honestly , in the end , this is not in our hands really and I can therefore only urge the Council and the Commission , like Mr Busuttil did , to address the fundamental policy decisions straight away .
I do expect a clear and binding commitment on the part of both the Council and the Commission to undertake all that is necessary to effectively introduce a durable , legally sound , European solution to the extraction of data on European soil .
Let me stress once more that the transfer and storage of data in bulk to a foreign power , even if it concerns our best friends , is and remains by definition , disproportionate .
It marks a huge departure from EU legislation and practice .
The rule of law is crucially important and in this context , Parliament must be extremely mindful in assessing envisaged agreements such as the one we are discussing today .
I do support , like others , a strong outwards-looking EU that is capable of acting shoulder to shoulder , as an equal partner , with the US .
In that framework , I can only underline once more that it is the EU that needs to lay down the principles on how Europe will cooperate with the US for counterterrorism purposes , including law enforcement and the use of data collected for commercial ends .
Getting it right should be the objective , and the European legal demands for the fair , proportionate and lawful processing of personal information are of paramount importance and must always be upheld .
Now it is for the Council and the Commission to put this into concrete action as soon as possible and to negotiate an agreement that meets all of the EU and US expectations .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Presidency and you , Commissioner Malmström , for what you have said .
The Presidency has rightly said that the TFTP agreement on the exchange of SWIFT bank data is about principles .
It is about fundamental constitutional principles , it is about the protection of privacy - Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
However , it is also about effective legal protection and fair procedures - Articles 6 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is about genuine proportionality from a constitutional legal point of view , and I stress from a constitutional legal point of view , because it is not about simply getting a feel for proportionality ; we need actual evidence of the need for , and suitability of , a measure and finally also evidence of the proportionality itself .
Here , I again have to make clear what other experts and even the investigative authorities have said repeatedly .
In my opinion , it cannot be proven that the mass transfer of personal data without specific initial suspicions is at all appropriate and that we do not have significantly less intensive means of intervention that would suffice to pursue these goals .
Without a prior decision in an individual case on the basis of existing suspicions , any access to the bank data of European citizens is disproportionate .
It must therefore be ensured that there is no bulk transfer of data .
Otherwise , this agreement would represent a breach of existing European and international treaties , and that is exactly what most European supreme courts have made very clear in rulings up to this point - in particular , the German Federal Constitutional Court in March - when it was a matter of data retention .

Therefore , Parliament cannot and should not make any compromises on its previous positions , but must ensure compatibility with EU law during and after negotiations , if need be then by all means with the presentation of the mandate and the results of the negotiations before the European Court of Justice .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to clearly present Parliament 's conditions to the United States and to provide the necessary clear evidence of proportionality .
Otherwise , Parliament will remain unable to agree to a TFTP agreement .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the ECR Group supported the Council 's original agreement on SWIFT with the United States and its terrorist-financed tracking programme for the transfer of financial messaging data , subject , of course , to certain safeguards .
We repudiated at the time the anti-Americanism , both latent and overt , that characterises some in this House .
America bears a vastly disproportionate burden worldwide for securing the liberty of us all .
We want to see the EU doing more , not less , to support America 's principled leadership in the fight against terrorism .
We therefore saw the SWIFT agreement as a vital tool to help excise the cancer of terrorist financing and to protect citizens on both sides of the Atlantic .
However , whilst I was saddened to see the deal voted down , I was not altogether surprised .

Undoubtedly , Parliament was flexing its muscles and keen to make a show of its new powers under the Lisbon Treaty , but the temporary demise of the SWIFT accord until the better current proposal was forthcoming from the Commission could perhaps ultimately be for the good , to serve as a wake-up call to President Obama 's Administration which , like its predecessors , appears to have a very sketchy grasp of the EU and its institutions , notably Parliament .
There seems to be little appreciation amongst American diplomats of the increased powers and influence of MEPs .
The letter sent by Secretary Clinton to President Buzek , raising concerns regarding SWIFT , was woefully late in the day .
Moreover , it was considered by many Members of this House as at best naive , and at worst arrogant , because it ignored the reality of how our Parliament operates through the political groups .
The United States maintains an almost invisible lobbying presence in the Parliament .
Compare that to small countries like Israel , Taiwan and Colombia , not to mention giants like India and China , which invest substantial diplomatic resources in building relationships in this House .
As a result , they punch above their weight diplomatically at EU level , whereas America falls woefully short of its potential .
It is extraordinary that the USA 's bilateral embassy to Belgium is still double the size of its mission to the European Union .
I am , however , heartened that the new American Ambassador to the EU , William Kennard , seems to appreciate MEPs ' importance , and this is now being conveyed back to Washington .
I hope that his time in Brussels coincides with a quantum leap in terms of America 's relationship with us MEPs , and the announced visit by Vice-President Biden is an excellent start , because no one wants to see the transatlantic partnership strengthened more than I do .
The next hurdle , of course , will be getting a new agreement on SWIFT through this House , but also one on passenger name records ( PNR ) , which , in my view , will prove no less controversial .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again , we are discussing the Commission 's and the Council 's mandate in relation to the SWIFT project .
The draft mandate being submitted to us today certainly takes up some of the demands made by the European Parliament in its resolution of September 2009 , but many points remain incomplete .
This is the case when it comes to the length of time in which the data are stored and the possibilities for our fellow EU citizens to lodge an appeal .
The US Privacy Act still discriminates against non-US citizens : even Commission officials admit that .
Furthermore , we are repeatedly told that SWIFT cannot process data on an individual basis because it does not have the capabilities , particularly the technical capabilities , to do so .
Therefore , there is still a huge problem as regards the proportionality of the transfers carried out .
As you yourself have just told us , Commissioner , there are still concerns in relation to these bulk data transfers .
I am sorry but , as far as I am concerned , I have no faith in the way in which the US authorities operate in this area .
Reasonable suspicion cannot be enough .
The damage caused by the United States in the fight against terrorism is well known .
As Mrs Sippel said , quality must take precedence over quantity .
Yes , a European authority should be able to have actual control over the data that will be transferred .
We are still awaiting guarantees in this area to safeguard the rights of our fellow citizens and of all those resident in Europe .
We welcome the progress that has already been made , but it is still not enough .
Yes , our fellow citizens have a right to security , but they have a right to it in all areas .
At a time when many of our fellow citizens are becoming more aware of the protection of privacy and of personal data - something that is coming across clearly in many of the speeches in this House - we have a duty to continue to alert you and to tell you , in all conscience , that , for us , the principles of necessity and of proportionality are still not being respected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I take this opportunity to highlight the legitimacy of your point that the European Parliament must not forget , either , the role and the importance of the Italian language , of the use of the Italian language , which has contributed so much to European culture .
Returning to the subject at hand , it must be said that , ultimately , after that standstill pursued strongly by the European Parliament , which , on this occasion , seemed perhaps not to have fully appreciated the urgent , dramatic need not to undermine in any way , for any reason , a fundamental requirement of the West and of Europe , that of defending itself from terrorism .
Of course , it is absolutely true that there has to be a balance , a proportionality , that citizens ' rights and privacy rights must not be sacrificed beyond measure and that the possibility for citizens to lodge an appeal , either an administrative appeal or a legal appeal , against any decisions taken on the basis of the SWIFT system must , of course , be guaranteed - just as this new wording by the Commission , which has accepted many of the most important points made by the European Parliament , guarantees .
Therefore , in my view , the guidelines in the negotiating mandate adopted by the Commission on SWIFT should be regarded as essentially sound , in terms of ensuring , I repeat , effective and necessary cooperation with the US authorities as regards the tracking of financial transactions to combat and prevent the terrorist threat - this , of course , being in the bilateral interest , since Europe , too , must remember that it needs to defend itself from terrorism ; we have seen too much obvious , and also extremely serious , evidence of terrorism - and of ensuring the democratic control of the data flow entrusted to the European Parliament , which is thus the most reliable form of protection there can be for European citizens ' personal data and the protection of their right to assert themselves in all appropriate forums .
The mandate also takes on board many suggestions offered by us MEPs , and this speaks volumes for the importance of the European Parliament and for the new role granted to it by the treaty .
Furthermore , we must remember that the agreement provides for reciprocity from the United States should the European Union succeed in launching a European terrorist finance tracking programme .
Europe must swing into action - in any case , it must not always trail behind - it must swing into action and must itself provide vital input and information .
On the PNR system , which will be discussed later , the same logic applies : a passenger recognition measure , once again for the purposes of combating terrorism , is absolutely crucial .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) want an agreement .
We want a good partnership with our American friends , above all , in the area of security .
We want a good agreement and we want this agreement very soon .
We should emphasise that this is a time that reflects the spirit of Lisbon as seldom before .
After Parliament 's resolution in mid September , after the Council 's decisions at the end of November , after the discussions in January / February and after Parliament 's clear position in February , we now have a situation that is a good example of cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I would really like to thank you , Commissioner , and also the Council , for this new beginning , that was started primarily by you and Commissioner Reding .
It is an example of what European citizens want in terms of scope for action , of how European citizens want to see us reach solutions together - not just European citizens , but , above all , those who are watching and listening in this House today .
At this point I would particularly like to welcome our friends from the Rhine and Hunsrück and our friends from Austria who are here today .
We in our group are not looking for problems , but fighting for solutions .
I should emphasise that a whole range of excellent proposals for solutions were found that we set out in September 's resolution , be it on the issue of bulk data , third countries , duration , terminability , or other matters .
These are the matters we need to negotiate on now .
I am rather surprised by our colleagues from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left who , at the time , refrained from voting on the resolution and refused to contribute , but are now calling for this resolution .
I therefore invite you to come on board .
Help us negotiate and together , we will bring about a good result .
As has been considered here , we should , in future , also work to ensure that we accelerate the development of the TFTP and you have also said that in your statements .
Yes , we will need these instruments and we should keep the schedule exactly as it was conceived by you , so that we can discuss the results of your negotiations here in Parliament before the end of summer and will also hopefully reach decisions .
I believe that the way you have held discussions , including on your action plan that I would like to support wholeheartedly , can continue in this vein on matters concerning the data agreement , Passenger Name Records ( PNR ) , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) and other issues .
( HU ) I would like to recall that , contrary to earlier negative expectations that preceded Parliament 's negative vote , there have , in fact , been several positive developments as well , and it seems that there will be a better than expected agreement between the European Union and the United States ; if all goes well , it will be concluded by the summer .
Since that time , it has first of all become clear to us that the US is far more open to these reservations and to finding constructive solutions to the European reservations than we had previously thought .
I think that we have all found that cooperation is better and the dialogue between the Council and Parliament is closer , and I think it is also important that Commissioner Cecilia Malmström regularly informs the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs of the developments .
I think this is the key to ensuring that good agreements do indeed continue to be reached in the future .
I think it is important to state this , before going any further .
I , too , would like to say what several people have emphasised , namely that Parliament is committed , and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats is also very seriously committed to securing an agreement as soon as possible , and to making sure that this is a good agreement , in other words , one that takes into account the interests of European citizens , including their data protection interests .
We know and we feel the responsibility , since this is a very important element in combating terrorism , even if it is not the only or even the most important element , but this particular data exchange is very important .
It seems to us that the mandate in its present state provides solutions to many problems but leaves many others without a solution .
As yet , there is no solution to problems such as those mentioned earlier by our colleagues and which will be the subject of further discussion today .
I think that these two weeks , which are available to us because of the postponement of the vote due to the problems with flying , present us with an opportunity ; an opportunity to find solutions to the outstanding problems and to find answers to those questions and reservations raised by Parliament to which we have not yet found reassuring answers .
It would be good if Council did not reach a decision before Parliament has had a chance to vote , since that could cause further difficulties in the near future .
Mr President , clearly , the Commission has listened .
The draft mandate is indeed a clear improvement on previous agreements , though my colleagues have highlighted aspects where our concerns remain .
I will not repeat those concerns apart from thanking my colleague , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , for all her hard work for the Parliament .
I want to say something on process and something on context .
Recent progress is , I think , a tribute to what can be achieved when partners treat each other with respect and listen to each other , treat objections seriously and try hard to bring views together .
As well as the Commission , I actually believe that the US authorities have made that effort of engagement and understanding .
I would like to thank Ambassador Bill Kennard in that regard .
He has grasped very well how the European Parliament works , perhaps rather better than some of our Member States .
Now what we need is for the Council to make the same effort and adopt a progressive mandate .
It was the Council 's failure last time to come to us with a serious offer of improvement meeting MEPs ' concerns that made it necessary for us to strike down the interim agreement .
For the last decade - and this is the point on context - authorities in the US and the EU have progressed in a reactive , even knee-jerk , manner to real or perceived security threats .
Sometimes , governments have even been guilty of gesture or dog-whistle politics designed to get media headlines or to label opponents soft on crime or terrorism .
We cannot go on like this , and I look forward to a new start where we base decisions , especially about data storage and transfer , on our basic bedrock principles of proportionality , necessity and legal processing .
We need an audit of all the schemes and projects that have accumulated in an unplanned manner .
I am heartened that - as I understand it - Commissioner Malmström plans to do that so we can get a clear view of gaps , duplication and over-intrusive measures and arrive at a rational and effective security framework that does not junk our civil liberties .
( NL ) Mr President , resolution or no resolution , I believe that the Council heard us loud and clear last time and knows full well what it has to do .
This Parliament is concerned about fundamental rights and the protection of citizens ' privacy and also about data protection .
These are fundamental rights , and a simple cost-benefit analysis is inappropriate where these are concerned .
The grounds given for requesting data in bulk - that it is technically impossible to do things any more precisely - strikes me as a strange argument .
I do not believe for a minute that this is technically impossible ; as I see it , it is more a matter of money and of cost .
As I said , where fundamental rights are concerned , it is not simply a matter of how much something costs .
In addition , it is important that Europe now shows itself to be an equal negotiating partner , as opposed to one that simply cosies up or waits for the United States to lay down the rules .
Parliament has given the Council and the Commission the power and elbow room to approach this role seriously from now on , and in this regard , I would ask the Commission and the Council to take account of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms that is now in force .
This , too , will have to be included in your mandate and the result of your negotiations .
I hope you come back with the right results , I hope you use the power and authority we gave you last time , and I await what you have to show for yourselves on your return .
( PL ) Mr President , the United States is the only world superpower today .
It is an absolute and multidimensional superpower - cultural , military and economic . We are fortunate that this superpower is friendly to us and is based on the same values and foundations upon which the European Union is built .
Therefore , we should appreciate this and support the United States in the noble cause of the fight against terrorism , because Western Europe in particular was protected by the US from communism for many decades .
It was only thanks to the US that free Europe was free for 40 years .
Today , the United States is giving very strong support to the whole free world so that the world can be free from terrorism .
A comparison between the United States and the European Union of the efforts , financial outlays and technology devoted to the fight against terrorism is embarrassing for European states and the European Union .
Therefore , if we can do something to help the United States in the fight against terrorism - and this is how I see this agreement - we should not hesitate .
We should , of course , respect the principles of which we have been talking , but that , as I see it , is a question of cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
What is required of us today is an expression of the political will to enter into such an agreement .
I think such political will should be present here .
The United States should enter into a treaty agreement with the European Union which will be both friendly and based on partnership .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for the progress that has nonetheless been made since February , when Parliament did what was only right - in other words , rejected the SWIFT agreement .
Parliament now has greater opportunity to make demands as regards the content of the agreement .
An intelligent Commission and an intelligent Council would be wise to pay heed to the demands and objections made by Parliament in February .
They concern our freedoms and civil rights , and that is the basis of the rule of law .
That is why we cannot allow the mass transmission of data without restrictions .
Such an agreement mixes together innocent citizens with those who may be guilty .
We can only allow data to be passed on where there are strong reasons to suspect the person concerned of being involved in crime .
It is claimed that there are technical problems inherent in this .
If that is the case , then we must ask ourselves whether our legislation should be decided by the technology or by our fundamental freedoms and civil rights .
To me the answer is obvious : our legislation must be based on our rights .
( SK ) In February , we refused to ratify an agreement on processing and transmitting data contained in financial reports for the purposes of a US Treasury programme to monitor terrorism .
The reasons for the refusal were clearly listed and they include in particular :
breaching the fundamental principles of data protection law for a large number of citizens and subjects of the European Union ( up to 90 million data items per month ) ,
the absence of protection for EU citizens against the abuse of their data provided under this agreement to the United States and to third countries , and
the absence of genuine reciprocity , since the other party to the agreement has not undertaken to provide information of similar quality and scope to the EU .
Many of these shortcomings can be eliminated in the new agreement , but the actual principle of a comprehensive transfer of all data from the EU to the US , where the US processes , evaluates and stores all records on EU financial operations without any restriction , under the pretext of looking for links to terrorism , is not tenable .
This tenet must be amended .
The financial operations of European banks should be processed only under European rules and on European soil .
We will hand over to our friends from the United States only those items that really relate to terrorism .

( PT ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this House , I supported the agreement concluded between the European Union and the United States on mutual judicial assistance .
I did so because I consider transatlantic cooperation to be very important in general , and particularly so in the area of freedom , security and justice .
In the plenary session on 11 February , I voted against the provisional agreement on the transfer of financial data concluded between the European Union and the United States .
I did so for the sake of Parliament 's prerogatives , but also because the agreement was unacceptable .
In that debate , I called for respect for the principles of necessity and proportionality , as well as for the integrity and security of European financial data .
I am pleased to note at this juncture the Commission 's and the Council 's new attitude towards cooperating with Parliament .
I believe that together , we shall succeed in establishing the basic principles that should guide and facilitate future cooperation between the European Union and the United States in the fight against terrorism .
I hope that the concerns expressed by Parliament in its resolution of September 2009 will be duly taken into account in this new agreement .
I reiterate that there needs to be absolute respect for the principles of necessity , proportionality and reciprocity .
I emphasise that there must be basic safeguards to guarantee that such data are retained for as little time as is strictly essential , after which they should be destroyed .
I reiterate the demand that legal appeals must be possible and that suitable guarantees must be established regarding any transfer of personal details to third countries .
Above all , it must be proved that such data are useful in preventing acts of terrorism or incriminating terrorists .
Outside this framework , it will not be possible to obtain our consent .
The European Parliament will be consistent with the positions it has always held .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , the draft mandate proposed by the European Commission is a step in the right direction .
The fight against terrorism is our priority .
It is therefore important to put a new agreement in place as soon as possible on the exchange of financial data with the United States , but not at all costs .
In February , a large majority of us said ' no ' to a bad interim agreement with the United States ; ' no ' to the exclusion of the European Parliament , the body representing 500 million citizens .
Citizens do not want their bank details to be simply transferred to the United States without sound guarantees of their rights .
We want an agreement with sound guarantees to protect the rights of our European citizens .
If these are not offered under the present negotiating mandate , there will be little difference from the state of affairs in February .
We need very good reasons if we are to say ' yes ' this time .
The Council and the Commission must inform the European Parliament comprehensively and directly .
It is to be welcomed that account has been taken of Parliament 's objections concerning guarantees of fundamental rights and freedoms in relation to the protection of personal data .
These will have to be the criterion for determining whether or not data are transferred , along with the criterion that the data must relate to the fight against terrorism .
These are fine promises , but I am curious as to how the Council and the Commission will safeguard these guarantees in practice .
The principles of proportionality and effectiveness are paramount .
Also , will the United States really do the same for us ?
What I would welcome is a complete , detailed statement of the rights our citizens would enjoy under the prospective agreement .
The Council and the Commission are proposing to entrust a European body with examining requests from the United States .
Council and Commission , what form do you see this kind of public EU body taking ?
Will it be a judicial authority , and will citizens have the possibility of court proceedings , which they are guaranteed in Europe ?
I should like to hear your responses .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you , Commissioner Malmström .
The negotiating mandate before us shows , above all , that the Commission and Parliament are again taking the same line and that cooperation has at least got off to a good start .
The fact that the European Parliament rejected the agreement in February - and I address this to all those who have described it as muscle flexing - has nothing to do with muscle flexing ; it is about assuming responsibility .
Assuming responsibility for the rights of those that we represent , namely the citizens of Europe .
The negotiations on the new agreement on the transfer of bank data now under way will , above all , answer the crucial question as to where Parliament and the European Union stand on respect .
Respect among partners , respect for citizens and respect for European legislation .
We were able to slip a lot of things that are important to us into this negotiating mandate .
The resolution that we will adopt in May very much reflects those things that specifically concern the protection of our citizens , both their data and their judicial remedies , including extraterritorial protection , particularly when their rights could be violated extraterritorially .
We have talked a lot about the transfer of aggregated data , so-called bulk data transfers .
What we must clarify is the fact that in the mandate concluded , we must set out how and when this problem will be resolved .
Otherwise , it will be very difficult to represent the whole thing in light of what we have formulated so far .
The European Parliament 's resolution highlights this in two paragraphs , the negotiating mandate in one .
I am confident that the Commission will resolve this in a sensible manner .
( PL ) Our debate is taking place literally two days before a meeting of ministers of the 27 Member States of the European Union on the same subject .
Therefore , and let us say it directly , our position is potentially a form of political pressure .
We are discussing this problem at a time when the fate of the negotiating mandate in talks with the United States is in the balance .
We have barely two months and one week to begin negotiations with Washington .
The European Commission is not very flexible in this area .
It has not proposed - with the greatest respect for Mrs Malmström - a single similar but alternative position .
However , playing on the basis of ' all or nothing ' is not only irrelevant and not in accord with the spirit of the European Union , but it is also a road to nowhere , a blind alley .
I am in favour of close cooperation with the USA and exchange of data , but the devil is in the detail .
While I am not an enthusiast of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , I would , however , like to ask if it is true that this mandate does not respect the provisions of the Charter .
What shall we do when the passenger data which we transfer to the USA , and I am in favour of this , are used for unauthorised purposes ?
Mr President , it is shocking to me that this Commission is still insisting on passing sensitive financial information on millions of innocent European citizens , including those from the UK , despite Parliament and the Civil Liberties Committee rejecting the proposals .
The issue here is not how we can better manage SWIFT , but that there should be no SWIFT agreement at all .
I would totally oppose this sort of infringement by my own government and resolutely stand against the EU handing in constituents ' personal information to America .
Handing over such information is at the thin end of the wedge , leading us into a frightening Big Brother of Europe .
Under current rules , the US can retain data for 90 years , which is longer than an average lifetime , and , although the US authorities say untouched data is deleted after five years , the US Government has already been accused of giving data to big American companies , not to tackle terrorism , but rather to further economic interests .

The European Parliament threw out these sickening proposals but the Commission does not like backing down , and an interim agreement was signed without parliamentary approval by the European Council last year , the day before the Lisbon Treaty would have prohibited it under the codecision procedure .
On 11 February , the European Parliament again rejected the interim agreement and a week prior to that , Parliament 's Civil Liberties Committee rejected the deal .
Your dogged pursuit of this disgusting agreement just goes to show your contempt for democracy and liberties of the people , including those from my country , Wales , and the rest of the United Kingdom .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the previous speaker , I would expressly like to thank both Commissioner Malmström and Commissioner Reding for their intensive efforts to take up the issues that have been raised by Parliament , as well as the problems that we see and have seen in the area of data security and confidentiality , in order to negotiate with the United States .
I am also grateful that key issues - as mentioned by my fellow Members - have already been analysed or considered in the mandate and that , in particular , this also includes issues in the area of inspection as well as the area of reciprocity .
On the matter of the erasure of data , I also consider it very important to be able to renegotiate the five-year period , since it is really not acceptable to hold data for such a long time .
I also feel it is important to ultimately discuss the matter of penalties in cases of deliberate extraction to the wrong ends in sensitive circumstances , since that prevents certain things being extracted that we do not want to see extracted .
The focus should only be on terrorism .
To me , what is also important is the idea that we have to tackle our own TFTP and that in the longer term , we cannot transfer bulk data , that is to say , large amounts of data to the United States .
That has nothing to do with mistrust , but the fact that in the long term , we ultimately want to take our own responsibility within Europe on an equal footing , and then exchange specific extracted data for the sole purpose of combating terrorism and finally maintain real reciprocity .
In this context , I would again like to ask the Commission to indicate how the topic of our own TFTP is viewed within the Commission and in the joint discussion with the Council .
( SL ) Terrorism remains one of the main threats to security in the European Union and we need to start negotiations with the US on the transfer of banking data as soon as possible , but not at any cost .
A new agreement must provide greater protection of the personal data of European citizens .
We need a better agreement , one which takes into account human rights and which addresses the issue of transferring batches of data on millions of European citizens .
The future agreement must also be a reciprocal one , which means that US authorities should provide similar data on financial transactions if the European Union establishes its financial transactions tracking programme in the future .
I am pleased to hear that the Commission agrees with this .
The new agreement must also ensure stricter guarantees for the transfer of data to third countries .
Are we going to allow the US to transfer information to any country or are we going to set out some clear criteria for that ?
It is imperative that we have the most appropriate safeguards .
It would also be appropriate for the country providing data to consent to their transfer to third countries , so that we can set up a system requiring countries that provide data to give their consent .
I therefore wonder if we could put in place some instruments that would also allow us to refuse the transfer of information to third countries where they fail to provide sufficiently specific reasons for obtaining such data .
As the European Union does not have its own financial transactions tracking system , our security depends on the US .
However , what can we ask for in return ?
We must also ensure that the future agreement with the US can be terminated immediately if any of the commitments is not met .
We need to persuade our citizens that transferring banking data is a sensible thing to do , since we are more and more concerned about the extent to which we permit intrusion into our privacy in the fight against terrorism .
( SV ) Mr President , ever since the end of the Second World War , it has been important to us Liberals to emphasise the transatlantic links between the US and Europe and to highlight our cooperation in various areas .
However , as in all partnerships , complications and difficulties can arise , and we have to overcome these .
One of the trickier complications has been the issue of people 's legitimate right to personal privacy .
I believe that as time goes on , it will become very clear that Parliament did the right thing in rejecting the temporary SWIFT agreement .
The EU must be characterised by democracy and transparency ; we , the elected representatives in this House , are an important part of this .
The procedures surrounding SWIFT left a great deal to be desired in this respect .
Parliament has stated quite clearly what we demand in order to approve a new permanent agreement .
The criteria are listed in the resolution that we are dealing with and debating today , and once these requirements are met , I look forward to a new vote .
There remains a conflict of interests between security on the one hand and the right to privacy on the other .
Let us now put the past behind us and work confidently towards our central aim , of which a new permanent SWIFT agreement is an important part : namely the security , protection and privacy of the citizens of Europe .
( FR ) We will all agree - there can be no ambiguity on this issue - that the fight against terrorism is a shared fight in which the European Union must play a full part .
Yet it is just as crucial for us MEPs to ensure that the rights of European citizens and , in particular , the right to protection of personal data , are respected .
I feel it is necessary to stress this point , and this message is addressed not only to the representatives of the Council and the Commission present in this House , but also to the US authorities , with which a new agreement must be negotiated .
More specifically , I wish to highlight one point that features among the essential demands made by the European Parliament , namely , the issue of data being retained by the US authorities .
The current plans are disproportionate in my view . That is why several questions need to be asked .
Why retain for such a long time - five years - data which , according to the parties involved , are not used ?
Is it not possible to reduce their retention period to a more reasonable length of time ?
As regards the data selected , this time , no retention period is mentioned in the mandate .
The previous agreement stipulated a maximum period of 90 years .
Would it not be a good idea to decide on an appropriate retention period that is proportionate to the use made of these data , for example , in relation to the length of a specific investigation , or of a specific trial ?
Is there an intended use for these data other than that of combating terrorism , and what is it ?
Lastly , could we consider retaining these data in Europe rather than in the United States ?
I should like the Council and the Commission to answer these questions .
This point is , in fact , crucial , and the European Parliament will not beat about the bush on this issue .
Therefore , it is vitally important for the Council to take specific account of this when it adopts the Commission 's negotiating mandate .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament took a very important step two months ago when it rejected this interim agreement .
Without going back over this matter , since I am the 27th speaker this afternoon , I should just like to stress that some people very poetically described this phase of European democracy as the first day in the life of the European Parliament under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , not only was it an historic victory in terms of respect for the privacy and the freedoms of the citizens of Europe and beyond , but it was also a turning point for the powers of the European Parliament and , at the same time , a great moment of courage and daring on the part of our rapporteur , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , to whom I should like to pay tribute in particular for her determination only a few weeks away from an important date for her .
There is no point in mentioning the underlying elements that make us interdependent where counterterrorism , security , and the balance to be struck in the area of individual freedoms are concerned .
Thus , as part of this new negotiating mandate , we are going to have to reach a fair and balanced agreement that respects rights and that is surrounded by guarantees illustrating what ultimately represents , in my eyes and in the eyes of many of our fellow citizens , the substance and strength of the European Union , namely the protection of European citizens .
Since our political will must comply with the law and with expression through legal channels , I shall not go back over the elements of reciprocity and proportionality .
Nevertheless , I do hope that stricter legal rules are enforced on bulk data transfers in a very vigilant and demanding way , as an issue separate from the storage and the right to rectification , modification and deletion of data , and from the right to appeal before the courts .
It is up to us to cooperate in order , together , to strike this balance between the demands of security and those of freedoms .
( RO ) The European Union acknowledges the particular importance of exchanging information globally in the fight against terrorism .
MEPs in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament support any action which may result in preventing and halting terrorism .
MEPs have been elected democratically to represent the interests of European citizens and cannot compromise in any way on the fact that they need to protect their rights enshrined in treaties and conventions .
There are some subjects which we cannot ignore , such as personal data protection , legal protection , data transfer volume , proportionality , reciprocity or the European Parliament 's permanent involvement in the monitoring process .
I believe that the appointment of a European authority for processing , authorising and transferring SWIFT data would be a solution which would provide the European Union with the guarantee that this data will be used solely for the purpose of fighting terrorism and that it pertains only to suspects who have already been identified .
European citizens will also have somewhere to submit complaints about any abuses .
We ask the Commission to submit , at least annually , reports on the implementation of the agreement in question .
I believe that this will guarantee that the process is being conducted according to the approved agreement and that we will be able to eliminate any shortcomings in good time .
With the aim of reaching a better mutual understanding of the points where there is a difference of opinion , I suggest that briefing sessions should be arranged immediately for the European Parliament 's political groups or even for national delegations , along with US representatives accredited to the European Union or Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , the trial of strength that our Parliament has embarked on with the Commission and the Council on the draft SWIFT agreement may be a good thing , provided that the collection and transfer of data relating to banking transactions are used exclusively for counterterrorism purposes .
Just about everyone has mentioned this obvious fact by now , but experience shows that , when it comes to the use of personal data , nothing is less certain .
A suspected terrorist who is known to the United States ' intelligence services is not necessarily known to their European counterparts , as the Commission 's answer to one of my questions shows .
My standpoint on any new agreement on this matter will depend on the relevance of gathering personal data , on the provision of those data to security control bodies and on respect for the principle of reciprocity as regards information held by the authorities .
I feel it is wise , therefore , to think about the best way of enforcing these conditions .
It is up to Parliament to make this one of its prerogatives .
Mr President , I welcome this debate in advance of the Council 's formal consideration of the Commission 's proposed mandate .
I also welcome the acceptance by the Commission of many of the concerns expressed by this Parliament when we rejected the interim agreement as inadequate .
Regretfully , due to circumstances beyond our control here today , we cannot adopt a Parliament position on the draft mandate .
We will vote on 6 May , and I strongly urge the Council not to sign off on an agreement before that date .
This Parliament 's consent is a treaty requirement , as indeed is compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights in any agreement that the Council signs off on .
It is extremely important to bear in mind that a short delay will be far less damaging to EU-US relations than a second rejection of a draft agreement .
I , like many others , have continuing concerns about block data transfer and indeed the control of that data once it leaves our control .
I am not satisfied so far that what is being proposed is , in fact , going to address those concerns .
I do want closer cooperation between the European Union and the United States of America , but that cooperation must be based on mutual respect for citizens ' rights .
( RO ) As you are well aware and has also been stated today , the fight against terrorism is a common cause in Europe .
Anti-Americanism is not a common cause in Europe .
This is why , especially based on what one of my fellow Members was saying before me , I do not believe that a statement which has blatantly expressed anti-American sentiment could be considered as a source of inspiration for establishing our Parliament The reason for this is that , in general , I think that feelings against the United States must not block agreement on fighting terrorism .
In fact , I would like to talk about trust in the relationship with the United States .
We in the European Union and United States have common enemies who will not hesitate to exploit any crack and any evidence of a lack of trust in this relationship .
The data provided by SWIFT cannot be used for any purpose other than fighting against terrorism .
The exception to this , of course , is situations where other extremely serious activities are associated with terrorism , such as drug trafficking and espionage .
Let us trust our US partners .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe there are a few things that are beyond dispute , like the transatlantic partnership - since it really is the foundation of our foreign policy - the common fight against terrorism and also the cooperation of the EU institutions .
However , the fact also remains that with the Treaty of Lisbon , we have acquired new foundations and , as the European Parliament , we have new rights and these rights must , above all , be exercised to protect our citizens .
One right is the protection of the fundamental rights of our citizens , as well as the protection of life and the protection of privacy .
Therefore we are in favour of the transfer of specific data .
However , the transfer of aggregate data is certainly going overboard .
The new agreement should give assurances of a balance between these fundamental rights , but also of reciprocity , proportionality and a minimum level of data security .
I would also like to ask the representative of the Council , the Presidency , where they were this morning when we debated the 2008 budget discharge - one of the most important chapters .
Unfortunately , the Council Presidency was conspicuous by its absence .
Mr President , one of the crucially important questions is whether bulk data - that is everyone 's information - should be handed over or whether data should be confined to identified individuals .
There is , of course , an intermediate position .
Population groups associated with terrorism at a particular time could be targeted .
For example , if Orkney fishermen suddenly became radicalised and started to kill humankind and not just fish , then they should be targeted .
If ageing , overweight , grey retired college teachers should put on fatigues and commit terrorist outrages against their students , rather than just boring them to death with their deadly monotones , then they - or rather I should say we - should also be targeted .
Targeting is viewed with distaste and condemned as discriminatory .
I would call it common sense .
Nevertheless , there must be early destruction of data belonging to innocent members of those targeted groups .
( CS ) Mr President , detecting the financial flows of terrorist networks is a highly effective instrument in the fight against terrorism .
In February , the left rejected a provisional agreement without even proposing another suitable framework for security units , thereby complicating the work of the police and the judiciary .
We must now join forces in order to adopt a new , definitive agreement .
I applaud the fact that the Council and Commission are today communicating openly , and I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether it is necessary to transmit 90 million items of data every month , because I have my doubts about that , and I would also like to ask how our citizens will appeal to the American authorities over suspected abuses of data and who will monitor the data transmitted to the American Government .
In my opinion , it should perhaps be an independent judicial body based on international treaties on mutual legal assistance , and not Europol , the decisions of which cannot be reviewed and which will not even have suitable powers unless we amend its statute .
The priority is the fight against terrorism , but we cannot circumvent the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is supposed to guarantee the protection of personal data .
Open access to judicial review in contentious cases would , in my view , be a sure guarantee .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate shows that civil rights and the fight against terrorism are not always easy to reconcile .
The SWIFT agreement that is being discussed again today underlines the problem of protecting our civil rights while , at the same time , investing in the security of our world community .
The Commission 's draft mandate continues to provide for the transfer of large data units between the USA and the EU . The retention periods are still too long and , last but not least , I have two questions .
Is there a time limit to this bilateral agreement ?
If so , what is the timeframe and within what timeframe will the data finally be erased ?
( FI ) Mr President , the fight against terrorism is important , and the EU must be part of this .
We cannot do this by trampling on human rights , however .
Respect for human rights is one of the most important European values , and it should be a unifying factor in transatlantic cooperation too .
It is important that transatlantic cooperation should work , but it must work reciprocally and with a feeling of mutual respect .
Changes to data must take place individually , and I want to stress again that we cannot trample on human rights in the name of the fight with terrorism .
If this happens , then we will have helped the terrorists .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Mrs Malmström , I wish to congratulate the authors of the motion for a resolution on the conclusion of the agreement between the United States and the European Union on the transfer of financial data to combat terrorism .
This resolution reiterates , in a balanced way , not only the requirements in terms of security but also the guarantees that the data of European citizens will be protected and that their fundamental rights will be respected .
As such , I believe that appointing a European public judicial authority to be in charge of receiving the requests issued by the United States Treasury Department is the key to the balanced approach we are looking for .
Indeed , it will help overcome the many obstacles to the principles of necessity and proportionality that have emerged , in particular , in the case of bulk data transfers .
It would also pave the way for the introduction of genuine reciprocity ; in other words , it would be possible for the European authorities and the Member States ' competent authorities to obtain financial data stored on US territory .
It is our credibility that is at stake here .
The SWIFT agreement is a kind of democratic test that we are all duty-bound to pass for the good of our fellow citizens .

Mr President , I would like to start by saying to Mr Seeber that I was in fact present this morning at the debate to which he was referring .
Even though I had not been officially invited , you , ladies and gentlemen , asked me to come and I came : I was present and spoke in that debate .
Perhaps it was he who was not here , just as he is not in this session now and has left the Chamber .
Well , I wanted to say that the debate we have had was , in my view , highly constructive .
I believe it shows that there is a real spirit of cooperation on both sides , among all the parties involved : Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
The rapporteur , Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , acknowledged the spirit of cooperation she could see in the Council - for which I am very grateful - and also in the Commission .
I am grateful that she has said so publicly .
Indeed , there is no doubt whatever that both the mandate that the Commission has put forward through Mrs Malmström and the mandate that the Council will approve will very much take account of and find inspiration in the concerns and positions expressed in your speeches and in the motion or draft motion for a resolution proposed by the rapporteur .
I have noticed that there is a series of problems that concern you in particular , and I want to assure you that those problems and concerns that you have mentioned will form part of the negotiating directives that the Council is going to approve .
The negotiations will be directed by the Commission and will result in something that the Council and Parliament will have to sign .
The first item in those negotiating directives will be the problem that has been brought up repeatedly here this afternoon : bulk data transfer .
Mr Albrecht , Mr Busuttil , Mrs Sippel , Mrs Sargentini , Mrs Svensson , Mr Paška , Mr De Rossa and several others have raised this issue .

I would like to tell you that we cannot , of course , accept indiscriminate bulk transfer , whatever may be requested for any purpose .
It is not about that .
It is about data that is requested solely for preventing , investigating and prosecuting terrorist crimes and terrorist financing and , moreover , with individualised objectives regarding a particular person where there are grounds for thinking that that person has a nexus or relations with terrorism or its financing .
We are therefore not looking at mass transfer of such data ; the objective and the subject place very clear bounds on that transfer of data .
In addition , there will be a European authority through which that data will be requested , and afterwards there will also be a check , essentially carried out by the Commission , on the use of said data and on the operation of the agreement that is to be signed .
I therefore believe that there is a mechanism in place that is perfectly able to answer the concerns that have been raised here on this issue .
The retention period for data has also been mentioned .
The retention period for data is set at around five years , because it is obviously necessary to retain the data for a minimum period of time for reasons of effectiveness .
It must be made clear , though , that the period must be as short as possible and no longer than is necessary to achieve the objective .
The objective - the need to retain the data - must always be absolutely well defined ; otherwise it would not make sense .
Data must always be retained with an objective and in relation to a specific person .
You have also shown your concern regarding people 's rights to have access to , to be informed about and to correct their data .
Mr Coelho , for example , who is not here at the moment , expressed this in some detail .
I can tell you that the negotiating directives agree with the draft mandate drawn up by Mrs Malmström in that those rights will be assured .
The rights of information , access and correction will and must be assured in the agreement to be signed .
The principles of necessity and of proportionality will be assured in the negotiating directives and in the agreement that is eventually signed .
The possibility of appeal will be assured - administrative appeal and judicial appeal - without discrimination on the basis of nationality or for any other reason .
Therefore , in relation to the concerns raised by Members , including Mrs Bozkurt and Mrs Vergiat , all that will be assured .
In addition , there will be absolute reciprocity .
This is one of the topics that was most emphasised in the previous debate , which we all remember .
There will be absolute reciprocity with regard to the United States .
That is another of the characteristics of the negotiating directives that the Council will approve and which agree with what you have said here and with the motion for a resolution proposed by Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert .
I would like to point out here that the Council is firmly committed to approving a mandate that protects the fundamental rights of European citizens , and which applies and is absolutely faithful to and in accordance with the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights - which forms part of the Treaty of Lisbon - and the European Convention on Human Rights , which the EU proposes to sign in the coming months as one of the goals marking the beginning of this new political stage of the Union .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I think this has indeed been a very constructive debate .
We have listened carefully and are taking due notice of everything that has been said .
The Council answered quite a lot of the questions that were raised , and I will just add a few things because it is important that we get as much clarity as possible .
There will be an EU review team . They will have the right to review random samples to ensure that the data has been taken in a way that is respected according to the agreement .
There must be a reasonable belief that the target of the search is a terrorist or someone financing terrorism .
We also must remember that each and every search of TFTP data is verified by a SWIFT scrutineer and by an independent judicial authority before it is given out .
The EU review team will also have access to this information .
The agreement will ensure that EU citizens have access to non-discriminatory administrative and judicial rights .
Exactly how this will be specified is , of course , part of the negotiations , so I cannot be more specific on this .
But it is - as the Council also said - a very important part of the negotiation .
We will have to find a solution to this , and as regards rectification and access .
Data will not be transferred to third countries - only relevant leads analysis but not mass data - and it will only be for terrorism purposes .
The whole deal is only for terrorism purposes .
The agreement will also ensure that EU nationals , via their data protection authorities , have the right to know that the rights of the data subject have been duly respected .
The use requests for data are already targeted when it comes to bulk data .
There has to be a suspected terrorist that can only be searched .
So only a fraction of SWIFT data will be transferred and only a very small proportion of that will be accessed .
The rest will remain anonymous .
We will seek to reduce and explore the possibility of reducing and fine-tuning the definition in order to have the volume still further reduced , but there are already legally binding rules that would prevent any access to that data unless there is reasonable suspicion .
The EU review team will verify a representative sample - as I said - and if there are any breaches of the agreement , it can be immediately interrupted by the European Union .
So I think that we can act swiftly and that we can have a good agreement .
There is the security gap issue that we have to take into consideration but , of course , there are also many questions that have to be answered concerning data protection and the other issues that you have raised .
The Americans have shown a very open attitude so far .
They are ready to work with us as quickly as possible but also to be creative and to find answers to our questions .
I know that a team from the European Parliament will travel next week and you will be able to put questions and hopefully have more answers then .
The other track in parallel to this is , of course , whether we should have another solution at European level , whether we should have an EU TFTP or create some new authority .
That is a very important discussion . It needs to be explored in depth within Europe .
Of course , that will not be part of the negotiation .
We must make sure that , should this happen , the Americans will help and there will be reciprocity , but we must figure that out .
The Commission is willing to participate , to be innovative and to put forward proposals , but that is for the Member States to decide .
I know that the European Parliament is very active , and I am looking forward to having these discussions with you .
So this is a parallel discussion .
Also in parallel , there is the work done by my colleague , Vice-President Viviane Reding , who is already starting to draft a mandate for a long-term data protection agreement for all the agreements that we have with the United States .
Of course , this is also something that has to be put into the picture .
Finally , the volcano in Iceland is , of course , something that has created a lot of travel problems for many people all around the world and it makes it impossible for you to vote .
I very much deplore that , but you can be sure that - the Presidency is here , I am here , our services are here - we have taken due account of the debate .
We have seen the draft resolution and that is signed by four political groups . We will communicate that to the Ministers .
If we postpone the decision in the Council , we will lose two important weeks of negotiations .
I said earlier that the Americans are willing .
They are constructive and they want to embark on this , but it will not be easy .
It will be a difficult negotiation and we need the time .
We want to get this done as soon as possible but also as well as possible .
If we want the European Parliament to be able to vote on it before the summer recess , we must take a decision so that we can start the negotiations as soon as possible .
So please be understanding about this .
I do want to reassure you that both the Presidency and the Commission have listened extremely carefully to your views and , as the Presidency said , we will take account of the debate here and communicate it to the Ministers on Friday .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in May .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the new SWIFT mandate for the EU-US agreement as part of the terrorist financing tracking programme , especially as the Council and Commission have learnt the lesson from the past and included Parliament 's stringent demand in negotiations , which is that higher standards should be applied to data protection .
However , this transfer of financial messaging data from the EU to the US must be firmly negotiated with the US authorities .
No bulk data must be transferred and technical resources must be insisted on which can facilitate the transfer of individual data , pertaining to suspects only .
I hope that this agreement will not cause the EU any surprises in the future and that it will be clarified before signing the agreement that the EU is entitled to obtain information from the US database and that there is no possibility of data being transferred to third countries .
Furthermore , this transfer must guarantee the protection and entitlement of citizens , especially with regard to accessing and amending their data , as stipulated in national and European legislation .
Last but not least , it must be clarified that European citizens have the right to submit a complaint where their personal data is used illegally .
Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) .
Madam President , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , the Council Presidency submitted to Parliament two agreements on the use of passenger name record data , known as ' PNR agreements ' , one dating from 2007 with the United States and the other from 2008 with Australia .
We have asked Parliament to give its approval to both agreements so that they can enter into force permanently , as at the moment , they are being applied merely provisionally .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , it is for Parliament to decide whether or not to approve these agreements , which determine the conditions under which PNR data on passengers on aircraft flying from the European Union can be shared with third countries .
The Council understands Parliament 's concerns - in line with what we have just been debating - specifically on the collection and sharing of that personal data which has to do with the fact that a person is included on a flight passenger list to fly outside the EU .
The Council has therefore asked the Commission to put forward a general guideline document in this respect .
I must say that the motion for a resolution that we have seen appears to be highly appropriate and , moreover , we welcome the constructive attitude not to vote on the agreements for the time being and the fact that the motion for a resolution calls for a suitable mechanism for reviewing the agreements .
In the case of the United States , it is true that there already exists a report reviewing the way the agreement works , and the Council will state its position once the Commission has proposed and submitted its recommendations for a new agreement with the United States .
In the case of the agreement with Australia , there has not yet been a review of how well it is working .
It will be for the Commission to decide whether it will wait for such a review of the agreement before it sets out a new negotiating mandate .
When the Commission proposes new mandates for negotiations with the United States and Australia , the Council will examine them carefully .
In that respect , it will , of course , take account of Parliament 's wishes , as always .
With regard to the Council 's request to the Commission for a broader , more generic regulation on the use of PNR data , we should remember that back in 2007 , the Commission proposed a framework decision .
During the Swedish Presidency , however , the decision was made not to pursue the debates on that framework decision , since the Swedish Presidency justifiably thought that , as the Treaty of Lisbon was about to enter into force , the topic was going to be a matter for codecision with Parliament and therefore the debate had to involve Parliament .
Consequently , the Presidency cannot , at the moment , adopt a position on the content of a future general scheme for the data of passengers who are on a list to travel outside the European Union until the Commission proposes a directive on the use of such data and there is a debate with this Parliament under the codecision procedure , which is the procedure we have had since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1 December last year .
In any case , in this respect , our ideas are , to a great extent , in line and in agreement with the criteria and positions that can be deduced from Parliament 's motion for a resolution , which is just a motion for the time being .
I would like to highlight three items in it .
First , the data may only be used for the purpose for which it was obtained , which is similar to what we said before with regard to the SWIFT agreement ; secondly , the collection of such data must be in line with our data protection legislation ; and , moreover , there must be a series of guarantees and safeguards covering the transfer of such data to third countries .
These , I believe , are three important principles .
They are in the motion for a resolution and , in that respect , we agree with the motion .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the importance of collecting PNR data is acknowledged by a growing number of countries in the world , including EU Member States .
They use such data to combat terrorism and other serious crimes .
To ensure that basic principles of data protection are respected and that PNR data is only used for specific law enforcement purposes , the EU has signed agreements with a number of countries on the transfer and the use of PNR data .
Two of these agreements , with the US and Australia , are before you for consent to conclude them .
With your resolution , you propose to postpone the vote on the consent and you call upon the Commission to propose a series of requirements for all PNR agreements with third countries .
You also call upon the Commission to renegotiate these two agreements on the basis of new negotiating directives which should meet those requirements .
I think that is a wise strategy .
In your resolution , you also refer to the PNR agreement with Canada .
That agreement was linked to a set of Canadian commitments and a Commission adequacy decision .
These documents expired on 22 September last year and a new agreement should therefore be renegotiated with Canada .
For practical reasons , it was not possible to do this before September 2009 .
However , this does not diminish the level of protection of PNR data transferred to Canada .
The PNR agreement itself does not have an expiry date ; it has never been terminated and thus continues to be in force .
The Canada Border Services Agency has confirmed in a letter to the Commission , to the Council Presidency and the Member States that its commitments will remain in full effect until a new agreement is in force .
I would like to thank the rapporteur Ms Sophia in ' t Veld and the other political groups for their constructive approach on these files , under which the agreements with the US and Australia remain provisionally applicable until their renegotiation .
I will , in the meantime , propose a set of three recommendations for negotiation directives to the Council as a part of a PNR package .
The package will consist firstly of a communication on a global external PNR strategy , including a set of general requirements that any PNR agreement with a third country should observe ; secondly , two negotiating directives for the renegotiation of the US and Australia PNR agreements , and negotiating directives for a new agreement with Canada ; and , thirdly , a new Commission EU PNR proposal based on an impact assessment .
This package will take due care of your recommendations as presented in this resolution , but also in the resolutions of November 2008 .
Moreover , it will take due account of the advice of the European Data Protection Supervisor , the Article 29 Working Party on Data Protection and the national data protection authorities .
I believe it is important to present an EU PNR system at the same time as the measures to ensure coherence and consistency between the EU 's internal and external PNR policies .
In conclusion , I welcome this resolution and I will act according to these recommendations .
I am looking forward to working further with you on these issues .

Madam President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , with the analysis of Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) data , as with SWIFT , an attempt is being made to reconcile the fight against global terrorism and serious crime with the fundamental rights of all to the protection of privacy and information self-determination .
We must also be aware , however , that in this age of mobility , there cannot be adequate security in Europe and worldwide without effective and rapid data exchange .
In the digital age , we also have to ensure special protection as regards information self-determination and privacy .
I therefore also consider it essential to make a more exact distinction between data needed to fight crime and sensitive private data .
For me , there is no doubt that we must firmly integrate controls , the right of appeal , access rights , claims for damages , as well as the length of the retention period , in the agreement .
Using the push method , it should be checked whether there can or need to be exceptions in urgent cases .
As regards the use of PNR data , we should also include serious crime .
To me , that includes offences like child pornography , people trafficking , murder , rape and also drug trafficking .
In my opinion , this would also contribute to protecting the personal rights of those affected .
I think it is good that we are taking a decision on the agreement on PNR data , in order to develop a basic model for all future agreements of this sort and to recommend a negotiating framework to the Commission , so that it takes into account our own ideas on data protection .
Perhaps in future , there will also be room to consider combating terrorism and crime together with our transatlantic partners in a joint institution .
That would certainly also be a step towards confronting globalised crime on a global scale .
Madam President , there are a few basic things I would like to say about this agreement .
There are , by all means , similarities with SWIFT , but also differences .
If the European Parliament had to vote today on the Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) agreement , we would have no other option but to vote no .
That is quite clear .
There are still significant objections to this agreement .
I will go into the details once more shortly .
That is why I was not happy when we spoke about postponing the vote .
However , unlike SWIFT , there were definitely good reasons for this postponement .
Nevertheless , I will say quite clearly that , for us , it does not mean that the vote can be postponed indefinitely , so that we now have a provisional agreement for years on end .
It is very important to us that we quickly reach a new negotiating mandate and , if possible , before the summer break , so that we can quickly gain clarity in detailed questions on how we should handle this data and what data should be included .
Data protection plays an important role and here , I would like to use the opportunity to address once again the question as to what data should be transmitted .
PNR covers 19 individual pieces of data .
I know from conversations I have had that it is of course possible - if you want to - to create personality profiles from these pieces of data .
Now , of course , those with whom we have such an agreement are saying they have no interest in this , they will not do it and that relevant data is erased .
However , if certain data that could be used to create a personality profile is not used at all , then we must consider whether it should indeed be collected , or - if we reach an agreement - whether all of the data needs to be transmitted .
That is a crucial question .
We also have to check what level of protection is afforded to data that is transmitted .
We know that the regulations in both agreements with the USA and Australia are very different .
With a view to further requests by other countries that want to have similar agreements , we should ensure that every time we reach an agreement , special standards apply .
We also have to consider in detail the question of how this data is to be used .
Originally , it was always said that it was about combating terrorism .
Now however , it is also about serious crime .
This can be discussed .
However , we must go into great detail here .
We know that even within the European Union itself , legal systems and legal culture vary greatly .
This may mean that the definition of what constitutes a serious crime is completely different in terms of the type of crime .
That means we need to look again in detail at what we are discussing when we say that serious crime should also naturally be included .
I hope that in future , with the implementation of the agreement , we ensure that there is a regular exchange of information between the institutions .
The President-in-Office of the Council has indicated that there has been a first review as far as the agreement with the USA is concerned .
Officially , we still do not have these results yet .
That was in February .
In future , I would not only like to see reports being drawn up regularly , I would also like to see these reports actually being made available to the European Parliament immediately .
It is very important to create a uniform agreement .
The issue of data must be reviewed again .
However , I believe that , on the basis of the previous discussion , we will probably reach a good agreement , and I therefore view further negotiations as something entirely positive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , as rapporteur I would first of all like to thank the shadows for their excellent , pleasant and fruitful cooperation resulting in a joint resolution .
Of course , this is not the final stage , as our talks on the topic and the text will continue .
Today we consider the request for consent by the Council on the two agreements with the US and Australia .
This House has always been highly critical of the use and transfer of PNR data .
As a matter of fact , in 2004 , Parliament sought the annulment of the agreement with the US before the European Court of Justice .
It would therefore be inconsistent with our earlier positions to give consent without further ado .
However , Parliament being responsible and cooperative as always , we agree that by rejecting the two agreements , we will create legal uncertainty and practical difficulties for citizens and carriers .
So we propose instead to suspend the vote and request the Commission to develop a coherent approach to the use of PNR that is based on a single set of principles .
I am very pleased to note that the Commission and the Council have embraced this strategy and that they are committed to working fast and flexibly .
We urge the Commission in particular to submit the PNR package , as it is now dubbed , before the summer break .
Such a coherent single approach seems the pragmatic option when more and more countries are requiring the transfer of passenger data .
Then there is the lapsed PNR agreement with Canada - or whatever the legal status is , as this is not entirely clear - as well as the shelved proposal for an EU PNR .
This draft resolution sets out a number of basic principles and minimum requirements for the PNR package , and they are , as it were , our conditions for consent .
A key element or key word here is proportionality , because it must be demonstrated convincingly that the same end cannot be achieved with less intrusive means .
This is really the key to everything .
We specifically need to look at API data and ESTA in this context .
We need , for example , to distinguish very clearly between the massive collection and use of data on all passengers for the purpose of automated searches such as profiling and data mining on the one hand , and targeted searches for known suspects on the other hand , identifying people who are , for example , on a no-fly or watch list .
That is something completely different and we need to distinguish very carefully .
Secondly , there must be a clear and strict purpose limitation in line with earlier resolutions , and we insist that data be used only for law-enforcement and security purposes and on the basis of very precise definitions of what that is : organised international crime and international terrorism .
We need to make very clear what it is that we are talking about .
Any use of PNR must be in line with EU data protection standards .
It is our prime responsibility to represent the interests of our own European citizens .
They have a right to know that we uphold European law in international relations and in our internal policies .
Finally , we recognise the need to provide law-enforcement and security authorities with the necessary means to do their job in an era of unprecedented mobility , but Europe also has a duty to protect our rights and freedoms .
I believe with the forthcoming PNR package we have a unique opportunity to get it right .

Madam President , I do not want to repeat what my fellow Members quite rightly said before me , but rather make a few general remarks .
I do not know whether you have ever seen the film Minority Report .
If not , then I would recommend that you watch it .
In this film , law enforcement agencies of the future use a so-called pre-crime system to try to arrest criminals before they have committed any crime .
So-called pre-cops try to predict the future by constantly monitoring people 's feelings and manners of behaviour .
Great !
A seemingly infallible system that finally provides security .
Then the chief investigator himself is targeted and the house of cards collapses .
I do not want to irritate you just now by reviewing this great and still relevant film in even more detail , but the uncontrolled access to all passenger information of all people worldwide for the purpose of profiling and nothing else has been going on in the USA at least since 11 September 2001 .
This uncontrolled access contradicts not only all data protection regulations of the European Union , but fundamental constitutional principles , like the presumption of innocence , the right to a fair trial and the prohibition of the arbitrary abuse of power .
In our opinion , the agreements negotiated by the EU with the USA and Australia on access to Passenger Name Record data are a serious violation of European fundamental rights and provisions of the rule of law , and as the European Parliament we have mentioned this on several occasions , as Mrs in ' t Veld has already made clear .
As the European Parliament , we cannot support these , but call on the Commission and the Council to lay a new mandate on the table that puts the protection of citizens worldwide before such a pre-crime system .
Madam President , I am not an illustrious film critic , as the previous speaker is .
I would not like our debate to be a debate about cinema .
Coming back specifically to the subject of our discussion , PNR data transfer should , in fact , be something obvious .
It used to be that this data was gathered for commercial purposes , but today , it can be of good service in the fight against crime .
However , this legitimate matter has become , in some sense , an element - let us say it sincerely - of a certain interinstitutional war which has been going on between the European Parliament and the Council for years .
It is not good that a motion which , in my opinion , and the opinion of my group , is so very relevant and legitimate , was introduced by the Council independently , without any consultation with Parliament .
For in this way , what is , in fact , a judicious motion , is now automatically being opposed by those who , even though they are in favour of data transfer , want to safeguard the European Parliament as a strong institution which is governed by its own laws and has a strong political will to make joint decisions .
I have the impression that in the debate on PNR , those who support PNR data transfer are , paradoxically , in the opposing camp , because they do not like the way the Council treats Parliament .
Let us say it plainly - we know from international experience that this is not the first time this has happened .
Furthermore , even some of those who support PNR data transfer think we should , today , make a political demonstration and show the Council its place in the pecking order - in a word , to punish the Council for its arrogance .
Finally , as a Polish saying goes , in this way we are , like it or not , throwing the baby out with the bathwater .
We are , quite rightly , giving the Council a smack , but on the other hand we are , in a sense , limiting our own instruments in the fight against terrorism , the mafia and organised crime .
Madam President , in contrast to previous speakers , I would like to compliment Mr Albrecht on his comparison with the world of film .
I believe it is important from time to time to allow culture to highlight society 's criticisms and it is something we could learn from here in Parliament .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs in ' t Veld , for her commitment to the protection of privacy and the rule of law in this matter as in many others .
The other day , the Spanish Presidency said that air travel is affecting the right to free movement , which is a fundamental right .
That is something we should bear in mind today as we discuss PNR , because the intention behind the use of PNR data is to decide who has the right to fly and who does not have that right .
Naturally , this affects our rights - not only the right to free movement , but also those under signed international conventions on our political and civil rights .
The aim of the EU and of internal mobility is to make borders disappear and for the EU to result in greater freedom of movement .
It does this for certain people , but for asylum seekers , refugees and so on - the bulk of whom are , in fact , women and children - the decision concerns whether or not they have the right to be allowed to fly .
This can be a matter of life and death for these people .
It is therefore important that we here in Parliament and in the Commission really look closely at how PNR data will be used .
It concerns freedom of movement , but it also concerns international conventions and our civil rights .
( MT ) I would like to make three brief comments .
First of all , we have just been talking about the SWIFT agreement and we said that it taught us certain lessons .
I believe that one such lesson was learnt by Parliament , namely that greater power brings about greater responsibility .
I believe that the strategy adopted by Parliament on the PNR agreement demonstrates that even Parliament understood that it has more power and therefore needs to shoulder greater responsibility .
This is something that we would do well to emphasise .
Secondly , is this agreement important or not ?
In my opinion , it is very important indeed .
Our fight against terrorism is important for our citizens ' security and we carry great responsibility in this regard .
Should an incident occur , our citizens will turn to us and ask , ' What did you do in order to safeguard our security ? '
My third point : Does this agreement raise issues on data protection and citizens ' privacy ?
I believe that yes , it does , and it raises certain concerns that we need to address in detail so as to be able to reach an agreement that can guarantee and safeguard citizens ' interests , especially concerning their privacy .
Therefore , I believe that the resolution before us is good and well balanced .
It clearly demonstrates what Parliament wants to achieve with respect to this agreement , in its bid to prove that we are exercising our powers with responsibility .
Therefore , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur of this resolution for her work on this dossier .

( NL ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) data is very similar to the one we have just held on SWIFT .
Basically , we are talking about the quest for a healthy , acceptable balance between security and the protection of privacy .
Both are important , of course , and a careful balance needs to be struck between them .
The problems in European aviation over recent days have demonstrated once more the essential role played by passenger and freight transport in the organisation of today 's society .
Just about everyone will travel by air sooner or later .
Therefore , it is unacceptable for us to have dozens of items of data continually transferred and updated , often completely unwittingly , without there being cast-iron guarantees to prevent abuse ; particularly as , for example , the US authorities already use a wide variety of information sources for a very long time to assess whether or not a person is suspicious , ranging from his or her visa application to check-in procedures at the airport .
A few weeks ago , I was able to see for myself in the PNR centre in Washington how a whole team is working round the clock to reduce an initial rough list of approximately 5 000 people each day to a small list of a handful of people to be denied access to US territory .
Evidently , only an administrative appeal is possible against such a ban on entering US territory .
It is clear that this flow of data must remain confined within certain limits and that the minimum conditions set out in the resolution must be laid down , such as restricting the use of this data to the detection of terrorism and international crime .
I agree with my fellow Members who have said that this must indeed be well defined , that all of this must , of course , be in keeping with the European data protection standards , and that this also applies when transferring data to further third countries where applicable .
In my opinion , we also need to provide rather more clarity regarding the ' sensitive ' PNR data , as I believe quite a few things are open to interpretation in this regard .
Therefore , I support the proposed postponement , so as to enable a new negotiating mandate to be presented , sooner rather than later , that takes account of our questions .
I take note of the constructive position of the Council and the Commission and , like my fellow Members , expect to see more clarity by the summer months .
( NL ) The tension has indeed eased a little , ladies and gentlemen .
Mrs in ' t Veld has drawn up a splendid resolution , one that is embraced by the Commission and the Council .
That is excellent in itself , and I agree with her : I think it very prudent to state at this juncture that we are drawing up a single clear guideline for all future Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) agreements that takes account of proportionality , which means transferring only the data truly and strictly necessary for the intended purpose , namely combating terrorism , and to make clear that this is the one and only objective .
This guideline must also make provision for reciprocity and provide that data cannot be stored for years to come , that time limits are indeed set , and that we stand by our fundamental rights .
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has now been declared binding , and so that , too , will have to be reflected in such PNR agreements .
Therefore , it strikes me as the right time to submit this to the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights in Vienna , and I should like to ask this of the Commission .
There is one other thing we should take into account , which is that it has now become customary for citizens to communicate with a foreign state - in this case , often the United States - via an enterprise , namely an airline , that has nothing to do with it , should not actually need certain of my details , and should not be trying to play this mediating role .
Something needs to be done about this .
( DE ) Madam President , freedom over the clouds , as the singer-songwriter Reinhard Mey once sang , will come to an abrupt end with the agreement with the USA on the retrieval of Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) data .
In August , a member of our group staff experienced first hand the effects the restriction of this freedom is already having .
Since the US authorities had put his name on their terror watch lists , the aircraft in which he was flying was not allowed to cross US air space .
As we all know in this House , this had considerable disadvantages and it was later revealed that there had been a misunderstanding .
Today , US authorities are already receiving a wide variety of data - credit card numbers , booking data , seating preferences , special food preferences , IP addresses and passenger information - without clear data protection regulations .
I would like to say quite clearly that we reject that , as well as the bulk transfer of data relating to flying , referred to as PNR , as it now is to be developed .
We cannot support it as it is currently formulated , because it is not for a specific purpose , and it is not proportionate or useful .
Finally , I would like to say that we must not allow the emergence of proactive risk analyses of patterns of travel and behaviour .
We need disclosure regulations like the USA 's privacy act .
These must be opened to European citizens .
The way to legal action must likewise stand open to them .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , I too would firstly like to make a short comparison with the SWIFT debate .
I was quite delighted to hear the representative of the Council talk of dedicated objectives in negotiations for this new SWIFT agreement .
I am therefore quite surprised by the sort of effect and power the Treaty of Lisbon and the statement by Parliament have had on the Council , which now wants to champion the interests of Europe .
I hope that we experience the same momentum now when we are talking about Passenger Name Record data , and that here there is also a commitment to fighting on behalf of European interests .
Secondly , I would like to say that I believe we all agree that from the point of view of legal certainty for both airlines and citizens , when it is a question of data protection rights , such agreements make sense .
The standards that we want have been set out clearly in the joint resolution .
Thirdly , I would like to mention a point that is not directly connected with the agreements , but definitely relates to the subject , in other words , the debate in the Council as to whether we also need or should develop a European PNR system .
The last major terror threat in Europe was the Detroit case when an attacker boarded a plane and wanted to fly to Detroit .
That happened last year before Christmas .
In this case , we learned that in the United Kingdom , we knew that this person was a threat .
However , those who decided whether he could fly or not did not have the necessary information to hand .
What I want to say here is that I believe that in the European Union , the problem is not whether there is enough data available .
I believe that we already know who poses a threat .
The problem is getting the data to where we need it in order to prevent threats .
In Toledo , the Spanish Presidency proposed - and I am grateful for this - that we strengthen the networking of counter terrorism authorities in Europe .
Unfortunately , this proposal was not taken up by the European interior ministers .
Instead , there was the proposal to build new data sets and gather new data .
It often seems to me that for the interior ministers , collecting new data is the easy option .
I would firstly ask you to attend to the networking of the authorities involved ; then we would achieve a lot in the fight against terror .
( SL ) I firmly believe that all Members of the European Parliament are aware of the importance of timely and accurate information in ensuring the safety of their many journeys .
Today , as we face air traffic chaos , the scale of the daily movement of passengers is much more obvious to us all .
Unfortunately , the financial losses of many airlines bear a rather obvious testament to that because of the missed flights and the crowds that have been and are still waiting for a seat on the first available flight .
I hope now that we will soon be able to fly safely again .
Any passenger who travels by aeroplane discloses their data explicitly only to the authorities responsible for combating terrorism and organised crime .
I have no quarrel with that .
If I voluntarily post details of when and where I am travelling on Twitter , then I do not mind such information being used in ensuring day-to-day air traffic security .
What I do object to , however , is the fact that PNR agreements do not set predetermined conditions and criteria for all countries equally , that they do not specify the data we need to disclose and that we do not know the exact purposes for which such data will be used by the authorities .
My question to you is as follows : can we expect to be given a mandate to negotiate a new agreement on the transfer of data records before or during the summer ?
Furthermore , will all agreements between the European Union and individual countries that wish to enter into them be model agreements and agreements with equal , high and clear standards for the use and protection of data ?
What action will you take to prevent PNR data being used in the profiling and definition of risk factors ?
The point I wish to make is that any possibility of allowing personality profiling based on ethnic origin , nationality , religion , sexual orientation , sex , age or health is unacceptable .
To this , I would like to add that no data collection system is sufficient in itself .
We cannot prevent attempted terrorist attacks without sound data exchange and cooperation of the intelligence services .
A very good reminder of that was the failed attack on the aeroplane flying to Detroit around Christmas last year .
What we need , above all , is to use efficiently the instruments we already have in the fight against terrorism and , in particular , better cooperation .
To conclude , I definitely do not want to say ' no ' to an agreement that would offer security to us all , citizens of the EU .
Still less do I want to see our fundamental privacy rights being violated .
However , it is right that any intrusion into our privacy should be balanced with security and efficiency of measures and with the protection of human rights .
( DE ) Madam President , today we have before us the second dossier of an agreement with the USA that is beset with huge problems in matters of data protection .
That actually brings me to the confirmation of the proposal by our European Data Protection Supervisor , Mr Hustinx , who said that it would make sense to once and for all negotiate and conclude a comprehensive transatlantic framework agreement on data protection .
That would be a rewarding task for both sides and would help us in many ways .
In general it is clear that we have completely different concepts of security here and on the other side of the Atlantic .
As the European Parliament , we must also ensure that our Commission does not merely accept what the USA proposes , but brings our standards into these negotiations with a sense of proportion and on an equal footing .
Therefore , a definition of the term ' serious crime ' is vital .
Clear correction of data must be possible .
For us , data protection must be activated , otherwise this agreement is a non-starter .

( PT ) Mr López Garrido , Mrs Malmström , we have shown our concern about the transfer of PNR data to the United States .
Such data may be kept for years after the safety checks have been carried out , and there is no legal protection for anyone who is not a US citizen .
The agreements we have concluded with both Australia and Canada have always been more acceptable and more in line with the principle of proportionality , as they allow for limited access in scope , in time and in the number of details , as well as oversight by a judicial authority .
I agree that general principles and rules should be laid down as a basis for making any agreements with third countries .
We may , in fact , see an avalanche of similar requests from other countries whose traditions regarding data protection and respect for human rights give greater cause for concern .
In addition , if we want true reciprocity , we will have to consider creating a single system for the European Union that involves Europol throughout the process .
Mr López Garrido , Mrs Malmström , in my opinion , any agreement will only be acceptable if guarantees of a suitable level of data protection are given , respecting the principles of necessity and proportionality and the EU rules in force .
It is also vital to ensure that only the ' push ' method is used ; in other words , the data must be supplied by us and not automatically drawn out by bodies in third countries that are given access to our databases .
I therefore support the joint proposal by the rapporteur Mrs in ' t Veld and the political groups to postpone the vote on Parliament 's consent , so as to give more time for the negotiations to meet the concerns that we have expressed here .
( RO ) The protection of personal data is one of the fundamental rights of European citizens .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens previous provisions thanks to the legal and mandatory nature of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Any personal data must be processed in accordance with Directives 46 / 1995 , 58 / 2002 and 24 / 2006 .
In fact , the European Parliament requests that any international agreement concerning personal data be signed subject to the signatories having in force similar provisions to those contained in the directives mentioned above .
In the information society and particularly during the development of the broadband communication infrastructure , the Data Storage Centre and the Data Processing Centre can be situated in different locations or even different countries .
This is why we are asking that any international agreement concerning personal data stipulates the requirement for personal data to be stored and processed only in locations which have similar legal provisions to those contained in European legislation .
One last point , Madam President : how can European citizens give their consent and , in particular , under what conditions ?
Madam President , I would like to make three comments by way of a conclusion on our part in this important debate .
The first concerns the point raised by Mr Weber as to whether Europe can or should have its own passenger name record data system , and what scope it might have .
We are in favour of there actually being a general regulation on the transfer of passenger - essentially air passenger - data .
We have therefore asked the Commission to carry out a study and , if appropriate , to prepare a draft directive laying down a general regulation in that respect including - as Mrs in ' t Veld 's motion for a resolution states - a privacy impact assessment .
That is to say , to what extent do effectiveness and proportionality , two principles that we have to take into account , impact on privacy and , therefore , how far should a European regulation go in this respect and what measures ought to be adopted in any case to protect fundamental rights ?
That is what Mrs Fayot mentioned : what measures ought to be adopted ?
I think the debate we had on SWIFT may clarify matters .
I believe the principles we discussed then and agreed upon should be present here .
We are talking about the right to privacy , the right to a private life , the right to one 's person and one 's own image , which must always be preserved .
Fundamental rights are indivisible , and in this case we are dealing with something that could jeopardise fundamental rights , so I believe we have to act with the same care that we talked about in the previous debate .
Lastly , my third comment is connected with the previous one .
As a general thought , it does not seem to me that security and freedom are two opposed principles or , in other words , that it is a kind of zero-sum game and that as we provide greater security , we will have less freedom , or as we give greater protection to fundamental rights and freedoms and are fundamentalist in protecting our fundamental rights , we will have less security .
I think that is a false dilemma .
On the contrary , I believe that security and freedom are two principles that enhance each other .
Both principles are therefore expressed and recognised in constitutions and in European legislation , and they are both present in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must always bear in mind that there is a Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Treaty of Lisbon , a charter requiring respect for fundamental rights , which is absolutely sacred and must not be violated .
I believe , therefore , that , when we think beyond the short term - because sometimes our thinking is very constrained by the short term - and think about the long term , the measures designed to protect our security , if prudent and well thought out , always prove to be effective .
Protecting rights and freedoms is always something that improves citizens ' well-being and , in the end , their security as well .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , yes , I have seen the film Minority Report .
It is a good and interesting film , quite scary , and this is not what we are trying do with this .
I think this has been a very interesting and constructive debate and I agree that there are similarities with the SWIFT or TFTP discussions .
It is about fighting serious organised crime and terrorism , but it is also about how we protect the privacy of the individual .
It raises questions of data protection , of proportionality , clarification of the purposes , definitions , legal certainties , etc .
The negotiations on the TFTP with our American friends will also give us important experiences that we can bring into the PNR discussions .
It will help us further clarify the thinking of the European Union and get closer on this , which I think will be helpful .
I think the TFTP work we have been doing so far between the three institutions has given us experiences on how we can work together - the Council , Parliament and the Commission - on these extremely difficult and sensitive issues .
Hopefully , we will have good results .
I have listened carefully to the debate .
I have read your resolution .
I think it is a very balanced and wise resolution .
As I said , we will start working immediately based on that and I am looking forward to good cooperation and discussions with you in working on this .
As you know , I had already promised Parliament during the course of my hearing that I would carry out an overview of all the anti-terrorist measures we have at our disposal in the European Union - to identify them , have a list of them and discuss them with Parliament - and also of the overall architecture of all our data information and sharing systems , so that we have this in our mind when we start our work .
I think this is important and I think it will increase the transparency and depth of our discussions .
Thank you , Commissioner , for this collaboration ; I hope it will be fruitful .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in May .
Ban on use of cyanide mining technologies ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Mr Áder and Mr Tőkés , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , on the ban on the use of cyanide mining technologies - B7-0206 / 2010 ) .
author . - ( HU ) Fellow Members , very important decisions have been taken in the European Union over the past few years aimed at protecting our environment .
I would mention just the decision regarding biodiversity or the Water Framework Directive .
The EU 's Water Framework Directive makes Member States responsible for protecting water quality and preventing pollution .
Is this a worthy goal ?
Yes , it is .
Is it our responsibility to do everything we can in order to reach this goal ?
Clearly it is .
Are there any mining technologies that endanger our waters and our environment ?
Unfortunately , there are .
Moreover , there is one extremely dangerous and , at the same time , obsolete technology in particular .
Along with quite a few fellow Members , I would like this technology to be banned throughout the European Union .
The cyanide disaster on the Tisza River ten years ago , as well as accidents that have occurred since then , also serve as reminders of this problem .
Ladies and gentlemen , the present moment is one that is both fortunate and pressing .
Fortunate , because according to the information received from the Commission , today only three countries still use this cyanide-based mining technology , and it is fortunate also because there are three other countries that have banned cyanide mining technology , thus setting an example for the other EU Member States .
At the same time , it is also pressing since , on account of the rising price of gold , there are plans to open new mines throughout Europe using this dangerous and obsolete technology .
This represents a serious threat to our environment .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we are serious about the need to protect our waters , we cannot create cyanide-poisoned lakes alongside our rivers and lakes .
Yet this is the result of this obsolete technology .
If we are serious about safeguarding biodiversity , we cannot allow the use of technologies that can kill all forms of life in our rivers , from micro-organisms to crabs and fish .
The time is ripe , distinguished fellow Members , to take action .
Let us not wait for a new catastrophe to warn us of this .
Finally , please allow me to thank all those fellow Members who are present and those who will participate in the debate , but who are unable to be here due to the eruption of the volcano , who have done a lot to help prepare this proposal for a decision , and thanks to whom we were able to present this House with a joint proposal for a text that is the fruit of compromise and that is supported not only by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) but also the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the European Conservatives and Reformists .
I believe that , given the seriousness of the matter , this is absolutely justified .
I would ask my fellow Members to continue their support through the final stage of the decision-making process .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , my colleague , Commissioner Piebalgs excuses himself .
Unfortunately , he cannot be here with you today , so he has entrusted me with the task of taking this debate with you .
Thank you for this opportunity to explain the Commission 's position on the use of cyanide for gold extraction in the European Union .
First , as the honourable Member knows , we have had a careful and very comprehensive study of the dramatic accident and the causes of it at Baia Mare in Romania in 2000 when a dam retaining toxic substances broke .
The conclusions of that study were taken on board when the European Union adopted in 2006 a specific directive on the management of extracted waste .
The deadline for Member States to transpose this was only two years ago and it is still regarded as an up-to-date , proportionate and appropriate approach to the risk of using cyanide .
The directive includes several requirements to improve the safety of extractive waste management facilities and limit their impact on the environment .
Explicit and precise requirements are set on the construction and the management of waste facilities which have to be operated using the ' best available technique ' concept .
A full accident prevention policy is required for the facilities in which toxic substances are treated or stored .
Emergency plans to be used in case of accidents must be established , not only by the operator but also by the competent authorities .
Clear information requirements are included in the directive if trans-boundary impacts are expected .
This legislation also incorporates requirements for the closure of extraction facilities , and for after closure .
It includes the obligation to set up an underwritten financial guarantee for each installation before the beginning of the operation .
The directive includes strict maximum limit values of cyanide concentration before this substance is stored in ponds for remaining residues to be broken down by oxidation , sunlight or bacteria .
In practice , in order to meet the strict limit values , it is necessary to install specific equipment destroying most of the cyanide before its storage in the pond .
To our best knowledge , unfortunately , no adequate alternatives to cyanide use for gold extraction exist on the market .
In most European deposits , gold is bound with other metals meaning that a separation method is required .
A total cyanide ban would imply stopping European extraction and consequently increase gold imports , often from countries with lower environmental and social standards .
Nevertheless , the Commission is following technology development in the sector and , if alternative techniques emerge in the coming years , the debate might very well be reopened .
In the meantime , a good implementation of this directive is essential to guarantee the safety of these facilities and minimise the risk associated with their management .
Let me also point out that Member States are responsible for deciding on whether to open gold mines on their territories .
The Commission 's role is to ensure full implementation of the directive and good implementation and enforcement is a priority .
Under the directive , the Member States are bound to provide the Commission with information on implementation no later than 2012 and we , in turn , are obliged to analyse and report on this basis .
That will obviously be the right time for us to assess the effectiveness of this approach and if , at that point , the current approach were found to be ineffective , we should not rule out the possibility of an outright ban .
In conclusion , I would like to insist on the importance of ensuring high waste-recycling rates and improved resource efficiency in the extraction sector .
Even without considering the use of cyanide , mining for gold is far from kind to the environment .
To extract 1 g of gold , it is necessary to move and treat , on average , 5 000 kg of ore .
The same amount can be obtained through the recycling of approximately 5 kg of old mobile phones .
This example illustrates the importance of increasing the separate collection and recycling of waste - in this case , electronic and electrical waste which can contain gold and other similar precious metals .
This is why resource efficiency is a priority for this Commission .

Madam President , I am pleased that Commissioner Malmström is here , but in this case , I would rather have seen her colleague Mr Potočnik , the responsible Commissioner , because this problem is for him to solve .
I would like to say first of all that Europe produces 0.73 % of the world 's gold and that gold is currently being mined in Bulgaria , Finland , Hungary , Italy , Romania and Sweden .
Not all use these dangerous cyanide technologies .
I would also like to point out that the task force that was set up to investigate the accident in Baia Mare has established that the plant design was unsuitable for the storage and disposal of mine waste , that the authorisation of this design was not checked by the supervisory authorities and that there was insufficient monitoring of the damming and plant operation , so there were many mistakes on the part of the plant operator .
As the Commissioner has correctly established , we have learned from this accident .
However , I believe the Commission should draw further conclusions in view of this very dangerous technology .
Since , to my knowledge , the alternative technologies that are on the market do not yet offer the results that we actually want , we should also consider what we can do in the area of research and development , to secure the future of gold production , but also to guarantee plant safety .
On many occasions , Europe has committed itself to adhering to high environmental protection standards .
I would remind you of the Water Framework Directive that clearly aims to prevent these hazards , but also commitments in the area of biodiversity .
Therefore , I ask you , Mrs Malmström , to pass on to Commissioner Potočnik our clear demand that progress be made in the area of gold production on the part of the Commission , the European legislator .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament unreservedly supports the ban on the use of cyanide mining technologies , because I would like to call the Commissioner 's attention to the fact that it is not enough for the Commission to act after the event .
Unfortunately , in European environmental protection - and , in particular , in the Committee on Petitions - there are numerous examples where environmental pollution begins and continues without us being able to prevent it ; therefore the European Union must henceforth make prevention its aim .

My colleagues , Mr Áder and Mr Seeber , also referred to the cyanide disaster at the mine in Baia Mare .
When we are urging a ban on the use of cyanide in mining , in gold mining , we are doing so based on the experience of a specific , very sad environmental catastrophe .
With regard to the current investment at Roşia Montană , the plans involve an exponentially larger gold mine .
There are numerous problems surrounding the investment .
There is no guarantee that the surface extraction accompanying the investment will not transform the landscape .
A great deal of poison will be released into the environment .
The expected lifetime of the mine is only 20 years , and it will create scarcely any jobs .
There is no guarantee that the investor will restore the environment after the mining is finished .
For all these reasons , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , are not only launching the initiative but are also asking the Commission to draw up legislation by 2010 or 2011 definitively banning the use of cyanide in mining within the European Union , because environmental pollution does not stop at national borders .
Even if a few countries ban the use of cyanide in gold mining , this is useless if we do not solve the problem at EU level .
Madam President , this is a very important topic that we are debating , because cyanide is an exceptionally dangerous substance .
We do not accept what the Commission representative has said about there being no safe techniques .
We consider that the three current investment plans to mine gold using cyanide in Greece should be dealt with by banning this technique .
In Evros , in Rodopi and in Halkidiki , there has been strong reaction from the local communities and the Supreme Administrative Court in Greece , the Council of State , has handed down decisions .
The threat of the involvement of the International Monetary Fund , as a result of the crisis in my country , is causing fears of possible pressure to relax legislation to protect the environment and controls .
There are practices and experiences from other countries with tragic results .
In Greece , the dangers come from the exploitation of gold in Bulgaria , which is the Evros catchment basin .
Also , there is the question of the Turkish shores and the related threats to the Aegean .
There are also similar plans in other countries .
However , Hungary , as we already know , decided just last December to ban all cyanide-based mining work .
There should also be support from European legislation , with a full ban and the simultaneous creation of a safety network for economically vulnerable countries such as Greece .
We are calling for the weak legislation of the European Union to become more decisive and for different levels in permitted pollutants for each Member State to be abolished .

Madam President , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I wish to say that we consider the matter to be extremely serious ; it needs immediate action and this is no time for obstruction .
The Commission and the position which it is maintaining are relaxed and the directive is full of holes and does not prevent the dangers to which other members referred .
The importance and the repercussions of the use of cyanide in metal mining are well documented and we have seen what happened in Romania .
One member referred earlier to mining programmes being prepared at present in Greece .
When I asked the Commission about the creation of cyanide-based gold mines in Bulgaria , the Commission 's reply increased my fears and the need for this legislation to be stricter and to be applied more decisively .
We are certain that citizens will obviously react , but we too must act .
We therefore join our voice with everyone calling for a complete ban on the use of cyanide in metal mining and every country should commit to such a ban , as Hungary did recently .
The representatives of EU bodies often like to place great emphasis publicly on protecting the health of our citizens and protecting nature and the environment .
It is therefore striking that European regulations are almost suspiciously inconsistent when it comes to the use of a highly toxic chemical substance , cyanide , in the mining of precious metals .
It is well-known among professionals that cyanide is one of the most toxic of all chemical substances .
It gets into the organism by inhalation through undamaged skin or after use .
At sufficient concentrations , death follows in a few seconds or minutes .
The arguments of mining companies that they can ensure conditions for gold mining that will prevent the risk of damage to health or the environment have always proved worthless .
Sometimes , there is human error and sometimes nature springs a surprise .
This can be seen from dozens of serious accidents all over the world , which have resulted in the extensive destruction of nature , harm to health and also loss of life .
Let us recall just a few from recent years : Summitville in Colorado , Carson Hill in California , Brewer in South Carolina , Harmony in South Africa , Omai in Guyana , Gold Quarry in Nevada , Zortman-Landusky in Montana , Kumtor in Kyrgyzstan , Homestake in South Dakota , Placer in the Philippines , Baia Mare in Romania and Tolukuma in Papua New Guinea .
In all of these places , both the inhabitants and nature paid dearly for the greed of the modern-day gold diggers , facilitated by the indifference of the authorities .
Commissioner , the time has come to show the people of the EU what really matters to you : the environment and people 's health and lives , or the profits of mining companies .
( RO ) We must agree that the ban on the use of cyanide in mining will become a priority issue for the environment not only in Romania , but throughout the whole of Europe as well .
More than 25 major accidents and discharges have occurred worldwide between 1998 and 2006 , making it increasingly obvious that cyanide has been posing a constant hazard to the environment for decades .
These mining accidents raise a number of questions about practices and the application of regulations governing the management of cyanide , even if the companies involved are well-meaning .
In addition , the difficulty in managing the transport , storage and use of cyanide , combined with shortcomings in operating and maintaining tailing ponds , not to mention bad weather , can result in explosive situations , with a devastating impact on the environment .
There are alternatives to the use of cyanide in mining , but they are not promoted by the mining industry , even though regulations are applied at European Union level to actively promote new emerging technologies which are safe .
In November 2005 , MEPs and Member States adopted the Mining Waste Directive .
This directive is an ineffective legislative instrument , resulting from great pressure exerted by the mining industry and concerns expressed by the countries in Central and Eastern Europe with regard to waiving any request and responsibility for cleaning up old , abandoned mining sites .
Some of the loopholes in the directive become obvious if we consider that it does not , for instance , refer to cyanide emissions in air .
Let us take the example of the Roşia Montană mining development in Alba County .
If operations get under way , it is estimated that 134.2 kg of cyanide will be emitted into the air every day , which will happen every day of normal operation .
This means an annual volume of 48 983 kg of emissions or 783 728 kg over the mine 's 16-year operating life .
In addition , there is not even any European legislation on air quality for such emissions .
In this context , it is our moral duty to future generations , and in keeping with the global trends on banning the use of cyanide in mining , to support this legislative proposal .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , at a time when we are marking the tenth anniversary of a large-scale environmental catastrophe involving the escape of cyanide into European rivers from a Romanian gold mine , we are voting on a resolution in which we demand an EU-wide ban on the extraction of gold through the use of cyanide .
This is an extremely dangerous technique , not only in case of accidents , which threaten wide areas , but also because it imposes an environmental burden in the course of extraction which can no longer be tolerated .
For every tonne of rock contaminated with a highly toxic material , which is broken down only with great difficulty in the environment , only a few grams of gold are extracted .
At the same time , very many tonnes of this toxic rock are created .
Moreover , the objections of most foreign mine owners to our activities are unfounded , since there are other , safer , if rather more expensive , methods of extraction .
I would like to ask for your support in the vote on our joint resolution , through which we call on the European Commission to ban the cyanide-based technology within the EU from 2012 , and also for both the Commission and the Member States not to support mining projects using cyanide within the EU or in third countries .
The ban is already applied today in the Czech Republic , Germany and Hungary , and other countries should also ban this mining technique .
I consider it essential for mining companies to have mandatory insurance cover against damages caused through accidents , including the cost of restoring areas affected by accidents to their original state .
I would like to end by emphasising that the insignificant profits obtained through the cheaper extraction of gold using cyanide cannot relieve us of the responsibility for a functioning ecosystem and for conserving the ecosystem for future generations .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , after Chernobyl , we all understand the nuclear risk .
In 2000 , however , the second biggest environmental disaster in the history of Europe - perhaps even in the history of the world - was caused by the accident at Baia Mare in Romania , to which numerous members have referred .
One hundred thousand cubic metres of water with very high concentrations of cyanide and other heavy metals leaked from a gold mine into the Tisza River and from there into the Danube , affecting Hungary and Serbia , as well as Romania , killing tens of thousands of fish and poisoning the drinking water .
The contamination of the food chain in the areas directly affected was long term .
Hungary reported 1 367 tonnes of dead fish .
Over 100 persons , mainly children , were poisoned from eating contaminated fish and were treated immediately .
Nonetheless , not only does gold mining involving the use of cyanide solvents continue , not only is it not banned at European level ; on the contrary , the investments in question are subsidised by the Member States and the European Union .
Mining is continuing or is being planned in Sweden , Finland , Slovakia , Romania , Bulgaria and Greece , while it is banned by law in Hungary and the Czech Republic and by case-law in Germany .
The time when we sacrificed the local environment and our citizens ' health for jobs is long gone .
Even the economic viability of this particular activity would collapse if the principle of prevention and the ' polluter pays ' principle were applied .
Every economic activity is welcome , provided that it is in keeping with environmental protection and protection of our citizens ' health .
However , when we use cyanide , we expose both the environment and our citizens ' health to irreparable danger .
Commissioner Malmström , are you in a position to assure us that we shall have adequate and strong legislation and that Baia Mare will not be repeated this time in Sweden , Finland , Bulgaria or Greece ?
I call on the Commission to prove that it honours the undertakings which it made just two months ago before the European Parliament .
I add my voice to those of the local communities which are the first to suffer the consequences and join in the fight by environmental movements , while calling for an immediate ban on the use of cyanide in gold mining inside the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , Commission , the gold is sitting there ; it cannot escape .
What we are being called upon to debate is when , how and with what environmental impact we decide to mine it .
If an investment is implemented with the use of cyanide , the repercussions are irreversible , because the gold is gone and the slurry , which contains dangerous toxic cyanides , as the directive itself admits , remains in large quantities in the mining area .
This issue does not only concern the Member States in question , because there are also Member States downstream whose installations are sited on rivers .
The existing directive has one disadvantage : the financial guarantee provided for does not cover all the repercussions in the event of an accident , especially after the installations in question have shut down .
Consequently , the basic ' polluter pays ' principle is being infringed , especially given that the companies using this technique are basically outside Europe and , once mining has finished , they get out their handkerchief and wave goodbye to us .
Therefore , we need to seriously re-examine alternative mining methods and reinstate the basic ' polluter pays ' principle , with full and reliable insurance cover in the event of an accident , from now and for as long as these dangerous substances remain trapped in the earth .
Until these preconditions apply , I believe that there should be a complete ban on this technology , which will probably motivate companies to carry out serious research into alternative , less polluting techniques because , if you have a cheap method and do not pay for the pollution it causes , you have no reason to research alternatives .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I decided to speak on the topic in hand because I followed in detail events surrounding the prospecting and opening of the Mokrsko and Kašperské Hory deposits in the Czech Republic , where finely dispersed gold was to have been extracted through cyanidation .
At that time , in the mid-1990s , we considered the environmental impact of the chemical substances used and the fact that cyanidation involves processing huge volumes of ore , in addition to which there were the harmful effects not only of the cyanide but also of the substances used for so-called de-cyanidation , which are chlorine and calcium oxide .
There is also the further compelling fact that harmful accompanying elements can be mobilised through the use of these processes .
These elements especially include arsenic , which is highly hazardous and is often contained in arsenic pyrite , a very frequent accompanying mineral .
In many cases , I am personally a supporter of mining as a necessary precondition for technological progress , but where the cyanidation of gold ore deposits is concerned , I oppose this technology and I am delighted that , in 2000 , an amendment of the Mining Act in the Czech Republic excluded it from the permissible methods of treating gold .
In view of the major risks connected with cyanidation , it would be a good thing to exclude this technology , not only in the EU but also worldwide . This is because the risks of cyanidation are disproportionately high in third world countries in particular , where there are lower levels of environmental protection .
Commissioner , are you sure that new alternative technologies and new kinds of separation and flotation separation have been properly considered ?
( SK ) First , I would like to thank the initiators , namely Mr Áder and Mr Tőkés , for raising this very serious issue .

I would like to support as strongly as possible the draft resolution on a general ban on cyanide technologies in mining throughout the European Union .
Anyone who experienced and saw the results of the environmental catastrophe caused by the failure of the technology in Baia Mare , and the subsequent release of toxic cyanide effluents into water courses , with far-reaching effects on fauna in the Tisza River in Hungary , as well as the Danube in Bulgaria , would do everything possible to ensure that something similar could never happen again in the European Union .
My own country , Slovakia , was seriously affected by the catastrophe , since it took place along our borders .
Moreover , there is a similar threat in Slovakia from the reopening of several old mines for precious metals , where the use of cyanide technology is under consideration due to the low concentrations of the precious metals .
It would be completely mistaken and incorrect to characterise this process as a bilateral affair between two Member States of the EU .
I hope that the Commission will take a rather more determined position than the one shown here by the Commissioner .
Through the adoption of the resolution , we must stand up for a general and broad defence of European values in our environmental policy .
( RO ) I would like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for the balanced position which she presented in opening this debate .
Technologies which use cyanide are hazardous .
However , there are also other technologies which are just as hazardous , for instance , the production of nuclear technology .
There are regulations , standards and norms in place to prevent accidents .
We do not need to apply a ban ; we simply have to observe the rules .
The resolution mentions 30 accidents over the last 25 years .
It does not specify how many of them occurred in Europe because there have been very few , mainly in countries which were not members of the European Union at the time of the accident .
In fact , the Commission tightened up the regulations as a result of the unfortunate accident which occurred in 2000 .
Cyanide technology is used to obtain a variety of products , including even pharmaceutical products and vitamins .
The resolution only discusses mining and , specifically , gold production .
Why ?
The reason is that the problem is not actually with cyanide but with gold .
Not only is there a request to ban this technology , but also to halt ongoing projects by the date of the supposed ban .
The only future project I am aware of in Europe involving the mining of gold is in Romania .
Fellow Members , I would like to ask you to read the resolution text closely ; in particular , statements such as ' heavy rain in the future will increase the risk of leaks ' or ' the mining industry offers few job opportunities and only then with limited prospects of 16 years ' or ' human negligence may occur because some Member States are incapable of enforcing the legislation ' .
I do not think that such statements have any place in a European Parliament text .
This is why , fellow Members , please weigh up both the reasons for and consequences of voting against a resolution which diminishes our credibility before the Commission and reduces the chance of the motions for resolutions approved in the European Parliament being taken into consideration not only in the current case , but also in general .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the use of cyanide compounds in the mining industry is obviously an issue which no one can be indifferent to .
We are aware of the legal measures which the European Union has adopted .
They convey a clear message : we must continue to guarantee a high level of protection for people 's health and the environment through the use of appropriate resources , structures , control mechanisms and management systems .
Continuing to mobilise public opinion in Europe is also part of our mission .
However , when this is done by playing on people 's fears and using the environmental card to protect interests of another kind , the stance adopted completely loses its merit .
According to SRE Consulting 's report , the majority of cyanide compounds currently used on an industrial scale are used for the purposes of the chemical industry and the surface treatment of metals .
This means that , even though we ban their use in the mining of gold , they will continue to be used for other purposes and our ban will not result in a significant decrease in their use as a whole .
I totally support the absolute need to evaluate the impact on the environment and for both operators and control authorities in our countries to exercise preliminary and subsequent control .
At present , my country , Bulgaria , does not have an explicit ban on the use of cyanide compounds in the mining of gold .
In this case , the use of other technologies , especially during the current crisis , has not proved to be more effective .
This does not mean that we are making compromises , but that we are listening to the voice of reason and not going to extremes .
This is why the bridge connecting one group of people opposed to any ban to the group of people holding a different view passes through you .
This is a bridge which , I urge you , we must not burn .
Mr President , I agree that tailings dams such as the one that caused the accident in Baia Mare in 2000 should not be created .
Finland is a big gold producer by European standards .
The new mine in Kittilä is the biggest in Europe with a yearly production of 5 000 kg of gold .
Now we have to remember one scientific fact ; gold does not dissolve in liquids other than cyanide .
Therefore , the extraction process in Kittilä also involves cyanide , but in closed processes .
Cyanide used in processing the enriched slurry is reused and the residuals of cyanide are destroyed after the process .
Even the residuals of cyanide in the water recovered from tailings dams are purified .
Bacteria-based extraction would be more nature-friendly , but it is not yet used for gold .
The first mine in the world to use microbial extraction from heaps of nickel ore is in Talvivaara , also in Finland .
Microbial purification of residual cyanide is being developed with good results and I strongly recommend moving in that direction .
Therefore , I do not support a move to ban the use of cyanide totally but I would certainly encourage strict environmental controls with the best available technology and closed processes .
( RO ) I believe that the initiative on banning the use of cyanide-based technology in gold mining is unjustified .
There are a number of European legislative acts in force in this area , as already mentioned earlier , which have increasingly tightened the regulations on the conditions for using cyanide , starting right from the time of the unfortunate accident mentioned earlier , which occurred in Baia Mare and regrettably resulted in contamination .
Therefore , our efforts should focus on enforcing this legislative framework strictly at national level in each Member State in this situation .
Cyanide-based technology has been used for extracting gold for over 100 years under conditions ensuring the environment 's safety and as part of an efficient process for extracting gold .
In fact , 90 % of the gold extracted worldwide over the last 20 years has been extracted using this technology and not an alternative .
The technical regulations governing the use and neutralisation of cyanide have helped minimise the risks to the environment and workers ' health .
I believe I must also stress that the proper application of the precautionary principle does not involve an emotional response which would take the form of a ban on a technology which has proven its benefit and whose risks are completely known and controllable .
When applying the precautionary principle , consideration must also be given to the risks to the environment arising from the use of other agents similar to cyanide as an alternative .
In any case , experts say that using such alternative agents poses greater risks than using cyanide .
( HU ) Allowing or banning mining ventures that use cyanide raises sensitive issues in certain Member States .
First of all , we must establish that solving this problem cannot be held hostage to political intentions and interests .
Assessing the danger of pollution is a matter for experts , and if there is such a danger , then it is up to political leaders to protect citizens ' interests .
On this point , the question goes beyond environmental protection concerns , since pollution can endanger people 's health , in contravention of the right of EU citizens to a high level of health protection ( Article 35 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights ) .
In this area , there can be no question of small or large risk .
If the health of citizens is put at risk , then political debate is pointless and the authorities must take action against the potential polluter .
Although the use of cyanide is banned in certain Member States and allowed in others , Member States must consult each other and aim at forming partnerships .
The Commission , for its part , should take a stand on the matter and initiate regulations that exclude the possibility of damage to the health of EU citizens .
( FI ) Mr President , as I come from the gold country of Northern Lapland , I want to make my contribution in this debate .
Just as Mrs Essayah said in her excellent speech , gold is dissolved by using cyanide , and this is happening in closed processes in Finland .
In the Kittilä goldmine , which is fairly close to where I live , over 5 000 kilos of gold are produced in a year .
There have been no problems , because environmental issues have been dealt with in such a way that legislation is up to date , the processes are closed and the residuals are destroyed .
Technology is also significant there .
In this matter , there are certainly a considerable number of differences between European countries , and I believe that we need to have cooperation and exchange best practices .
Another important matter is the use of microbes , which is a new innovation .
We must invest in this in the future as well , so that we can move to an even more environmentally friendly and effective procedure for dissolving gold .
We must make a concerted effort across Europe so that mining activity can continue while taking account of the environment in a sustainable way .


( DE ) Mr President , the speeches by Mrs Roithová , Mr Březina and Mr Mészáros really convinced me , since they described how there was similarly indiscriminate exploitation in the country in which they lived previously , namely Communist Czechoslovakia , how there has been a change in attitude and how today , they are the ones who are advocating environmental protection and common European standards .
I believe we need this change in attitude throughout Europe .
We must be aware of the fact that we are in the process of developing new technologies .
Why not stretch out the mining of a reserve that is running out anyway and first of all develop these new technologies ?
I would like to make one point quite clear : if we are not careful , something irretrievable will be destroyed and future generations will damn us for it .
I therefore really must ask for a long-term approach here .
It is crucial that we have uniform European standards , since rivers cross borders and cyanide is , of course , also an environmental hazard that crosses borders .
( RO ) I agree that every measure must be taken at European Union level to reduce the purported risks from using toxic , hazardous substances such as cyanide .
However , banning these substances must not be viewed as the only solution .
Toxic , hazardous substances are used in many industrial processes other than mining .
Apart from the accident in Baia Mare in 2000 , there have been a further two major accidents in the mining sector : one which occurred in Spain in 1998 , and the other in Sweden in 2003 , both of greater magnitude .
However , their causes were similar : tailing ponds which collapsed .
More than 90 % of gold and silver production carried out globally uses cyanide-based technology for extracting the metals .
Imposing an unconditional ban on this technology and replacing it with technologies based on substances which pose smaller risks to the environment , but which are exorbitant and produce lower yields , means that the relevant country has to actually stop extracting these metals , with the economic and social repercussions this entails .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Takkula has just said , cyanide technology is a common method in mining .
However , as we have heard , it is highly dangerous .
The disaster that Mrs Băsescu just mentioned contaminated the Danube at the time and shocked us all , and you know that I campaign strongly for the Danube region .
For that reason , as a trade politician , I wonder what can we do about it ?
In the European Union , we only have limited gold mining capacities .
The goal is to make a difference worldwide with technical innovations .
Here , there is high technology , I know .
In Germany environmental technologies were developed that will help to avoid cyanide in the future .
We must make these European high technologies commercially viable and we must make them affordable .
I see great potential for trade in this .
We should not confine ourselves to the European Union , but ensure that here , we also achieve a breakthrough in international trade , in the interests of the environment and our economy .
( SK ) Cyanide extraction techniques are associated with a high risk of environmental damage and therefore also pose a threat to human life and health .
Cyanide leaching of precious metals such as gold is banned in a number of Member States , but the risks of a natural disaster involving contamination of surface waters goes beyond national boundaries .
The notorious accident in Baia Mare ( which is in Romania , and here I must correct my colleague , Mr Posselt : it did not originate from Czechoslovakia , but rather from Romania , and then it contaminated both Hungary and Slovakia , and thus the former Czechoslovakia ) caused incalculable damage , even up to 1 000 km or more away from where it occurred .
My own country was among those affected .
Despite this , the law in many European countries still allows the use of such techniques .
In the interests of protecting human health and the environment , and in view of the fact that cyanide extraction techniques can affect a number of states when accidents occur , I firmly believe that it is necessary and , indeed , essential to establish unified legislation at the European level .
( RO ) A chemical substance which has got out of control and escaped into the environment causes serious problems , but we have more than 10 million chemical substances .
We also have an even higher number of sites where work is carried out using chemical substances .
We could discuss here in the European Parliament millions of potentially dangerous scenarios .
Cyanides are certainly toxic , but I am a chemist and I can tell you that we have a global problem : fewer than 18 % of cyanides are used in mining .
The remaining cyanides are used to produce medicines , consumer goods in the cosmetics industry , as well as in many other areas .
However , substances are used on our planet which are thousands of times more toxic than cyanides .
Generally speaking , if chemical substances enter water , they destroy life .
We have many dead rivers around the world which have not been touched by cyanides .
There is no sign of life in the Dead Sea because it contains a large amount of sodium chloride , in other words , table salt .
When using any chemical substance , all the technologies and regulations for protecting the environment which apply in 2010 must be observed .
As a European state , this is definitely the path which Romania has chosen to go down .
Every country in the world must do the same .
Mr President , with all due respect , can I say that this debate is largely misdirected .
The subject before us is a very curious matter .
It reignites an accident that took place 10 years ago .
Why ?
Why has there been this long silence ?
And why now ?
Why a debate now ?
If we follow this pattern , we could and should ban anything and everything that can be linked to a past accident .
I find the whole matter unjustified .
I think it uses the environment as a screen and it is based on the mass fears so fashionable nowadays .
In my opinion , and I think in truth , it is just a poor political plot .
( DE ) Mr President , I would briefly like to clarify as my fellow Member perhaps misunderstood as a result of the translation .
I know Baia Mare very well and know that it is not in the former Czechoslovakia , but in the north of Transylvania .
I know it really well .
That was a translation error .
I merely alluded to the speeches by Mr Březina , Mrs Roithová and Mr Mészáros that referred to experiences in Kašperské Hory or Bergreichenstein , etc .
I am familiar with the geography of Central Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this debate .
I will , of course , make sure that Mr Potočnik gets a full account of it .
We share your concerns about cyanide .
It is , of course , a very dangerous toxin and we are aware of that .
But let me assure you that the Commission has drawn conclusions from the terrible accident that happened 10 years ago in Baia Mare .
The directive that we have very recently put in place includes 