Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 5 February 2009 .
Statements by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , two weeks ago , a Polish engineer , Piotr Stańczak , who has been held as a hostage by terrorists in Pakistan since last September , was murdered by his captors .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to express my outrage at this abhorrent murder of an innocent man who was a Polish citizen and a citizen of the European Union .
The European Parliament denounces this criminal act in the strongest possible terms . We would like to offer the family of the deceased and all his relatives our heartfelt sympathy and condolences .
Terrorism is a direct attack on freedom , human rights and democracy .
Terrorism is an attempt to attain one 's ends through blind violence and to destroy our common values .
It poses a great danger to the security and stability of the international community .
Terrorism is a crime , and one which we cannot go soft on .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the mother tongue of this murdered engineer , I would like to say , Niech spoczywa w wiecznym pokoju [ May he rest in eternal peace ] .
In memory of Piotr Stańczak , can I ask you all now to rise to commemorate him .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Ladies and gentlemen , the forest fires in Australia have led to a tragic loss of life over recent days .
These , the worst bushfires in Australia 's history , have claimed many lives in horrible circumstances .
We were all horrified by the violent power of this natural disaster and its horrendous consequences .
I have written to the Australian Prime Minister to convey the sincere sympathy of the European Parliament .
On behalf of the European Parliament at today 's plenary session , I would like , once again , to express our solidarity with Australia , its people and its authorities in these sad times .
Next week , a delegation from this Parliament will travel to Australia in order to convey our condolences personally .
I would like to take this opportunity , however , to express our heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the families of all those who lost their lives .
Our thoughts are with you .
Ladies and gentlemen , worrying news is again emerging from the Islamic Republic of Iran .
Seven leading figures in the Bahá 'í religious community were taken into custody in May 2008 .
For eight months , they were denied the opportunity of legal counsel .
Now , these seven dignitaries of the Bahá 'í religious community are to be subjected to a trial this week that meets not even the most basic requirements of the rule of law .
The Nobel prize-winner and Iranian lawyer Shirin Ebadi , who was prepared to handle the defence of the imprisoned leaders , has herself been on the receiving end of death threats .
The European Parliament calls on the Iranian authorities once again , and in the most urgent terms , to respect human rights and the rights of religious minorities and to reconsider its indictment against the seven leaders of the Bahá 'í - Fariba Kamalabadi , Jamaloddin Khanjani , Afif Naeimi , Saeid Rasaie , Mahvash Sabet , Behrouz Tavakkoli and Vahid Tizfahm .
These people were incarcerated solely as a result of their beliefs and should be released immediately .
( Applause )

Ladies and gentlemen , last Friday , 13 February 2009 , the Spanish Member of this House , Mr Herrero , was arrested by the Venezuelan Government in the capital , Caracas , and subsequently expelled from the country , as a result of comments he had made to the media about the Venezuelan Government .
Mr Herrero was in the country as part of the official delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , who had been invited by an opposition party in the context of the constitutional referendum .
To arrest him , the police forced their way into his hotel room and they then put him on a scheduled flight to Brazil , without an official explanation or any opportunity to collect his personal belongings .
We find this unacceptable !
On behalf of the European Parliament , I protest to the strongest possible degree about these methods .
I emphatically condemn this incident , which represents an infringement of human rights and a denigration of the democratic institution that is the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , I rise as Chair of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with Australia and New Zealand to strongly identify myself with the statement you have just made and to thank you for it .
I look forward to delivering that message next week in Australia .
Thank you very much , Mr Chichester .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Follow-up to a request for the defence of immunity : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Corrigendum ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents meeting on Thursday , 5 February 2009 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Wednesday :
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has requested that Mr Reul 's report on possible solutions to the challenges in relation to oil supply be deferred to the next part-session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we debated this motion long and hard in the committee , and we reached a decision backed by a large majority , but yesterday and today , there has been an abundance of advice and suggestions that have come about primarily because other committees have added extra subjects for discussion .
It seems to me that it would be a good idea not to make the decision today but , instead , to have the opportunity at a later date to find a solution which Parliament is then in a position to support .
I therefore ask that you adopt this deferral today .
Thank you .
Mr President , we have tabled two motions , neither of which , most probably , will achieve a broad majority in this House .
I therefore wish to endorse this motion .
Mr President , with your permission , we will also move to defer Mr Berman 's report .
If this motion is not accepted due to the lateness of its timing , I would like to say , now , that we will move tomorrow to postpone the vote on the report .
Thank you .
Thank you very much , Mr Swoboda .
Does anyone wish to oppose the motion ?
Mr President , my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has tabled a resolution which has the support of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and large parts of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
I therefore think that Mr Reul is calling for a deferral out of fear that his position is a minority one .
I find it a little strange that we should have such a long and hard debate and then hear calls for another delay .
We are thus against deferral .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have heard the political contexts .
You have also heard what Mr Swoboda had to say .
The decision will be taken tomorrow .
( Parliament adopts the motion from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ) .
We will vote on Mr Swoboda 's motion tomorrow .
I would ask you all to remember that in today 's vote .
( The order of business was adopted thus amended )
Role of the European Union in the Middle East ( debate )
The next item is the statements from the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and from the Commission on the role of the European Union in the Middle East .
It is my pleasure to welcome into our midst the High Representative , Mr Solana , and to ask him to address us .
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . - Mr President , this is the first time that I have appeared before you this year , 2009 .
It is a great pleasure to be here and I hope that the good cooperation we have had in the past will continue this year .
The war in Gaza ended a month ago , on 18 January , and I think you would agree with me that it feels like yesterday .
The scale of the suffering and destruction was immense and it has left us all with a bitter taste in our mouths .
The humanitarian situation today remains heart-breaking .
We need to find urgent solutions to get aid in and to reduce the level of suffering of the people .
At the same time , we need to do all we can to end the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians and between Israel and the Arab world .
In fact , the parameters of the solution are well known , and have been known for some time .
What matters now is the political will to implement it among Israelis and Palestinians , among Arabs and the wider international community .
The European vocation for peace in the Middle East remains as strong as ever .
Our commitment to the creation of a viable and independent Palestinian state , living side by side with Israel , is total .
It is at the heart of our Middle East policy .
All our actions have this strategic objective in mind .
We will give our firm backing to all who want a peaceful solution to the many challenges across the Middle East region .
This House - Parliament - knows just how difficult and how intractable the situation may seem .
Too often , the region has been plagued by cycles of violence , rising extremism and economic hardship .
At the same time , the conditions for Europeans and Americans to work together in the search for peace in the Middle East are probably better than ever .
I have just returned from Washington where I had good discussions with everybody there in the Obama administration .
I think I have the assurance from them that the strong commitment that has been expressed is a reality .
We are willing and ready to work with them towards achieving success in this conflict .
I think the appointment of Senator Mitchell as US envoy has given the people in the Middle East and his friends renewed hope .
We know him .
We have worked with him .
I had the privilege of working with him in 2001 on the famous report and just recently , I have had the opportunity to work with him in the region .
I hope very much that these changes will lead to a new approach , one that provides the parties with a greater say in how they manage their affairs .
We know that solutions and proposals should be locally inspired .
However , at the same time , deeper international engagement remains essential .
This is why the Arab Peace Initiative is so crucial .
This initiative is the collective expression of the Arab world on how they could help to end their conflict with Israel .
It is their response to the issue that has held back their development and their integration into our global world .
It remains , and should remain , on the table .
We have just had important elections in Israel .
Of course , it is for the Israeli people , their political leaders , to decide on the composition of their new government .
From our side , we hope that the new prime minister and government will be solid interlocutors for peace talks .
Needless to say , the same applies to the Palestinians .
They , too , have to get their house in order , including through reconciliation .
As everybody knows , we strongly encourage intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind President Abbas and all the efforts by Egypt and the Arab League in that direction .
This will be a key to peace , stability and development .
As I said , I know that this Parliament has been deeply preoccupied with the crisis in Gaza , and so have we all .
Let me use this occasion to highlight some of the most important international efforts , which focused on trying to end the violence and easing the plight of all civilian populations .
Egypt 's role in resolving the situation in Gaza , and indeed with the Palestinians themselves , remains crucial .
We hope their efforts will soon lead to a durable and sustainable ceasefire , to the opening of the crossings for all goods and persons , and some sort of intra-Palestinian agreement .
Without this , it will be difficult - not to say impossible - to rebuild Gaza .
We are looking forward to welcoming positive announcements on the ceasefire .
The day before yesterday , there were good meetings , and let us hope that they will continue today and in the future so that a ceasefire may be called , without delay .
As you know , Egypt will also host an important conference on reconstruction on 2 March and we expect all the international community to make a commitment there .
The European Union , too , played its role .
We immediately expressed our willingness to contribute in concrete ways to a durable ceasefire .
We also stated our readiness to re-dispatch our monitors to the Rafah crossing point , in accordance with the agreement that we signed in 2005 .
We are ready to operate at Rafah , or at any other crossing points where help is needed or requested .
Several European countries also expressed their readiness to help the interdiction of illegal trafficking , in particular , arms smuggling , into Gaza .
The activities of the European Parliament in response to the crisis have been significant and are part and parcel of the European Union 's overall reaction to the crisis .
As far as the United Nations is concerned , we can warmly commend UNRWA for its work and perseverance and underline that the European Union will continue to support all its efforts .
But it is clear that no single country or organisation can tackle the conflicts in the Middle East alone .
The very nature of the difficulties demands multilateral solutions .
The Quartet will have a crucial role to play in the months ahead .
The new US Administration , in cooperation with us , has confirmed its intention to make full use of the Quartet .
The terrible events in Gaza should also force us to take a more strategic and long-term look at Gaza .
The Gaza Strip constitutes an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967 and , without any doubt , will be part of a Palestinian state .
Gaza needs to become economically and politically viable .
Gaza needs to become part of a political solution .
The immediate priority remains to secure a durable and fully respected ceasefire and to allow for the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid .
We need to see the opening of the crossings for humanitarian assistance , for commercial goods and for people , on a regular and predictable basis .
As you know , the diplomatic fall-out of the Gaza conflict in the wider region has been very significant : indirect talks between Syria and Israel have been suspended ; Mauritania and Qatar have suspended ties with Israel ; a withdrawal of the Arab Peace Initiative was threatened .


Arab divisions , as you know , have deepened .
Without Arab unity it will be very difficult to make progress in Gaza and in the wider Middle East peace process .
Peace in the Middle East requires a united Arab world .
The upcoming Arab League summit will be crucial to restore Arab unity , in particular , behind the Arab Peace Initiative .
In the coming months , we will also have elections in Iran and in Lebanon .
On 12 June , the Iranians will vote for a new President .
We have repeatedly stated our deep respect for Iran and our desire to forge a completely different kind of relationship with this country .
This is clearly in everyone 's interests , but to achieve that , we need trust and that trust must be restored .
Let me conclude by saying that 2009 will be critical for the Middle East .
We are possibly at a threshold .
We can choose to pursue the same policies in the same manner , knowing that they will lead to the same results - the results that we know today .
On the other hand , we can try to work with energy , with determination , to adjust our policies , to adjust the way we set about achieving results .
We have to work on both crisis management and conflict resolution - there is no doubt about that .
However , the time has come to focus decisively on conflict resolution .
It is the only way to end this endless sequence of death and destruction .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , High Representative .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to bring to your attention the fact that , this coming Sunday , I will be leading a delegation , in my capacity as President of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , to Gaza , Ramallah , Sderot und Jerusalem for two and a half days .
Amongst other things , talks are to be held with President Peres and Prime Minister Olmert in Jerusalem and President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and Prime Minister Fayyad in Ramallah .
In Gaza , preparations will be made for the United Nations visit , which will then be carried out .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are at a moment of transition in the Middle East .
Soon , most probably , there will be a new Israeli Government .
There is already a new US administration , currently defining its foreign policy priorities .
And we may soon face transition in the occupied Palestinian territory .
So changing dynamics can create opportunities for new engagement .
However , there is no denying that the recent conflict resulted in enormous human suffering and destruction .
It has left the Middle East peace process - we have to confess - in a particularly fragile state .
This House knows that only too well , and I refer to the discussions and debates that we have already had here .
This is clearly not where we wanted to be at the beginning of 2009 .
But if there is , some day , to be peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians , the only way forward is to do all we can to get the talks back on track .
This human tragedy in Gaza has had a huge impact on the region .
I returned only last night from a trip to Syria and Lebanon , and I will certainly also say something about that but , in particular , let me say that what we need to do is to make clear to all Israeli leaders that the EU expects sustained commitment to the peace process and to the two-state solution .
We also need to reinforce the message to the Palestinians that a strong Palestinian Authority with effective leadership over the entire occupied Palestinian territory is essential both for the reunification of the West Bank and Gaza and to get the peace process back on track .
That is why the European Union is supporting the efforts of Egypt , Turkey and others to achieve this .
With the new US administration , we need to agree a joint way forward .
I spoke on the phone to Secretary Clinton to that end only last week .
She agreed on the need for a lasting ceasefire and a return to the peace process , which is absolutely crucial .
We also agreed that the Quartet should consult closely on these matters before the end of the month .
I am glad that the American administration sees the Quartet as a very important institution for going forward on peace .
Finally , we need to step up our own engagement with the Arab League countries .
The consensus for peace is weakening , not only in Israel and within the occupied Palestinian territory , but also within the Arab League , where worrying divisions are appearing .
To that end , as I just said , I have just returned from Syria and Lebanon , where I met President Assad in Syria , President Sleiman in Lebanon , and other key partners .
The recent conflict has badly damaged negotiations not only on the Palestinian , but also on the Syrian , track .
We therefore exchanged views on the peace process at length .
I reiterated the very strong support of the European Union for the Arab peace initiative , and I urged partners to maintain their commitment to it , because it offers a serious framework for regional peace talks .
I also stressed the milestone decision taken by Syria and Lebanon to establish diplomatic relations , and pushed for completion of all steps in this process .
In both countries , we discussed practical ways in which the European Union could support the process of reform .
In Lebanon , I reiterated our readiness in principle to deploy an EU election observation mission , and I have already decided that an exploratory mission should go there immediately .
The European Union as a whole has been extremely active in recent weeks both on the political and practical fronts .
On the political front , since I last reported to you in January , we have all pursued our intensive diplomatic activity .
We have been at the forefront of calls for a ceasefire and have worked with Egypt and others to make a lasting ceasefire possible .
The Council conclusions in January indicated that the EU is developing a ' work plan ' for a lasting ceasefire .
This document identifies six areas for action including humanitarian response , the prevention of smuggling to Gaza , the re-opening of the Gaza crossing points , reconstruction , intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the resumption of the peace process .
Much very delicate work is going on .
To give but a flavour of the pace of activity we have all been involved in : for instance , I was at a working dinner of the Paris Co-Chairs on 15 January , the Summit meetings in Sharm el-Sheikh and Jerusalem on 18 January , and EU ministerial meetings with Israel on 21 January and with a group composed of Egypt , the Palestinian Authority , Jordan and Turkey on 25 January .
In addition , Commissioner Louis Michel , who is responsible for humanitarian aid , visited Gaza on 24 and 25 January .
We are in regular contact with Quartet colleagues .
We had important meetings as a troika in Moscow .
I had this telephone conversation with Clinton ; Javier Solana was there in Washington , and we are agreed on the need to renew the peace process .
We continue our road map monitoring work , and we also deploy state-building assistance , including in sensitive areas such as the rule of law and border management .
The EU 's action strategy for the Middle East also foresees EU support for specific final status issues , for instance , for Jerusalem , refugees and security arrangements .
In practical terms , the EU has prioritised delivery of humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza .
The Commission has already mobilised EUR 10 million practically overnight , and another EUR 32 million has now been committed for the coming period .
In early March , the Egyptian Government is organising an international conference in Sharm el-Sheikh in support of the Palestinian economy for the reconstruction of Gaza .
We , as the Commission , will be a co-sponsor of this event .
I am delighted that I had the opportunity to discuss the pledge that the Commission intends to make with the Chairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Budgets at an early stage here in Parliament on 2 February .
Thank you again for your support .
The problem at the moment is not only funding , but access , particularly to Gaza .
We have been very vocal , both in public and in private , about the unacceptable closure of the Gaza crossings .
This House will wish to join me today in calling , once again , for the crossings to be fully opened .
( Applause )
When access does improve - as I have no doubt it will - we may then have to review our financial forecast .
At that point , I may need to come back to discuss this with you .
I hope I will again be able to count on your support .
Honourable Members , you can count on the commitment of the Commission - and also on my personal commitment - to do everything in our power to help bring peace as swiftly as possible to one of the most troubled parts of the world .
We will certainly continue to work very closely with this House .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Vondra , Mr Solana , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Gaza is getting a little worse each day .
The population is suffering enormously .
There is a shortage of everything .
The embargo imposed on Gaza means each delivery of humanitarian aid has to get through an obstacle course .
Even when it is delivered , the humanitarian aid is insufficient to meet the needs on the ground .
The hospitals can no longer operate properly .
The population can no longer be looked after .
What is happening today in Gaza is a humanitarian catastrophe on a major scale .
The European Union is already playing a major role in the region .
The financial support it has given and continues to give to the Palestinians is considerable .
It has done a lot upstream to prevent the humanitarian disaster we are witnessing today .
Despite the obstacles , it continues to give humanitarian aid and assistance to the population of the Gaza Strip .
Just today , the European Union has granted EUR 41 million in aid to the United Nations Agency for Palestine Refugees .
This , then , is not the moment for us to start to keep our mouths shut .
For me , the European message must be clear .
We cannot tolerate humanitarian aid being taken hostage in this conflict .
It is essential that this aid be able to move freely , without restriction , and that the checkpoints be opened .
Moreover , we issue a warning to Hamas .
Last month 's incidents , when Hamas confiscated , and failed to return , the humanitarian aid distributed by the United Nations Agency in the region are scandalous , intolerable and must not be repeated .
All the players involved must anticipate the reconstruction phase and actively prepare it by assessing the damage on the ground and by preparing a plan for the financial , economic and social rehabilitation of the Gaza Strip .
This rehabilitation is essential for the region 's stability .
That is the objective of the donor conference that meets in Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March .
Let us , however , be clear . No reconstruction - yet another one - can take place before a lasting ceasefire has been called .
A ceasefire and the cessation of military operations , on the part of Israel too , are absolute prerequisites for the reestablishment of peace in the region .
It also begins , with reference to Hamas - and I say this with the utmost firmness - with putting a definitive end to the firing of rockets into Israel from Gaza .
All measures must also be taken to fight against the entry of arms and munitions through the tunnels linking Gaza with Egypt .
Restoring dialogue between all sectors of Palestinian society and restarting the current negotiation process are essential .
Egypt , which has a particular responsibility due to its location on the border with Gaza , must take an active part in this negotiation process .
All our future diplomatic efforts must take this particular role of Egypt into consideration .
We can only hope to find a solution to the conflict by keeping the diplomatic route open .
I call on all the parties involved , including the Quartet , the Arab League and the diplomats of the Member States , to continue to engage in the negotiations with firmness and determination .

Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the message from our debate can only be one thing : there is no violent solution in the Middle East .
There is no military solution .
There is no solution through terrorism .
It may be the case that one party gains a short-term military advantage .
It may be the case that a terrorist act causes a great deal of chaos .
Yet experience shows that every act of violence generates more violence and pushes the cycle of violence further .
What is crucial , therefore , is dialogue , and that is something that is extremely difficult in the Middle East , especially in a time of uncertainty and , to some extent , of asynchronicity .
Yet there is also hope emanating from the United States .
President Obama , Hillary Clinton and their team offer a consensus and dialogue-oriented model , something completely different from the previous administration which has now , thankfully , left office .
So there is hope in Washington .
What about Jerusalem , though ?
What Benjamin Netanyahu had to say during the election campaign certainly did pose a threat to the peace process , while Avigor Liebermann is also certainly a threat to the peace process in the Middle East .
This asynchronicity poses a risk .
What is going on in Lebanon ?
What influence will Hezbollah have in future ?
To what extent is it prepared to engage in constructive dialogue , before and after the election in Lebanon ?
What about the Western-oriented majority ?
Would that majority be able to react to an election victory by integrating Hezbollah ?
Is Hezbollah prepared to allow itself to be integrated ?
This depends , to a crucial degree , on who governs in Tehran .
The issue of the election outcome in Iran is of central importance .
This is also true for the attitude of Hamas .
The question of whether we have a radical president who denies Israel 's right to exist - as the current incumbent does - or whether there is to be a government that is prepared to talk and this readiness to talk stretches from Tehran to Beirut and on to Rafah is a crucial issue for the stabilisation of the whole region .
We are in favour of a unity government for the Palestinians .
Without a unity government for the Palestinians , the peace process is unmanageable .
It is therefore now up to Hamas to show that it is willing and able to join such a government .
The basic precondition for this , however , is to be talking with Hamas , that those amongst the Palestinian people who want to talk with Hamas be supported and that they not be forced onto the defensive by a government in Jerusalem that knows only the politics of continuing the settlements .
As a side point , if it is true that 163 hectares have now been re-released for settlement , this is a destabilising element and this is something that we need to be absolutely forthright in making clear to our friends in Israel .
In the Middle East , everything is interconnected .
It is not possible to simply pick out individual elements and believe it possible to solve an individual problem by military means .
That is why the basis for everything is the readiness to talk .
The Arab League 's plan , Saudi Arabia 's peace plan , envisages an end to violence with simultaneous recognition of Israel 's right to exist .
This is a bold and ambitious plan , and it is one that needs to be discussed .
It is progress in itself that there are people in the Arab League , in the Arab camp , who are prepared to have that debate .
That is something that must be supported .
Bombers are not the way to support this , and I might add that the way to support the work of the European Union is likewise not for what we build to be destroyed again for whatever military reasons .
For this reason , our message can only be that dialogue is the precondition .
High Representative Solana , you said that this is your first time before us this year .
This is perhaps also your last visit before our elections in June .
As dialogue is very much a sine qua non for success , I would like to say to you , on behalf of my group , that you represent the personification of dialogue .
Your work deserves more than respect .
It deserves a great degree of admiration , above all , for your continuous advocacy of dialogue .
For that , you have our sincere appreciation .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Schulz .
We do , of course , hope - and this is something we can all agree on - that Mr Solana will come before us a few more times before the end of this parliamentary term .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is with heavy hearts that we debate once again what our Union can do to ease the pain in the Middle East .
Looking at the recent conflict in Gaza , all the old familiar phrases apply : blame on both sides ; provocation by Hamas ; disproportionate response by Israel .
But in the face of the recurring violence , we have recycled those tired phrases so often that they have lost whatever impact they once had .
We cannot go on like this .
Of course , it is our moral duty to assist in the reconstruction of Gaza .
Of course , it makes sense to seek safeguards from Israel .
It is bad enough to see the airport , schools and sewerage systems blown up ; it is worse to rebuild them with European money knowing that they will likely be destroyed once again .
Is it possible , is it credible , to imagine that Israel can assure us that this will not happen ?
In any event , reconstruction and humanitarian aid from the European Union will not prevent future conflict .
We need a new and positive approach , jointly with the United States , if possible , but without them if not .
Last month 's violence and the outcome of this month 's election have changed the terms of the debate .
Hamas is stronger politically , it is intact militarily , it is holding out against recognising Israel , and the expected coalition in Israel will be more hard-line than ever and broadly resistant to seeing a separate Palestinian state .
Meanwhile , the gulf between the West Bank and Gaza grows ever wider , with the threat of a permanent division .
The Council and the Commission have not really said what their response will be to this turn of events , and the Czech Presidency appears to want the matter off the agenda , but we can afford to wait no longer .
With the situation in flux and neither Hamas nor the Israelis talking to one another , we must set achievable terms on which we can talk to both .
Isolation has led only to despair .
The time has come for diplomacy , delicate but determined .
In which forum ?
In the Quartet , Mr Solana ?
Well , perhaps , but let us first acknowledge that the policy failures , the dashed hopes and the creeping extremism of the past seven years have taken place under the Quartet 's watch .
Its envoy , Tony Blair , has never even been to Gaza .
If he went there , he could visit the site of the industrial area , which is one of his pet projects , designed to generate jobs , but levelled last month .
( Applause )
The Quartet has to open its mind to a new approach and , if our partners within it cannot take that step , then we should explore ways in which it might .
Lastly , we can only prepare for the future if we acknowledge honestly what has happened in the past .
There should be a free and fair international investigation into alleged war crimes in the Gaza conflict .
The UNRWA and our own parliamentary committee have both reported alarming evidence of war crimes , and the allegations are serious indeed .
If Israel is wrongly accused , its name should be cleared , but if it has committed those crimes , it must face up to its responsibilities .
Our aim must be to forge an agreement for a peaceful and prosperous future on both sides of the divide , where enemies can once again become partners .
However , the failure of our approach to date is written in spilled blood on the ground .
Mr Solana , we must pioneer a new path to peace , and the European Union , if necessary , must take the lead .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , High Representative and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , I warmly welcome today 's settlement to provide humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip .
This is a step in the right direction for the European Parliament .
The current humanitarian situation in Gaza is bad and the European Union has a responsibility to help .
Many words have been spoken with regard to the need for peace , dialogue , understanding , temperance - if one would wish to use that word - with regard to the reactions and the counter-reactions to different events .
But three things jump out at us immediately when we speak about the Middle East .
Firstly , it is not a negotiation of equals .
There is strength on one side , weakness and division on the other side .
Secondly , it is not an equal participation of outside influences and outside media coverage .
One side gets more positive protection from international media and countries ; the other side suffers under the derogatory terms of ' terrorism ' or ' reactionary ' .
Thirdly , and most importantly of all , despite all the political disagreements , geographical disagreements and historical disputes , it is the same people who continue to suffer day after day after day : women , children , innocent civilians , people who have no truck with political groups , political organisations or with paramilitary groups or terrorist organisations .
These are the poor innocents caught in the middle of the rocket fire , of the bombing and the so-called - and I laugh when I hear these words being used - ' targeted intelligent bombing ' .
There is no such thing as an ' intelligent ' or ' safe ' bomb .
When it lands , it blows up - it kills people .
We have ample evidence to show that not only the Hamas rockets going into Israel killed innocent people but that , a hundred times more , the bombs and the bullets from the Israeli forces have killed thousands and injured thousands of people within Gaza and within the Occupied Territories .
Indeed , we have evidence from an Irishman , John King , who works for UNRWA in Gaza , to show that , when they informed the Israeli authorities that their bombs were landing close to a UN compound in Gaza that was storing fuel and food and was also acting as a refuge to children whose school had been bombed earlier in the day , the bombs came closer ; and when they had to phone them a second time , the bombs landed on the fuel dump within the UN compound .
Perhaps it is negligence , misinformation or deliberate targeting , but one way or the other it is an act - maybe not quite a war crime in some people 's minds - but it is an act of attack on the institutions of peace , humanity and freedom .
At times of war , there are rules of engagement , there are certain things which cannot be done .
Of course , we must get aid and assistance to the Palestinian people for the rebuilding of their areas .
Of course we must ensure and insist that talks take place and that peace can be allowed to flourish , but that requires us to take brave moves within Europe as well .
Like Martin Schulz , I congratulate Javier Solana on walking that long lonely path of speaking to people that nobody else would speak to , of opening the doors of dialogue , because ultimately only through dialogue between enemies can you make peace , and only through peace can you build the foundations of a solid two-state solution that will guarantee peace , equity , security and justice within the Middle East .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I was a member of the European Parliament delegation that travelled to Gaza last week to see the devastation , and the focus of Parliament 's resolution today is humanitarian action , which is desperately needed .
This is a real humanitarian crisis , and how are we going to address that urgently ? Ninety per cent of people in Gaza are dependent on UN aid .
This is not linked to any negotiations .
We have to ensure that that aid gets through , and the key to that is the lifting of the siege and the opening of the crossing points .
How can a densely populated area of 1.5 million people that has been bombed for 22 days and in which over 1 000 people were killed even begin to recover when only 15 categories of humanitarian items are being allowed in : food , some medicines and mattresses ?
You cannot rebuild homes and offices without cement and glass , which are banned .
You cannot teach children in schools that have no paper because it is banned .
You cannot feed people when there is not enough food being allowed in .
It is not that the aid is not there , but it is not being allowed through .
We have to put pressure on the Israeli Government to end the blockade and open the crossings .
Any assessment of the damage caused in Gaza must draw attention to the deliberate targeting to destroy the infrastructure and the economy .
We saw schools , factories , homes and a hospital deliberately attacked .
Once again , we have witnessed the destruction by Israel of projects funded by the European Union and , rather than take action on this , we are talking about upgrading trade relations when conditions on human rights are currently being breached under the current agreements .
Mr Solana talked about how pursuing the same policies can bring us back to the same place .
Well , I agree .
In 2006 , the European Union refused to recognise the Palestinian Unity Government , which included members of Hamas , and yet we are ready to recognise a new Israeli Government , which may include members who reject a two-state solution , who do not support a Palestinian state .
What is crucial now is that the EU must be prepared to work with and recognise an interim Palestinian national government of consensus that should emerge from the Cairo talks in the next few weeks , and we must give out clear signals of our intentions to the international community .
We have to support the reconciliation process in Palestine as part of achieving a long-term solution , and that means ensuring that we do not repeat the mistakes of the past .
( Applause )

Mr President , Mr Solano , Commissioner , as I listened nearly a month ago to the children of Gaza speak , amongst the ruins of their house , of how they had trembled as the bombs fell , or to their parents describe the hell of those 22 days and nights that will forever mark their lives and the memory of future generations , I was not proud of Europe .
I thought of some of the leaders of our Member States , of all those who will answer to history for their lack of political courage , the missed opportunities , for their lack of vision .
I asked myself this question : to what extremes must the Israeli leaders push their inhumanity towards the Palestinians and their scorn for law and the most fundamental values before the main European political leaders dare to raise a finger and say finally , ' Enough is enough ' ?
Those who call themselves friends of Israel to justify the impunity and unlimited accommodation shown towards its current ruling class should reflect on these words from the great Israeli writer David Grossman , whom I wish to quote : ' Amidst the wave of nationalist hyperbole now sweeping the nation , it would not hurt to recall that in the final analysis , this last operation in Gaza is just another stop along a trail blazing with fire , violence and hatred .
A trail marked at times by victory , at other times by defeat , but which is leading us inevitably to ruin ' .
Or let them ask the same question as Shlomo Sand , the famous Israeli historian , whom I also quote : ' We sowed desolation .
We have proved that we have no moral reserve .
Have we strengthened the peace camp among Palestinians ? '
He continues : ' Israel has been pushing the Palestinians to despair . '
For 20 years , Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Authority recognised the State of Israel with nothing to show in return .
Israel refused the offer of the Arab League in 2002 , ladies and gentlemen .
Everyone talks about the Arab League and about the Arab League 's peace project .
It has been in existence for seven years .
What has Europe done to seize this opportunity ?
I therefore come back to Shlomo Sand : ' Israel refused the offer of the Arab League in 2002 of full recognition of Israel with the pre-1967 borders . '
The Israeli historian concludes thus : ' Israel will make peace only if pressure is brought to bear on its policies ' .
This leads to a question , Mr Solano , as you said nothing on the subject of international law .
What pressure is the Union prepared to exert on Israel over Gaza and the West Bank , including Jerusalem , to remind its current and future leaders that membership of the international community in general , and the privileged partnership with the European Union in particular , come at a price , that they have no place for military occupation , nor war crimes , nor a policy which pushes each day towards a divorce between Europe and the Arab-Muslim world ?
I would wish , as a European , not to have to place the hope for a change in policy towards the Near East solely on the occupant of the White House .
I would still like to believe in an about-turn by Europe .
( Applause )
( IND / DEM ) . - Mr President , today we are debating a resolution about humanitarian aid .
Before making my contribution , I would like to stress that I am not speaking on behalf of the IND / DEM Group as it has no position on this topic .
Instead , I am speaking as an MEP on behalf of myself and of my people .
The vast majority of the people of Gaza must rely on humanitarian aid for their very survival - food , water , shelter , clothes and , especially , medicine .
This is a population that has been under siege for a very long time .
All crossing points have been closed for 18 months and now , with the terrible recent aggression visited on the people of Gaza , they are even more desperate .
Because the siege has still not been lifted and crossings are still closed , it is very difficult to get essentials to the people .
I note in recital E of this resolution that we Europeans give ourselves a nice pat on the back for our humanitarian aid efforts .
You , Commissioner , talked of the political efforts that you are making , but do we deserve this praise ?
Israel-EU trade is worth EUR 27 billion annually .
If we really wanted action on Gaza , we would use the power that this trade gives us by imposing economic sanctions .
Our refusal to do this , even at the height of the bombing in January , indicated that we prefer the status quo of business as usual , with our contribution of humanitarian aid possibly being a salve to our conscience .
Not only are we unwilling to risk upsetting a good business market for the sake of bringing injustice in Gaza to an end , but we are also unwilling so far to dissolve or even just suspend the EU-Israel agreement .
I have a great love of the Jewish people .
In college , I took the opportunity to study several courses of their history and literature under a rabbi .
However , friendship does not mean blindness but the willingness to be honest .
Actually , judging by demonstrations that took place in the major cities of Israel , there are many Israeli citizens who publicly oppose their Government 's action .
To return to the urgency of the humanitarian aid : rebuilding physical infrastructure is important , but it is understandable that agencies may be hesitant to rebuild when it looks as though an even more threatening regime is taking over in Israel .
Rebuilding human infrastructure , however , cannot wait .
We must get supplies in .
I would especially point out that the particularly vicious weaponry used in January has left many people with missing limbs and terrible burns .
I myself know what it is like to have a healthy child become disabled .
We must get intervention - medical and educational - to all those thousands of people , especially children who , since the New Year , have become disabled for life .
As we help them , we must record their stories , to begin the process of gathering evidence for targeted attacks and possible war crimes .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is certainly not Europe , still less its High Representative for Foreign Policy , Javier Solana , the former Secretary-General of NATO , who can play the role of mediator between Israel and Palestine .
At the most , they will be called on to finance the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip , as they are doing today for Kosovo , Lebanon and Afghanistan .
The US and Israel do the bombing while Europe finances reconstruction .
That is how tasks are allocated amongst the allies .
It should , however , be up to those who do the damage to pay .
Egypt is at the centre of the peace talks that are discussing an extended ceasefire with Hamas .
However , the challenge is formidable as the new Israeli Government , under pressure from the third man , Mr Liebermann , the far-right leader who is democratically accepted over there , risks seeing its task singularly complicated in this negotiation .
In fact , Mr Netanyahu , who is presented as the future prime minister , has always been opposed to a truce with Hamas .
A further difficulty is that the Palestinian Authority of Mahmoud Abbas has become , in the West Bank , a sort of international protectorate whose legitimacy has greatly diminished amongst the population .
The final factor we have to take into account is that the expansion of the Israeli colonies , which has not stopped since 1967 , makes the creation of a Palestinian State on the West Bank particularly tricky .
Today , the ball is in the Israeli court , but will the hawks in each camp accept this truce of God that the two sides demand without providing themselves with the resources ?
Allow me to add a thought on France 's return to NATO 's integrated military structure , which will be debated within the framework of the Vatanen report .
This return will result in France taking on heavy obligations .
In fact , we are rejoining NATO even though the Cold War has been over since 1990 .
Mr Sarkozy seems to have forgotten the fall of the Berlin Wall and Russia 's return to the ranks of free nations .
Is there a need to reinforce the bloc line of thinking at a time when we see multipolarity and the rising power of emerging countries , including on the military level ?
Moreover , France 's membership of the integrated structure will oblige it to reinforce its contingent in Afghanistan , even though it already has 3 300 men on the ground .
Which funds will it use to finance this operation when its defence budget is about to fall below 2 % of GDP and over 30 regiments are to be cut ?
Paradoxically , we are going to increase our financial participation to rejoin NATO and , at the same time , reduce our military presence in Africa .
European defence , so beloved of President Sarkozy , will therefore be a pillar of the Atlantic Alliance .
You only have to read the Treaty of Lisbon and its additional protocols to convince yourselves of this .
Whether it be in terms of foreign policy or common security , the European road is a dead end that can only lead to an alignment with the US and its allies .
It is this logic of retraction that we reject in the name of national sovereignty and independence , which rest in particular on our independent nuclear deterrent .
Other members have also overrun slightly , and we must accord the same treatment to everyone .
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . - ( ES ) Mr President , I will not be able to answer all those who have spoken during this debate in the little time available to me .
Allow me to express my most heartfelt thanks for what you said about me personally and what I do .
I would just like to tell you that you can be sure that I will continue to work just as determinedly - even more so if possible - because the situation is becoming more difficult every day .
I believe that there are five issues on which a consensus could be reached between all those who have spoken before me .
First , humanitarian issues : there can be no doubt that the most pressing and important question is the humanitarian one .
The violence of recent days and weeks has thrown into sharp relief some enormous gaps in what is needed to alleviate the population 's suffering , in particular , amongst the people of Gaza .
Therefore , we will do everything in our power to alleviate the great hardships of daily life in Gaza .
The Commission will do so - without the slightest hesitation - as will the Member States of the Council ; the entire international community will do so .
Second , the opening of the border crossings between Gaza and Israel and between Gaza and Egypt is absolutely essential to this .
Moreover , these must be opened quickly , without delay .
From our point of view , all aid will be supplied wherever it is needed and , as far as Rafah is concerned in particular , we will be ready for deployment as soon as possible .
There are already European Union observers there , available , so that as soon as the frontier is opened at Rafah , we will be ready to deploy .
Third , the issue - and it is a very important one - of Palestinian unity .
Honourable Members , I believe that it is clear that there will be no solution at the moment without the beginnings of reconciliation between Palestinians .
Therefore , as stated in the Resolution of the most recent General Affairs Council , the European Union supports , and will continue to support , the efforts that are being made , whether by President Abbas or by President Mubarak , to make progress towards reconciliation between Palestinians .
Many speakers have mentioned the obligations that we may assume , depending on whether there is a new Palestinian consensus government .
It seems to me , honourable Members - and this is my personal opinion - that if there is a Palestinian consensus government , a government whose goal is the Two States , a government whose goal is to build these Two States through peaceful means , a government that has a programme of reconstruction in Gaza , and a government that attempts to build an electoral process in 2009 , I believe that such a government is one that the European Union should support .
Fourth , on the question of Israel : there are two important issues following the elections .
Firstly , that the government that has emerged from the elections , or that will emerge from the majority produced by the elections , is obliged , as far as we can see , to carry on with a peace process .
For this reason , whatever government does emerge from the elections , we will continue working and doing everything we can to ensure that it becomes established , and that it works and contributes towards carrying on a peace process , doing everything in its power to conclude that process as far as possible during 2009 .
Fifth , in our view , the settlements issue is absolutely fundamental .
I believe that the most recent data concerning the state of the settlements in 2008 , published by the Government of Israel , ought to make all of us feel responsible .
I would like to tell you that in 2001 , I worked with the then Senator Mitchell on the famous report that bears his name .
I was one of the four people who worked on that programme .
I would like you , honourable Members , to be so good as to re-read that report , published in 2001 , in which things were said that , unfortunately , still have to be said today ; for example , on the subject of the settlements .
If we in the European Union are incapable of trying to change the way in which the settlements are being established , there is little chance of any peace initiative having credibility .
Therefore , this issue must be taken seriously .
We must talk seriously with our friends in Israel to ensure that the issue of the settlements is dealt with in a radically different way .
Finally , Mr President , honourable Members : the Arab League .
Unity among the Arab states is vital .
It is essential that we cooperate with all the countries of the Arab League to ensure that the peace initiative signed by the Arab League remains in force .
Crucially , this peace process must end with reconciliation between Palestinians and Israelis , but also between the Arabs and Israel .
Therefore , we fully support those who are working to make the peace initiative a reality .
We see deep divisions within the Arab League .
We will have to do everything that we can diplomatically to prevent a deepening of these differences and instead encourage the rebuilding of a process of harmony and cooperation within the great Arab family .
Mr President , honourable Members , as I have said , 2009 will be an enormously important year .
We will have to continue to manage the crisis , bring humanitarian aid , do everything in our power to ensure that there is a ceasefire , and do everything in our power to ensure that negotiation takes place between Israel and Gaza and between Egypt and Gaza .
However , honourable Members , if we do not change our mentality from a position of crisis-management to one deeply rooted in conflict-resolution , we will be in the same situation to which we have unfortunately returned at the start of 2009 .
Mr President , I hope that , in the end , if we all work together , 2009 will be a year in which we can actually resolve this enormous conflict which has unfortunately been weighing down on us for too long .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I just wanted to say again that last year we clearly said that failure is not an option .
We were all hopeful for the Annapolis process and we were hopeful for a peace process .
Unfortunately , the military incursion into Gaza after the rockets launched from Gaza into Israel have changed the equation .
Now we all know that there is a series of elements that is absolutely necessary so that we can come back to peace agreements .
In any case , however , one thing is sure : a military solution is no solution .
On this I agree with all of you .
Therefore , whatever the cost , we will all have to work in order to bring about peace .
Many actors are there : in the European Union , in the international community - be it the United States of America , the UN or Russia - but there are also many Arab friends and colleagues .
I can only hope that , when a new Israeli Government is in place , all those actors will want to come together for peace .
Our rationale is clear , but whether the emotions will then bring us to the right path , we will have to see .
Be assured that we will work for that .
( Applause )
A motion for a resolution to wind up the debate has been tabled under Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is unacceptable .
Eighty-eight percent of the population are in need of food aid , there is a lack of essential medical supplies in the hospitals , and thousands of tons of aid cannot be brought into Gaza because not enough trucks are being allowed in .
People all over the world were horrified at the low level of international response when more than 1 000 Palestinians - including more than 300 children - were killed during the recent Israeli attack on Gaza .
A proactive , long-term strategy from Europe and from the new US Government must include the right of Palestinians to a sustainable state - based on the borders that were there before 1967 .
It must stop settlement activities in the Occupied Territories and it must demolish the apartheid wall .
The security of Israel and a free state of Palestine must be achieved , but the situation where Israel is using security as an excuse to destroy the lives of innocent Palestinians must be ended .
A genuine process of negotiation must be begun .
The EU must cancel the Association Agreement between the European Union and Israel while Israel does not comply with international law and humanitarian law .
What should the ' role of the European Union in the Middle East ' be ( or not be ) ?
What are the principles by which it should be guided ?
It must demand an end to the aggression and to the inhumane blockade of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and it must ensure that urgent humanitarian aid is provided to them .
It must condemn the brutal aggression , crimes , violations of the most basic human rights and state terrorism perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people , which nothing can justify .
It must unequivocally denounce the fact that in Palestine , there are colonisers and colonised , aggressors and victims , oppressors and oppressed , and exploiters and exploited .
It must suspend the Association Agreement and any strengthening of bilateral relations with Israel , such as those advocated by the External Relations Council on 8 and 9 December .
It must demand compliance by Israel with international law and the UN resolutions , and an end to the occupation , settlements , security fence , assassinations , detentions and innumerable humiliations inflicted on the Palestinian people .
It must demand and fight for respect for the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to an independent and sovereign state , with the 1967 borders and a capital in East Jerusalem .
In essence , it must stop being complicit in the impunity of Israeli colonialism .
The recent elections in Israel and the new US administration offer the opportunity for a new beginning in the Middle East peace process .
I believe that the EU must convey a clear message of support to the new cabinet in Tel Aviv while , at the same time , clearly expressing what is expected of its Israeli partners in terms of pursuing measures which will facilitate a lasting peace , which includes shutting down the settlements on the West Bank and offering strong support for a dual-state solution , and help avoid military excesses and the serious humanitarian repercussions they entail .
The EU 's approach to the Middle East must be based on several strong principles .
The first principle is close cooperation with the US without which we cannot achieve a long-term solution in the region .
The second is that our approach must be aimed at avoiding , as far as possible , violence by both sides , condemning Palestinian extremism and excessive measures adopted by Israel , as well as supporting moderate governance solutions from both sides which are capable of facilitating the peace process .
I wish to express my support for the European Parliament resolution voted on today , which confirms the EU 's commitment to the process of reconstruction in Gaza and provides the basis for the discussions which will be conducted in Cairo in March at the time of the international donors ' conference .
Democracy , peace and respect for human rights are fundamental values for the European Union which has the role and obligation to defend and promote them , both inside the EU and in its relations with other states too .
The situation affecting Gaza 's population is tragic and must be resolved urgently .
The flagrant violation of human rights and freedoms in this region is a cause for concern for the European Union , from the perspective of both its relations with Israel and of security and stability in the Middle East .
The European Union must adopt urgent measures to provide humanitarian assistance to the population in the Gaza region , while also thinking in the medium and long term about measures designed to promote peace , security and stability in the area .
With this in mind , the EU must step up its diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflicts and encourage dialogue and reconciliation in the region .
At the same time , it must impose without hesitation tough sanctions against any anti-democratic stance or violation of human rights and freedoms .
In order to achieve an EU-Middle East agreement , the attempt to restore stability , and assistance in realising the peace programme in the Gaza Strip , should , for the present , continue to be the priority .
The European Union should also do everything in its power to bring about an end to the dispute in which innocent citizens are losing their lives .
Furthermore , efforts should concentrate on bringing assistance to people , on ensuring that they have the basic means to live .
The population of the Gaza Strip have only 60 % of their daily food needs available , which means that they are even more at risk of disease and exposed to difficult conditions .
The lack of drinking water constitutes no less a threat than the lack of food .
I do not , I think , need to mention the lack of medical care or the destruction of schools and public institutions , which is significantly hindering the establishment of order and a return to normality .
We should remember that only when many basic problems of everyday life have been solved will we be able to concentrate on the economic development of the Middle East and on close commercial cooperation with the region .
The European Union has an opportunity to help the Arab world , and all the countries of the Middle East , to become a region where prosperity prevails , which will , in turn , create a framework for closer cooperation between the Middle East and the EU .
1 .
Role of the European Union in the Middle East ( vote )
Before the vote on paragraph 5 :
( IT ) Mr President , at the beginning of paragraph 5 , after the word ' believes ' , the following phrase would be added :
' inter alia with a view to the International Conference in support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March 2009 ' .
( IT ) Mr President , the amendment is the same .
It refers to the International Conference in support of the Palestinian Economy , to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 2 March , and would be added to the recital .
Voting time
Welcome
I have been asked to welcome a visiting delegation in the gallery from the region of Piedmont .
Normally , we only welcome delegations from nation States but , since we do wish to bolster the regions , I will make an exception and wish a warm welcome to the delegation from Piedmont .
Explanations of vote
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the role of the European Union in the Middle East as I agree that we need to support the reconstruction plans for the Gaza Strip .
This resolution seeks to grant immediately rapid and unrestricted humanitarian aid , a measure which is a moral obligation .
This aid must be provided without any conditions or restrictions .
The Israeli authorities are being requested to allow an adequate , continuous flow of humanitarian aid , including all the necessary materials so that the UN agencies such as UNRWA ( United Nations Relief and Works Agency ) and international organisations can carry out their activities and tend to the population 's needs .
With the European Parliament resolution on humanitarian aid to Gaza , the EU is endeavouring , driven by the principle of treating the slaughtering Israelis on equal terms with the resisting Palestinians , to conceal its huge responsibility for the slaughter of the Palestinian people during the murderous Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip which resulted in over 1 300 dead , the majority of whom were children , women and the elderly , and over 5 000 injured .
The complete destruction of thousands of homes and every social infrastructure , in conjunction with the complete economic isolation imposed by Israel , has resulted in the Palestinian population living under tragic and inhumane conditions .
The avoidance of any form of reference to and condemnation of Israel and the causes of the tragic situation of the Palestinian people confirms , once again , the support of the EU for the criminal action by Israel in its effort to upgrade its role in the escalating infighting between the imperialists in the Middle East .
What the heroic Palestinian people need more than anything is not charity from the imperialists . It is the foundation of an independent and sovereign Palestinian state with its capital in East Jerusalem , in keeping with the UN resolutions on the 1967 borders , and undivided solidarity from other peoples in its struggle .
in writing . - ( SV ) The situation in the Gaza Strip is extremely serious , as the ongoing conflict is depriving the civilian population of food , medicines and fuel .
The situation is so serious that immediate external help is required .
We have therefore voted in favour of the resolution .
However , we feel that it is extremely regrettable - though unfortunately not particularly surprising - that the European Parliament is once again using a disaster to slowly but surely advance its position .
After more than 18 months of an inhumane blockade , the 22 days of brutal Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip have led to the deaths of at least 1 324 people and over 5 000 wounded , most of whom are children .
Over 100 000 people have been displaced and more than 15 000 homes have been destroyed .
Basic infrastructures and key public services have been destroyed or dismantled , threatening the response to the most basic needs of the Palestinian population .
Faced with this shocking crime , the European Parliament does not have a single word of condemnation for Israel .
There is no doubt that the Palestinian population urgently needs aid .
There is no doubt that we must recognise the suffering of the Palestinian population .
However , it is also essential to denounce the aggressors and hold them responsible .
Instead , the resolution insists on whitewashing the Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip , hiding it behind the term ' conflict ' .
This aggression is part of the strategy to overcome the legitimate resistance of the Palestinian people to the occupation and to undermine the conditions required for building a Palestinian state .
The EU , which is always so quick to invoke human rights , is ' forgetting ' them with regard to Israel which , for more than 40 years , has been colonising the Palestinian territories of the West Bank , Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution of 18 February 2009 on humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip , as the civilian population is in great need of aid because of the situation created in this area .
I feel that an assessment must be carried out of the needs of the population in the Gaza Strip and plans for the area 's reconstruction must be initiated .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Annual Report ( 2007 ) on the main aspects and basic choices of the CFSP - European Security Strategy and ESDP - The role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Jacek Saryusz-Wolski , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the annual report on the main aspects and basic choices of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) in 2007 , presented to the European Parliament in application of point G , paragraph 43 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 ,
the report by Karl von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the European Security Strategy and the European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) , and
the report by Ari Vatanen , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you are not interested in following our debates , our rapporteur asks , rightly so , and for the dignity of our work , if you could please leave the Chamber in silence .
Thank you , Mr President .
Indeed , I believe that the Union 's foreign policy is worthy of attention .
Mr President , we have a special debate today on three major reports on foreign policy , on security and defence , and on EU-NATO relations .
Our annual report on the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) has become an important vehicle through which Parliament expresses its strategic view on EU foreign policy .
In this year 's report , we have decided to focus on policy making and policy shaping .
We have focused on the need to establish a true dialogue with the Council on the main objectives of the EU 's common foreign and security policy .
We have recognised that it is in progress , namely that for the first time , the Council 's report systematically refers to the resolutions adopted by the European Parliament .
We are grateful : this is a real achievement .
However , we have expressed also our regret that the Council does not engage in a full dialogue with the views advanced by Parliament , nor does it refer to those resolutions in operational documents as joint actions or common positions .
We expect that the Council 's annual report will provide opportunities to establish a dialogue with Parliament aimed at developing a more strategic approach to the common foreign and security policy . We have reiterated the most important principles in our report which should underscore our foreign policy .
In our view , the CFSP must be underpinned and guided by the values which the European Union and its Member States cherish , notably democracy , the rule of law , respect for the dignity of the human person , for human rights and for fundamental freedoms , and the promotion of peace and effective multilateralism .
We believe that the European Union can make an impact , but only if it speaks with one voice and if it is equipped with appropriate instruments like those stemming from the Lisbon Treaty and a more generous budget .
We can undertake effective action only when it is legitimised by both the European and national parliaments acting at their respective levels and in accordance with their own mandates .
In order to be credible and to respond to the expectations of EU citizens - and I say this on the eve of new parliamentary elections coming soon - the CFSP must be allocated resources commensurate with the objectives and specific targets .
We regret , therefore , that as in previous years , the CFSP budget is seriously under-funded .

We address horizontal and geographical issues in our report .

On horizontal issues , let me just enumerate the most important ones we touched upon : first , upholding human rights and promoting peace and security in Europe 's neighbourhood and at global level ; second , support for effective multilateralism and respect for international law ; third , the fight against terrorism ; fourth , non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and disarmament ; fifth , climate change , energy security and issues like cyber security .
In this report , we are intentionally selective .
We concentrate , therefore , on some strategic and geographical priority areas such as the Western Balkans , the Middle East and the broader Middle East , South Caucasus , Africa and Asia , and obviously relations with our strategic partner , the USA , as well as relations with Russia .
This report should be seen in conjunction with , and complementary to , Parliament 's more detailed reports .
It should not be trying to duplicate them .
I want to thank my colleagues in the House from the different political groups for their understanding and excellent cooperation .
We have tried to take most of the concerns on board , and I hope that the report will be endorsed by a handsome majority of our House .
Finally , to our partners from the Council and the Commission , I would like to say that we hope that this occasion can help us to develop a deeper strategic dialogue between Parliament , the Council and the Commission which will bring more democratic legitimacy to the hard work you are doing , Mr Solana and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , in order to have more cooperation in our triangle .
I hope that you will treat this as a possibility to develop more synergy , to strengthen our common voice - the voice of all three actors - and to give more democratic and parliamentary legitimacy to our common goal which is : foreign policy ; one voice ; European Union .
Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , this report should provide us with an opportunity to consider how far we have come with the European Union 's security and defence policy , where we are now , and what part the European Parliament has to play in this .
In so doing , we must observe that there have so far been 22 deployments within the framework of the European security and defence policy , of which 16 were civilian deployments and 6 military ones .
This means that a very strong emphasis has been placed on the civilian side of things .
This civilian side , of course , comes complete with functional democratic control as the civilian operations under the ESDP are funded from the European budget and are therefore scrutinised by the European Parliament .
There are other things that are funded from the European Union 's budget that are directly linked to security policy .
Examples include security research - EUR 1.3 billion over 7 years ; Galileo , which we say there are security aspects to - EUR 3.4 billion ; and GMES / Kopernikus , a project for which another EUR 1 billion is available .
We also now have , and this is a new development , legislation in the European Parliament in the field of security and defence .
We have adopted a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the intra-Community transfer of defence equipment and on tendering in the field of security and defence .
This is an important first step along the road .
Of particular importance , however , is the information for the European Parliament .
In this regard , our special committee , which also has access to secret information , is of particular importance , as are the regular discussions that we hold in this committee with the Special Representative on these subjects .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the High Representative and his colleagues for the constructive cooperation that has developed .
I shall turn now to the individual points of this report .
This report calls for the European Union to define its own security interests more clearly .
We always speak of the security interests of the individual countries , but we do have common security interests .
The protection of our citizens within and beyond the Union , peace in our neighbourhood , the protection of our external borders , the protection of our critical infrastructures , energy security , the security of our trade routes , the security of our assets at the global level and many other things represent , in reality , individual security interests and common security interests of the European Union .
We also need to consider what the security and defence-related ambitions of the European Union actually are .
The draft report states very clearly that we have no ambition to become a superpower like the United States .
It is also made very clear that we must concentrate on the geographical surroundings of the European Union .
Our priorities are the Balkans - the European Union 's main assignments - North Africa , the frozen conflicts in the East and our contribution to resolving the conflict in Palestine .
We must put our focus quite clearly on these areas .
I feel compelled to observe that , at the end of the French Presidency , the Council set very ambitious objectives , namely acquiring the ability to carry out certain operations in parallel .
If that is what we want , we will need the funds to bring it about .
This will involve the establishment of an autonomous and permanent headquarters in Brussels .
This is a first , very clear demand from this Parliament .
There was a very broad majority in favour of this in the committee .
Secondly , we need to bear in mind that the 27 Member States have 2 million soldiers at their disposal .
Three per cent of these soldiers should be made available to the European Union on a permanent basis .
That would be 60 000 soldiers .
This is why the report also calls for the Eurocorps to also be permanently assigned to the European Union .
This call is aimed at the six Member States that make up the Eurocorps .
We then make clear statements about the capabilities that we need to develop .
The 27 Member States of the European Union spend EUR 200 billion per annum on defence , and this EUR 200 billion must be better spent than it has been in the past .
We cannot afford to re-invent the wheel 27 times and we are therefore asking you today to ensure that , in future , where the European Union 's and the taxpayers ' money is spent on defence , it is better spent than it was in the past . Thank you very much .

rapporteur . - Mr President , 70 years ago , Mr Chamberlain came back from Munich waving a piece of paper and saying ' peace for our time ' .
Well , we know how wrong he was , and we also know that wishful thinking is a deadly substitute for realism .
Today , on this issue , we have to be brutally honest .
The EU has been incredibly successful in peacemaking .
The events of the Second World War gave birth to the EU .
I am very happy that Mr Solana is here today because finally we have this phone number for the EU .
Mr Solana has this number , which Mr Kissinger asked for years ago .
But what kinds of means are we - Member States and politicians - giving to Mr Solana ?
That is the question .
We have a financial crisis now , which did not fall on us from the sky .
It was very much self-inflicted .
We are talking about the toxic assets of banks and how we have to clear them .
Perhaps this is also the time to ask : what are the toxic assets and what are the obstacles to our peacemaking , our raison d 'être ?
We have to move on - the EU has to move on in its peacebuilding .
The world is changing so fast around us .
The biggest obstacle is that we simply do not have a vision .
We are day-to-day politicians who are short-sighted .
Immobility is our big problem .
The world is changing around us , faster than we can react .
What is the result of inefficient and failing security policies ?
Human suffering , dead bodies , mutilated people and atrocities .
Even if those people do not vote for us , we have to care for them because they are our brothers and sisters in the human family .
On 2 April 1917 , President Wilson said , ' a steadfast concert of peace can never be maintained except by a partnership of democratic nations ' .
President Wilson was awarded a Nobel Prize - which he deserved much more than Al Gore .
We in the EU do not realise what kinds of tools we have in our mosaic composition of 27 countries .
That gives us a unique tool in peacemaking .
Perhaps some people do not like the French , others do not like the Germans , and perhaps some people do not like the Finns , even - but I think everybody likes the Finns ! - but , when we are together , 27 countries , nobody can say that they hate the EU .
Therefore , the unique ability we have enables us to go to any crisis spot and be a doctor or a referee . But without the military capacity , without military credibility , we are like a dog whose bark is worse than its bite .
We have idealism but we do not equip ourselves with the means to reach those targets .
Now is the time to strike while the iron is hot : Il faut battre le fer tant qu 'il est chaud , as the French say .
Now , Mr Obama is the new President of the United States and he values Europe - he says that we are important allies .
What do we have to do ?
We have to get our act together .
Already , 94 % of the European population is in NATO , and only 6 % are outside .
Why do we not use it more efficiently ?
We owe that to the people , because it is our duty to alleviate human suffering ; it is our ethical duty and it is in our long-term interest .
Only by following in the footsteps of our forefathers can we be faithful to the EU 's inheritance and make the inevitable inconceivable - and that is what peacemaking means .
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . - Mr President , thank you for inviting me once again to this important debate on the CFSP .
I think that it is becoming a tradition once a year to hold this debate and I am very happy to participate .
I would like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Mr von Wogau and Mr Vatanen , for their reports .
I found in them a lot of things that resonate with what we are thinking and doing .
I have taken note of many of the things said in the reports and I hope very much that they will play a part in updating our thinking , with your cooperation .
Speaking today , at the beginning of 2009 , at the European Parliament , reminds me of where we were 10 years ago , in 1999 . That was really when we began working on ESDP .
And when I look at where we are today and compare this to where we were on the day that we began to work on ESDP , a lot of progress has really been made .
Nobody can fail to see what has been achieved .
As has been mentioned , more than 20 civilian and military operations are , or have been , deployed on just about every continent , from Europe to Asia , from the Middle East to Africa .
Thousands of European men and women are engaged in these operations , ranging from military to police , from border guards to monitors , from judges to prosecutors , a good range of people doing good for the stability of the world .
I think this is the European way of doing things . A comprehensive approach to crisis prevention and to crisis management ; a large and diversified tool box where we can take whatever is necessary ; a rapid response capability ; trying to be what we deserve to be , a global actor , as is asked of us by third countries .
Obviously , if the Lisbon Treaty were to be ratified , and I hope it will be , we would , without any doubt , be much more effective .
I should like to thank Parliament for the support we have obtained over recent years , for the good cooperation that I have always enjoyed from you , the representatives of the citizens of the European Union .
Without the engagement , without the understanding , without the support , not only of the Members of this distinguished House , but also of the citizens of the European Union through other mechanisms - their own parliaments - it would be very difficult to play the role that we try to play with the number of operations that we have and with the number of citizens of the European Union who are engaged in them .
The CFSP is more than an instrument .
The CFSP relates to our values , to your values , to the values of our people .
I really feel attached to these values that are represented in the core of all the 27 Member States of the European Union : human rights , the rule of law , international law and effective multilateralism ; all those words and concepts are probably a constructive representation of what we are .
But the CFSP also helps shape our internal cooperation among the Member States of the European Union .
By working together , by acting together , we define who we are .
And so the CFSP is also a way in which the European Union keeps on , every day , defining itself .
I think that what I have said will resonate with the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
This really is what we do and what we are about : values and action and , at the same time , construction of the European Union .
We act because of who we are , and who we are is shaped by our actions .
I think this is an important concept to keep in mind .
The Security Strategy of 2003 was a basic document that allowed us to map the way ahead .
The three reports make reference to that document .
As you know , we have updated it in cooperation with the Commission and Parliament in 2008 .
That document does not replace the 2003 document but it certainly reinforces it and brings it up to date , incorporating the threats and challenges that we face in the world in which we are living today , from climate change to terrorism , from energy security to piracy .
Let me say a word about piracy because that relates to our youngest operation , Atalanta .
I would like to underline that this is the first time that the ESDP has engaged in a maritime operation .
It is quite a step forward , quite a step in the right direction to have this type of operation .
This maritime operation against piracy is conducted from a European operational headquarters in the United Kingdom .
It involves a significant number of countries and a significant number of third countries want to join it .
I had lunch today with the Swiss Foreign Minister and they want to participate in this operation because they share our concerns on piracy .
This is very important .
You probably think , and I agree with you , that this offshore operation is very important but that the problems onshore need to be solved as well as the problems offshore .
Let me say a word about structures - internal structures relating to ESDP .
As you know , during the last month of the French Presidency , we were working on a document to reorganise and set up something very dear to me .
I tried to do it from the very beginning and we have the support to do it now , namely to develop a strategic planning capability which is , at the same time , both civilian and military .
This is the modern approach to crisis management .
I think that we are relatively new to these actions and because of this , we can be even more efficient , more flexible , and more able to adapt to new realities than others .
And so I think that what we are doing , in having military and civilian cooperation at the strategic planning level , is very important .
I have to say , and I hope you will agree with me , that military action alone cannot solve the conflicts of today .
Civilian action is not possible without a secure environment .
This is the equilibrium we have to find and this is what we are seeing everywhere - in the Middle East , in Afghanistan , wherever you look .
It is a very important concept of symbiosis between political , civilian and security aspects of our lives .
As has been said very eloquently by the three rapporteurs , we need capabilities .
Without capabilities we only have documents , and with documents alone we do not solve conflicts .
That was stressed very much at the December European Council and I would like to thank the three rapporteurs for having made this point clearly .
We have problems sometimes with force generation and this is something that is very important for you to know .
Without more rapid force generation , be it police , prosecutors , or military , it will be very difficult to act at the rhythm , at the speed , that is required in crisis management .
Let me say a word about NATO-European Union relations because they are covered in the report by Mr Vatanen .
As you know , we have a framework for cooperation that we call Berlin Plus .
However , not all the operations that we conduct on behalf of the European Union fall within this framework , for cooperation with the North Atlantic Alliance .
We still have problems , as you know , because this relationship has not been able to overcome some of the difficulties we have in really cooperating in operations with NATO that fall outside the framework of Berlin Plus .
We have problems in Kosovo that have still not been resolved and we have problems in Afghanistan .
I hope very much that in the run-up to the NATO summit , we will be able to resolve these problems .
Let me say a word on Afghanistan .
Without any doubt , this is going to be one of the most important issues facing us in 2009 .
You have seen the position of President Obama on this theatre - Afghanistan-Pakistan - and the appointment of a special representative .
We have to deliver and to deliver in a sensible manner .
More engagement will be needed .
This does not necessarily mean military engagement but we have to engage in a more efficient manner and in a more coordinated manner amongst ourselves and with others - the United States , the international community at large , the United Nations .
I have had the opportunity to meet Richard Holbrooke already a couple of times , and General Petraeus .
We are going to re-examine this concept in the coming weeks and it will be very good if , by that time , we are ready to respond in a constructive manner to a very important problem on which we are engaged , the European Union is engaged , the Member States are engaged , and I think we should maintain this engagement .
We could talk for hours about many other issues - energy , non-proliferation , you name it , but I think the important thing is that we have this fundamental agreement in the three reports that have been presented today on what we have been doing over the last period of time .
I would like to finish and say thank you very much for your cooperation .
My thanks to those who work with me more intensively on some of the specific dossiers in which we are engaged .
As I said , I think how we act in the international arena on behalf of the European Union will also define who we are .
At this point , it is very important that we do better because we want to be better .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I appreciate this opportunity to participate once again in this comprehensive debate on foreign and security policy matters .
Let me thank the authors of the three reports , which are the basis of today 's debate .
I would like to say that Javier Solana 's services and my own worked very well together on the report on the European security strategy ( ESS ) , and I believe that this shows in the result .
The report reflects well the new security challenges the EU faces and gives a broad definition of security .
Let me first say a few words on the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
The reports before us today , and the European security strategy report , all conclude that the European Union can make a difference if everyone works together to ensure that we have a fully coherent policy , one which embraces the CFSP , the Community dimension and , of course , actions by Member States .
Not only do we need to speak with one voice , but we also need to act together in a coherent and coordinated way .
This requires bringing together the best mix of EU policy instruments , from ESDP operations to conflict prevention and crisis response measures through the Instrument for Stability , development assistance , humanitarian aid , or democracy and human rights tools .
Let me give you a few examples : Afghanistan , Georgia , Kosovo and Chad could show how we do this in practice .
In Afghanistan , we have given a prominent place to security sector reform and governance within our overall assistance strategy .
Since 2007 , the Commission has embarked on a new programme reforming the justice sector .
On policing , the EUPOL mission of the Council is doing the mentoring and training on the ground , whilst the Commission supports the Afghan national police through the Law and Order Trust Fund ( LOTFA ) .
The Commission is also the main paymaster for the running costs of the Afghan police - over EUR 200 million to date since 2002 .
In Georgia , additional EU post-conflict financial support is being provided .
Up to now , a total of EUR 120 million - out of a EUR 500 million package from 2008 to 2010 - has been provided to the Government .
This exceptional EC assistance has contributed to preventing a major humanitarian crisis .
In Kosovo , the Commission has played its role in getting the EULEX Kosovo mission staffed and equipped in time .
In addition to ongoing assistance , we will this year prepare a study , which should identify means to advance Kosovo 's political and socio-economic development , and its progress towards integration with the European Union .
In Chad , we have committed a total of EUR 311 million under the 10th European Development Fund .
There , our goal is to contribute to the reduction of poverty and facilitate economic development .
Our priorities are good governance , including the judiciary and police , infrastructure and rural development .
Furthermore , we are supporting the training of 850 Chadian police by the UN mission MINURCAT through the Instrument for Stability with EUR 10 million .
We are also facilitating the voluntary return of Chadian IDPs and refugees and providing EUR 30 million in humanitarian assistance .
I think this is the right approach , and it needs to be pursued systematically each time the EU is faced with a new crisis .
This flexibility in our policy mix is emphasised in the report on the European security strategy of last December and referred to in all three reports that we have before us .
In the ESS report , it is rightly said that the links between internal and external EU policies have become more pronounced , which is clearly essential when we are considering issues such as energy security and climate change , or the focus on the security and development nexus and recognition of the importance of long-term poverty reduction as a means to reducing security threats .
The report recognises the need to communicate better with our citizens on all the aspects of security which are of particular concern to them so that we can maintain support for our global engagement , and emphasises that everything the EU has done in the field of security is based on our values and principles and has been linked to UN objectives .
We must continue to bring this message to the people , also on issues such as terrorism , and we have to say that it is firmly founded on respect for human rights and international law .
We also recognise the role of civil society and NGOs and of women in building peace , thereby reflecting a truly European approach .
I was pleased to note that the EP report on the ESS stressed the need to further implement UN Security Council resolutions 1325 and 1820 on women and conflict .
Turning to energy , the gas crisis affecting the EU this year was unprecedented in its effect .
With regard to energy security , it is clear that we have lessons to draw .
For instance , the need for a functioning EU internal energy market , for interconnection and infrastructure projects , for the development of mechanisms to handle supply crises and for the EU to have a strong external energy policy is now clear , and we support this broad approach .
The report calls for a greater role for the European Union in its neighbourhood , but I shall not talk about that now .
Our relations with Russia , which have been tested lately , play an important role and have a great security impact .
The transatlantic link remains fundamental to our common security , and here we will soon be working with President Obama on issues that are of high priority .
Let me conclude with a few words on a particular element of the Commission 's contribution to the EU crisis response , namely the Instrument for Stability .
The first two years of the new instrument have been successful , both in terms of budget implementation , operational quality and political coordination with Council and Parliament .
So far , EUR 220 million have been committed for 59 actions worldwide in 2007 and 2008 , with the main share in Africa , followed by Asia and the Middle East , plus Kosovo and Georgia .
Our priorities for 2009 will , as Javier Solana has already said , certainly include Afghanistan , Pakistan and the Middle East .
Let me say that we , through the Instrument for Stability , and in close cooperation with the Council secretariat , are engaged in a number of activities and are playing an increasingly important role in providing training for mission staff on procurement and financial administration and on ESDP-related training for civilian response teams .
We have trained 600 police experts on civilian crisis management in line with UN training standards , so that the robustness , the flexibility and the interoperability of the EU police elements have been improved .
I would like to add - and I think it is a very important point , for instance on Afghanistan - that we also need to ensure that the terms and conditions of service for seconded staff from Member States and contracted staff are sufficiently attractive to bring forward qualified candidates in sufficient numbers to staff our missions .
I think we will have to work in that direction .
That means that our input into crisis management is increasingly in demand , and expectations of what the EU can deliver are high .
But we will try to go and do what these expectations require from us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in relation to the annual report ( 2007 ) on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy , I would like to emphasise some of the important issues from the viewpoint of the Committee on Budgets .
Firstly , I would like to talk about the transparency of budget expenditure on the common foreign and security policy .
The practice implemented by the European Commission of carrying over to the following year unused appropriations from the common foreign and security policy chapter , which the European Commission considers to be allocated revenue , gives a certain cause for concern .
The Committee on Budgets has asked the Commission to provide information on this financial practice and recommends that the issue be examined in one of the regular common foreign and security policy meetings .
Secondly , I would like to discuss the transfer of appropriations between different budget chapter headings within the common foreign and security policy .
Certainly , here we need to have some flexibility , in order to be able to react quickly to crises in non-EU countries .
The Commission could , however , improve transparency and , hence , democratic scrutiny in the field of the common foreign and security policy , by informing Parliament of internal transfers in good time .
This is particularly important because the majority of common foreign and security policy missions , such as , in particular , the European Union 's monitoring mission in Georgia and EULEX in Kosovo , are politically sensitive .
Thirdly , in relation to the regular common foreign and security policy meetings held pursuant to the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management , the Committee on Budgets considers that much more effective use could be made of these meetings , by assessing planned measures in the common foreign and security policy sphere and the European Union 's medium and long-term strategies in non-EU countries , and also by preparing a budgetary authority position prior to the conciliation meeting . Thank you for your attention .



Mr President , I wish to thank the European Parliament 's three rapporteurs - Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Mr von Wogau and Mr Vatanen - for their reports and to stress , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and Mr Solana did , that they are a significant contribution by Parliament to the task of developing a strong , visible and effective foreign security and defence policy .
This policy must guarantee the defence of our interests in the world and protect and provide security for our citizens .
It must contribute towards creating a European Union that plays its part in an effective multilateral system and , above all , Mr President , it must help to ensure that human rights and democratic values prevail in every part of the world .
I believe we can see from the Treaty of Lisbon and the news that reaches us today from the Republic of Ireland - where the polls show 60 % in favour of the Treaty - and the Czech Republic - with the Czech Parliament 's ratification of the Treaty - that the European Union is coming of age in terms of its foreign and security policy .
Above all , this must also contribute to making our governments think in a more European way when facing crises .
I believe that the European Union has to develop its own strategic considerations - this is obvious , and it is covered in the new security strategy - but without forgetting that the transatlantic link is written into the European Union 's genetic code .
The United States , through the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation , has been the guarantor of Europe 's security and , for the time being , there is still no alternative to this link .
Furthermore , I believe that it will only be possible to establish Europe as a ' power ' if this is done by asserting itself , not against the United States , but alongside the United States , as two partners who share the same vision of the world and have a mutual respect for each other .
Of course , this does not mean that the European Union has to give the United States a carte blanche : we must defend our interests and our values whenever we consider it appropriate .
The United States must also learn to respect the positions of the European Union because , as the work of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and Mr Solana assumes , we are an institution that can be respected internationally and that has significant potential as an interlocutor in every region of the world .
Mr President , it is not true of the Council , but we here in Parliament and , as a result , also the Commission , are edging towards the finishing straight for this electoral term .
For that reason , I think it makes sense that we should act not merely as the accounts clerk checking the balance sheet of the European security and defence policy 's progress , but in a much more fundamental capacity .
I must admit that I am absolutely torn between two ways of looking at this .
I tear my hair out when we have to deal with the day-to-day necessities , when a mission is threatening to fail for want of six helicopters , when there is no political will in the various capitals or when there are splits on technology projects .
When I look at things from a historical perspective , however , everything looks different , and Mr Solana , in fact , deserves a great deal of praise in this regard .
The European security and defence policy has only been in existence for around ten years , we should remember , and the document on the security strategy was only produced in 2003 .
On that basis , the progress made is really quite great , from a historical point of view .
As a historical optimist , I choose the latter point of view in case of doubt .
The second point that I , as a social democrat , would like to address , relates to something for which neither the European Union nor NATO is responsible , but which affects us all as Europeans . It relates to developments in connection with the missile defence system in Poland and the Czech Republic .
We , as social democrats , are very pleased to hear that things that we have put forward are now being implemented in connection with changes in the United States .
We have always said that it does not make sense to rush the decision on the stationing of equipment , as there is not , at this time , any threat from , for example , Iran .
Hillary Clinton said last week that further decisions at the US end will be taken in the context of what happens in Iran .
Joe Biden has said that it is dependent on technical capabilities and financial considerations .
These are things that we welcome .
We will , at least , not be the last doomed brigade left fluttering the flag of this missile defence system .
Today 's debate , which is based on the three reports , proves that , contrary to what many euro-pessimists and euro sceptics claim , European defence and security policy and a European foreign policy are indeed taking more and more shape and are showing more and more signs of consistency .
This has been abundantly demonstrated by the speakers before me .
I should first and foremost like to thank the three rapporteurs for the way in which they have taken the opinions of the liberal shadow rapporteurs into consideration when writing their reports .
We are pleased that many of our opinions are reflected in these reports .
It is a little unfortunate , in my view , that for the NATO report by Mr Vatanen , who went out of his way to take as many opinions and approaches into consideration as possible , amendments were tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group of the European Parliament at the very last minute , as if these two groups wanted to place their own stamp on the report .
We will be endorsing it nevertheless , because we believe - and this is with reference to the report - that it does highlight the right aspects and that it also shows sufficient realism .
For example , it is recognised , albeit in an elegant manner , that there is definitely competition between the European Union and NATO .
Things like this are usually completely ignored , even though that is just the way it is .
Secondly , the amendment put forward by Mr Duff and myself , in which we clearly set out the difficulties that are caused by the respective attitudes of Turkey , Greece and Cyprus in NATO and the European Union , has been accepted .
Usually , we do not get much further than elegant allusions .
Finally , there is a plea for complementarity between the strategies of the European Union and NATO in relation to defence and security which , ladies and gentlemen , is absolutely vital .
Mr President , the liberal end of history foretold in the nineteen nineties has turned out to be a fantasy .
We are entitled to feel increasingly isolated .
Therefore , there is no alternative to cooperation between the European Union and NATO .
There is no alternative to a greater engagement of Europe and the USA in matters of international security .
Otherwise the principles of international order will de facto be dictated by Korea , Iran or the terrorists of Hamas .
Energy , raw materials , piracy and Internet security require special attention .
Recently in Poland , we learned that better coordination of the rescue of hostages is also a huge problem .
However , the fact that decisions are taken jointly does not mean they will be good ones .
Therefore , I would not overrate the role of the Lisbon Treaty .
The limitations of our effectiveness are to be found in European capitals .
It is there that we should seek the political will to pursue a joint world policy , and not in procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is the case that , in recent years , there has been rapid development of the European foreign and security policy .
We must ensure , however , that there is equally rapid development and change in relation to threats and crises of whatever kind .
My group is opposed to glossing over our own work .
For that reason , I am likewise not prepared to talk up the reports before us today .
Mr Saryusz-Wolski has produced a sound report , and it is one that we will support .
That said , the strategic dilemma is clear .
Mr Solana , you are absolutely right .
You have just told us that European cooperation must be strengthened at the strategic level .
First and foremost , though , what we have to strive for , and what we need to come up with , is a common European strategy in foreign and security policy - something that we still do not have .
I say this because we are at a historic juncture .
These reports - in particular that of Mr Vatanen - on NATO , limp along in the shadow of the new US Government .
Mr Vatanen declined to deal with the question of nuclear disarmament - which we will be voting on once again tomorrow - in his report .
So what is it that we are talking about , then ?
I will turn now to Mr von Wogau 's report .
This report discusses a new concept : SAFE .
This is a nice play on words - Synchronised Armed Forces Europe - but this concept simply does not exist .
We , furthermore , do not see why we should support this , when this concept is just not on the table .
Mr von Wogau has neglected to discuss human security in his report .
My group insists that we , as the European Union , must clearly set out this objective in international politics .
He has neglected to ensure that we speak about the peacebuilding partnership or the development of a civilian peace corps .
For these reasons , I feel entitled to say that this report is completely inadequate if we believe that Europe must act now , in the coming months , from today - and that is something that became clear at the security conference in Munich .
There is a window of opportunity after the election in the United States .
I do not know how long that window will stay open .
As Europeans , we must now formulate our strategic interests and incorporate them into the alliance - NATO - and we must also now stipulate our definitions of security , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner pointed out , with regard to Russia .
Otherwise , what will happen is that , in a few months time , the US administration will be more forward looking than us in the European Union and will decide , in bilateral talks with Russia , on crucial security strategy positions without European power - political power , conflict-prevention power - being able to have any influence on this re-stabilisation of transatlantic security policy .
For that reason , I call on us , and on others , to truly leave behind the old mindsets of the cold war and choosing one camp over the other and sticking with it and to move on .
Europe has the obligation to its citizens to create a security partnership now that brings peace , rather than the opposite .

Mr President , the reports by Mr von Wogau and Mr Vatanen are explicit and clear and push forward still further the militarisation of the European Union .
The reports require the de facto transformation of the EU into a military power .
Mr von Wogau 's report on the European Security Strategy requires an ' integrated European Armed Force ' .
We do not share the view that this is the way forward .
What is more , the report advocates , inter alia , an EU Operational Headquarters and a common market in defence equipment .
The von Wogau report even lends its retrospective support to the dreadfully overpriced Eurofighter programme .
The report states that the Treaty of Lisbon , which ' will introduce major innovations in the field of the ESDP , ' is of key importance .
This is a key reason behind our opposition to the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Vatanen report calls for permanent structures of cooperation between the EU and NATO .
We believe this is wrong .
Each new EU military mission is problematic .
NATO is not an alliance for peace - it is a prosecutor of wars , in Yugoslavia and now in Afghanistan .
What wars will be next ?
NATO stands for the politics of war .
The report labels NATO as ' the core of European security ' .
No !
NATO stands for insecurity !
A mixing together of NATO and the EU would be highly problematic , especially with regard to the two strategies .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left stand for a civilian European Union and oppose NATO .
What is needed is the disbandment of NATO .
NATO wants to hold celebrations of its 60-year existence in Strasbourg , Baden-Baden and Kehl .
I issue the call from here at the European Parliament today for protests against this NATO summit !
Sixty years of NATO is sixty years too many .
As a group , we have submitted minority reports in response to the reports of Messrs von Wogau and Vatanen , and my colleagues will elaborate on the specific problems in relation to Russia .
As before , we reject the missile defence system and we reject wordings in this report that make reference to Cyprus .
We will therefore be voting against these two reports .
When , less than a year ago , I , along with an EP delegation , learnt about the activities of the EU police mission on the West Bank , I nursed a glimmer of hope of a Palestinian Authority actually enforcing its authority by means of an effective policing and security system .
Paragraph 25 of this Saryusz-Wolski report therefore welcomes the extension of the mandate of the EU police mission in the Palestinian regions .
Meanwhile , I have very recently seen a few very unfavourable reports on public safety on the West Bank , including extortion practices by members of the Palestinian security system who operate like mafia leaders at night , or even the names of terrorist group members who are on the Palestinian Authority 's payroll .
I would like to ask the Council and Commission whether these reports are true .
Is it fiction ?
In short , what is the latest on the EU police mission in the Palestinian regions ?
This is essential , after all .
If they are pursuing a viable Palestinian state , law and order must first be restored on the West Bank .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would argue that the Atlantic Alliance is an obsolete defence instrument and that in certain recent cases it has not in fact helped relations , for example , with Russia .
I believe that we should maintain our relations with Russia and use them to pave the way for a privileged partnership .
I agree with Mrs Ferrero-Waldner 's statement that common security policies should not overlook the fact that in recent times , NATO has not proved to be the most useful instrument of dissuasion or peacemaking .
I believe that Europe now has the maturity and political need to outline its own independent security strategy .
This does not mean adopting an opposite position .
We can be alongside - as other Members have argued - without continuing to be subject to what are often non-European interests .
For this reason , I cannot support the reports put forward .
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . - ( ES ) Mr President , as quickly as possible and given that the contributions of the various speakers have , in general terms , been along the same lines , allow me to mention to the House three or four issues that come to mind having heard the speeches .
To begin with , resources and means .
The rapporteurs of the various reports have said that it is true that we have problems with resources and with means , and that better utilisation of national resources could be a good route for us to take .
However , I would say that we also have available to us some means of which we are not making the best possible use , and I would like to highlight this for you .
I believe that it was a good idea to create the European Defence Agency by agreement of the European Council , without the need to apply or adopt the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe that the Agency can carry out great work in coordinating national policies , to give greater added value to all policies that are put in place .
Someone spoke about helicopters .
Helicopters are needed for all kinds of missions : civilian missions , military missions , all sorts of missions ; for transport .
The helicopter has today become an essential crisis management tool .
Better coordination of what we have , both in terms of hardware and in terms of making better use of software for helicopters , would allow us to make better use of them and would , in fact , give us more than we have in day-to-day use .
I would also like to say that in recent weeks , our strategic relationships with the United States and with the Russian Federation have taken great steps forward .
Mrs Beer spoke about the Munich Security Conference ; it was , I believe , an important event , at which progress was made in unscheduled talks because it was not a political forum for decision making , but an extremely important forum for reflection .
I believe that the issue which will be under discussion in the coming years and months will be our relationships both with the United States , from the point-of-view of strategy in the coming years , and with Russia .
That was the case in Munich , as well as later on when Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and I were in Moscow , discussing the fundamental theme of new ideas on European security with the leaders of the Russian Federation .
Europe does not want to be a military power .
I believe that Europe - the European Union - is a civilian power with military means , which is very different from a military power , and I believe that this should continue to be the case .
This work and all the documents that we produce , and which both Parliament and the Commission - or I myself - produce , are working towards that goal .
A few words about the police in the Palestinian territories , which is a subject we looked at in the previous session .
EUPOL is one of the most important assets we have as regards credibility and work in the field of security with the Palestinians and in the occupied territories , and it will continue to be an important asset of the European Union , winning recognition from all : from the Palestinians , the Israelis and the surrounding countries .
Therefore , be sure that we will do whatever we can to continue working towards that goal .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , I should like to thank the three rapporteurs , and wish to comment on just a few part aspects .
I should like to say in particular , however , that 60 years of NATO have meant 60 years of peace and freedom for my generation : this should be noted .
If we now succeed in strengthening EU foreign , security and defence policy at a time when multilateralism is increasing again - as the High Representative , Mr Solana , has just said - that is , if we manage to incorporate our vision of preventive measures and soft power into a common transatlantic strategy to a greater extent at this time of multilateralism , we shall have a good future ahead .
At the same time , France 's return to military integration strengthens Europe 's position .
The Munich Security Conference was telling : following explanations by Prime Minister Tusk , Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy - in the presence of Joe Biden , Vice-President of the United States - a European corps within NATO went practically unchallenged .
In my eyes , at least , it was a sensational discovery that there were no protests from the Americans .
In transatlantic relations , we can step up the development of common positions in the military field , too , so that these can then be portrayed credibly within the framework of NATO .
For this reason , we should use our vision of military capabilities with an emphasis on soft power and prevention to tackle a new agenda , one that had already existed , but which became clear in Munich , for President Obama 's policies make it possible for us to enter a new era of disarmament negotiations .
We Europeans can play a role in this with START , with the NPT , which needs to be renegotiated , and particularly with the CFE Treaty , which is of particular importance in Europe as we also have certain problems with Russia .
If all of this is incorporated , including the missile shield , it will give us new - better - opportunities to conduct common transatlantic policy , with the United States as our ally and Russia as our strategic partner : a policy towards Europe 's interest in peace .
We can take this opportunity only if we ourselves become stronger and more influential , and therefore this policy goes in the right direction .
Mr President , the report on NATO 's role in the EU 's security architecture reflected different approaches in the European Parliament between , on the one hand , opinions which continue to look at NATO as the organisation offering the strongest security guarantee to its members , and opinions which , on the contrary , see less and less need for NATO in a world in which apparently there are no major threats - at least not comparable to the former Soviet one .
However , until now , there was no member in both organisations willing to give up the NATO security guarantee , even if the EU is putting weight behind its defence and security effort and has introduced its equivalent of Article 5 of the Washington Treaty : the solidarity clause in the Lisbon Treaty .
To my mind , the relationship between NATO and the EU - the most important component of the larger transatlantic relationship - should be one that is naturally complementary and mutually advantageous to two partners who are compelled to work together in responding to today 's multiplying and increasingly complex challenges .
To that effect , existing mechanisms - see the Berlin Plus agreements - could be improved ; new ones - see the proposal for an EU operational headquarters - should be contemplated ; obstacles - see the negative impact of the Cyprus problem - should be overcome ; and , most important , mutual perceptions should be definitely improved .
Thus , on the one hand , one should stop considering NATO as an adversary and , on the other , the EU as an appendix to NATO .
As mentioned , the truth is that in practice , the two partners could very well cooperate with each other , mutually complementing one another .
For that , the report has been amended and hopefully the end result has become acceptable to many of us .
Mr President , several speakers are putting a brave face on things this afternoon .
The fact is that not all of the ESDP missions are proving to be a success : several failed to have clarity of purpose , several are poorly funded and it is possible that we could still fail in the Afghan campaign .
So it is a good thing that Parliament is putting forward a strong contribution to defining common security , and we need now to establish far clearer criteria for the ESDP missions .
On the question of the integration of our forces , progress is feeble , and I cannot think that colliding French and British submarines is quite what we had expected !
( PL ) Mr President , when there are too many Presidents , there are , in fact , none at all .
When we are talking about the question of security , we should speak very clearly and precisely about something which is a most urgent and significant matter .
What happened last year in Caucasia , in the closest proximity to the European Union , shows that we must certainly place importance on eastern policy , and treat it as a specific investment in the security of Europe and the EU .
This is also why partnership with countries to the east of the EU is , I think , absolutely fundamental , and while I am pleased that this partnership exists , I am also concerned , because the budget allocated to Eastern Partnership has been reduced almost three-fold .
I think this is an absolutely fundamental question and I believe that it will be a specific banner of the European Union , not only for its nearest neighbours , but also for countries that lie a long way beyond Belarus , Ukraine or Georgia .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to the three rapporteurs .
Unfortunately , however , I have to say that I do not share the uncritical view of NATO that Mr Vatanen 's report , in particular , represents .
Of course , NATO is not the same as it was during the Cold War , and neither is Europe , and cooperation between NATO and the EU is an excellent thing .
I do not , however , share the view that it would be a problem if not all of the Member States of the EU were members of NATO .
We must recognise the fact that some have been able to make a worthwhile contribution to peacebuilding precisely because they have remained outside military alliances , as is the case with my country , Finland .
Since Finland does not belong to any military alliances , hardly anywhere is it perceived as hostile or a spokesman for the enemy . This has helped many Finns to act as peacebuilders .
Examples are our former Prime Minister Holker in Northern Ireland , our former President Ahtisaari in Namibia , Indonesia , Aceh and Kosovo , and our former minister , Mr Haavisto , in Sudan .
Although the majority of EU nationals live in member countries of NATO , we nevertheless also have to recognise that the existence of non-aligned countries is a valuable resource for peacebuilding .
It cannot be dismissed in the name of some aim to harmonise military policy within the EU .
( CS ) I originally wanted to talk about the dangers of the militarisation of space because I feel , as a former astronaut , that I have a particular understanding of this .
However , the documents presented highlight , among other things , the need to utilise security policy for the benefit of EU citizens .
At the same time we are completely ignoring , for example , their opinion on the planned construction of new foreign bases on EU territory .
Specifically , in Poland and the Czech Republic , preparations are continuing for the installation of components of the American missile defence system .
And particularly in my own country , the Czech Republic , the views and interests of the public are being completely ignored .
Not a single official voice has been heard from the EU in support of the interests of citizens , for whom the EU perhaps does not exist in this respect .
At the same time , two thirds of people in the Czech Republic consistently reject the foreign base , in spite of an information and promotional campaign that has been going on for more than two years .
In my view , there is something wrong with the EU when the interests of the people are not reflected in our documents and when people 's views can be ignored in the interests of democracy .
It is no wonder then that people turn away from EU politics , regarding it as something that does not belong to them or when they flatly reject it .
Mr President , the citizens of Europe need a strong Union with a competitive foreign , security and defence policy .
This will not happen if our Union keeps idle in one place .
China and India are growing , not only in economic power , but also in military might .
Europe 's competitive advantage should be based on knowledge and innovation .
This should be nurtured and supported by all of us .
In an effective security strategy , our European forces should have access to equipment and resources of the highest quality .
While the United States spends trillions of dollars on security , we in Europe are slow or idle in developing our own strategy .
In a time of crisis , we are closing firearms factories , like the factory in Radom , Poland .
We should instead be investing in advanced technologies , such as the recoilless technologies being developed in Poland as we speak .
Innovation creates new business and jobs .
We cannot build European capabilities by shutting down our own factories .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in principle I am certainly in favour of the idea of a European army , but we must define what kind of army it would be and with what limits .
Indeed , it is highly incongruous that we have two forces armed against each other - the Turkish army and the Greek army - that are part of the same alliance .
I am sure that the Council has visited Northern Cyprus and has been able to appreciate the damage done by the Turkish soldiers and Turkish occupation to an island that is surely European .
It must also be said that the alliance with the United States is clearly an alliance that very often brings great problems .
The US has dragged us into several wars , into several conflicts - I am thinking of Serbia , Iraq and Afghanistan - at the heart of which lay interests that were certainly not European .
Instead , we should ally ourselves with Russia and Belarus which are , in fact , historically , religiously , militarily and geopolitically European .
This is the future of the European army : an army , therefore , certainly not at war with the United States , but keeping a respectful distance ; an army without Turkey , because until we have evidence to the contrary , Turkey is part of Asia , and in the Mediterranean is unfortunately in conflict with a European country ; and an army allied with and closely linked to Russia and Belarus .
Mr President , you will not be surprised if I express concern about the thrust of the reports relating to ESDP , in particular Mr von Wogau 's report , which is full of false assumptions concerning the nature of the European Union and the ambition to create a European army under EU control .
It sees , and I quote this expression , ' Synchronised Armed Forces Europe ' as a step on the way to ' an integrated European Armed Force ' . Surely , in other words , a European army .
As we all know , ESDP produces no military added value .
It is a political tool in the advancement of an integrated Europe .
It should be seen for what it is .
For a long time , I have argued that the European Union could play a useful role in providing civil instruments for crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction .
This would actually be helpful .
By the way , no military officers that I know imagine that conflicts such as Afghanistan can be tackled by military means alone .
There is nothing new in what is now fashionably called ' the comprehensive approach ' .
We used to call it ' hearts and minds ' .
So it is quite wrong - a deceit in fact - for the EU to try and justify its involvement in military matters by claiming the comprehensive approach somehow rather for itself - some sort of EU-unique selling point .
For the EU , the honest and sensible approach would be to drop the defence ambition from ESDP and to concentrate on its civil contribution .
Then , perhaps , Europe and her allies would be able to focus on their military contributions to NATO , revitalising the transatlantic alliance for the difficult years ahead , without being distracted by the EU 's duplicative agenda .
The immediate problem is that the EU 's ambitions are now beginning to contaminate NATO , and I am seriously concerned that this will affect the way the 60th anniversary goes .
Meanwhile , back in the UK , we have government ministers in a state of denial that any of this is happening .

( ES ) Commissioner , Mr Solana , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the three rapporteurs for their work .
As a shadow rapporteur for the report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) , I will refer specifically to that document , beginning by congratulating Mr Saryusz-Wolski on the results of his work and his collaboration with other groups in order to obtain a consensual result .
In the same way as Parliament has demanded many times that the European Union be provided with the tools necessary to give it a single voice in the world , this House itself is also able to present a united front when evaluating and giving impetus to the great priorities of common foreign and security policy .
The efforts of our group - the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - have been towards twin goals .
First , introducing or reinforcing the big issues that we believe to be instrumental across all areas of foreign policy , such as the fight against climate change , the promotion of peace across the globe , or a commitment to human development .
Second , proposing ways to restore the balance between the geographical priorities of the CFSP as they appeared originally in the text , if they did appear , or introducing them as a new element if they were absent .
That is why we have championed , for example , greater clarification of the actions between the institutional and cooperative frameworks involved in the recently defined Eastern Dimension .
We have argued for greater diversification of and greater emphasis to be placed on relationships with Africa , a continent that we often only remember when particularly violent wars break out , and much of the time not even then .
As regards Latin America , we wanted the current negotiation processes for association agreements - the first bi-regional talks that the European Union will conclude in its history - to be given consideration .
Concerning the Mediterranean , we have objected to a reductionist approximation that only talks about security .
Instead , we want to include the rich political , economic and socio-cultural heritage contained in the Barcelona Process .
As far as amendments for plenary are concerned , our group has not presented any because we believe that in that way , the balance achieved by the compromises is somehow strengthened .
We will therefore oppose the majority of amendments , so as not to damage the compromise reached in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
( PL ) Mr President , as Tony Blair once said , although the European Union should not be a superstate , it should be a superpower .
We might add : not only an economic superpower , for it already is that , but an important player on the world stage , because this is required by the interests , including the economic interests , of all the Member States .
Henry Kissinger is said to have once asked for the telephone number to call to find out what the position of the European Union was in important matters of international policy .
Today that is the number of the High Representative .
The problem is , however , that when the telephone rings , Mr Solana has to know what to say .
It is , therefore , essential to build a common foreign policy , to include a security and energy policy , and therefore also a common policy towards Russia .
I would like to return to the constantly repeated proposal concerning the necessity for all the countries of the European Union to speak with one voice when engaging in dialogue with Russia .
For this to happen , a precisely defined policy towards Russia should be developed as quickly as possible , a policy maintained in common and founded on solidarity .
This will create a clear framework not only for talks between the EU and Russia , but also for bipartite talks with individual Member States .
In developing this policy , a very important role should be granted to the European Parliament , in view of the mandate it has obtained in democratic elections , and of which it may be proud .
( EL ) The report on the role of ΝΑΤΟ in the European Union has been used as an excuse to slip in the question of Cyprus 's joining the Partnership for Peace and ΝΑΤΟ .
Respect is needed for the position of the Republic of Cyprus .
Intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign Member State to obtain an integration which is not dictated by any treaty is not legitimate .
At a time when the Republic of Cyprus is in the middle of negotiations to resolve the Cyprus question , fronts are being opened which have a very adverse effect on the process .
The full demilitarisation of a homeland occupied by Turkey and the safeguarding of the sustainability of a future solution must be everyone 's sole objective .
Moreover , this is the position taken by the European Parliament in other reports .
We call on you to support Amendments 22 , 23 and 24 and to vote against those points which constitute intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign state .
We call on you to confirm that the principle of respect for the sovereign rights of the Member States is inviolate , independent of your overall opinion on the Partnership or on ΝΑΤΟ .
Our choice is demilitarisation and adherence to the principles of international law .
( EL ) Mr President , under international law ' I have a state ' means I control certain territories over which I instate a government which exercises a defence and foreign policy .
I ask you now about the ' state of Europe ' which various people are preaching about and I wonder , where are its borders , what are these certain territories and where is its defence when its defence is in the hands of a large - unfortunately American - army and where is its foreign policy when we have a Middle East in flames , a terrorist greenhouse exporting terrorism , the refugees and victims of which are not on their way to Alabama or Arizona or Kentucky but , unfortunately , are coming to Greece , to Cyprus , to Germany and to Spain ?
That is why I have to say that I have started to doubt the possibility of supporting the idea to come out of these proposals by the gentlemen who have tabled their reports before us and am thinking of voting against them tomorrow .
Madam President , those who pretend that an EU superstate is not being built before our eyes have a lot of explaining to do in terms of the contents of these empire building reports .
Affirmations that a common defence policy - now taken as a given - and what is called the EU 's strategic autonomy , require an integrated European armed force , and demands for an autonomous and permanent EU operational headquarters - along with demands for equivalence with NATO - leave no room for doubt but that , under our common foreign and security policy , those pushing the European project demand not just political power but also military power , all of which must come from diminishing the powers , the rights and the independence of the Member States .
Such super-statehood and a centralised army for Europe I repudiate , as I do the Lisbon Treaty , which would make it all possible .
Madam President , the message of our rapporteurs today could be that a vibrant Euro-Atlantic partnership is the best guarantee for European security and stability .
Indeed , I support adopting a new transatlantic agenda and bringing about a new set of Euro-Atlantic institutions , resulting finally in a comprehensive transatlantic common market .
Ari Vatanen has urged the involvement of all EU and NATO members in closer cooperation , regardless of which organisation they belong to .
I think that is a very practical idea , as is his idea of a permanent EU operational headquarters complementing - and , of course , not competing with - NATO 's command structures .
Another very important point is that we draw on the same pool of national resources .
Jacek Saryusz-Wolski has said that the CFSP is seriously underfinanced , so it is crucial to avoid duplication and to increase efficiency .
The question for the Member States is : What are they offering Mr Solana to carry out our common defence policies ?
Thirdly , it is time to address new challenges to our security .
In fact , future conflicts will be fought and perhaps decided in cyberspace , where every state has to react and defend itself , sometimes in a timeframe that does not exceed a second .
The European Parliament , too , needs to take the initiative to contribute to this dramatic challenge of the new century , a challenge that is based on the democratisation of modern technology .
( DE ) Madam President , the nationalists , the narrow-minded Members of this House , no doubt really believe that the risks and problems of this world can be dealt with by nations alone on an individual basis .
Mr Allister is a typical example .
Does he really believe that terrorism in the world can be combated by counting on his country 's national defence alone ?
Does he really believe that the problems of energy security can be solved if everyone tackles them on their own ?
That approach is antiquated .
Of course , the Treaty of Lisbon , so frequently criticised , would bring the great benefit of enabling us to work together a bit more , for example , in the matter of energy policy and of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , to address effectively the dangers and risks of this world .
The new United States Government under President Obama is pleased that this common European policy exists , as it means that the United States has a partner in tackling a number of these problems .
In addition - something made clear by the frequent presence of Russian representatives in this House - Russia , too , has now realised that the old approach of talking only to individual countries and then playing them off against each other simply no longer works .
Russia has realised that it must talk to the European Union if common solutions are to be reached , for example , in the matter of energy security .
Indeed , this is also mentioned repeatedly in the report by Mr Saryusz-Wolski .
How can we try to solve these problems together : that of energy security , for example ?
I am delighted that the High Representative and one of his staff are to further intensify their efforts on this in future , as this will enable us to demonstrate to our citizens how the Common Foreign and Security Policy takes into account their specific interests , and how we mean to prevent Europeans having to shiver again in future .
That is what this is about , and that is why we favour a common foreign and security policy over nationalist foreign policy .
( FR ) Madam President , I congratulate our three rapporteurs for this quite remarkable summary that they have given of the current state of our common foreign and security policy .
Mr Solano , you know better than anyone that Europe is expected to take its place on the world stage , as dictated by its economic and demographic power and its wealth of democratic and humanist values .
It has to be said that despite the will shown regularly by over two-thirds of our fellow European citizens , as you said , some progress has been made over ten years , I will grant you that , but it has to be said also that this Europe still does not exist .
If one were needed , Europe 's reticence with regard to resolving the new tragedy in the Middle East would be a recent example of this .
There was , and there still is , a need for the presence in Gaza of a Europe that plays an active role , helping the population to survive and rebuild the country , and helping in the fight against arms smuggling , which has allowed this territory to be transformed into a base for the launching of rockets of all sizes .
Despite the verbal outpourings in Sharm el-Sheikh and Jerusalem , nothing has yet been done in this respect .
I would like to ask again a question already asked at the time of the Lebanese crisis : when can we expect , Mr Solano , the deployment of a European fleet in the Mediterranean like the one you have introduced to deal with piracy ?
We have the resources .
Will we , one day , have the will ?
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union must act in the interests of the security of citizens of all Member States .
Above all , it should accept part of the responsibility for the war on terrorism and should react sharply to any manifestations of terrorism .
The murder of a Polish engineer - being held hostage in Pakistan - by the local Taliban has had far-reaching repercussions recently .
The so-called European diplomacy did not join the prior talks aimed at securing his release .
This shocking incident , which is an element of the broader problem of security , should be the subject of a separate Parliamentary debate and should result in specific steps being taken , and I appeal for this .
A priority at the moment is to achieve the return of the body of the murdered Pole and to help his family .
These essential but short-term measures cannot , however , take the place of a comprehensive approach to terrorism and of increasing diplomatic pressure on countries such as Pakistan .
( PT ) In international relations , Portugal abides by the principles of national independence , respect for human and peoples ' rights , equality between states , the peaceful resolution of international conflicts , non-interference in the internal affairs of other states and cooperation with all other peoples to bring about the emancipation and progress of humankind .
Portugal advocates the abolition of imperialism , colonialism and any other forms of aggression , control and exploitation in relations between peoples , and also comprehensive , simultaneous and controlled disarmament , dissolution of political and military blocs and the establishment of a system of collective security aimed at creating an international order capable of ensuring peace and justice in relations between peoples .
I would point to the text of Article 7 of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic to show how far away the European Union is from these principles .
By assuming the role of the European pillar of NATO , in partnership with the US , and by increasingly promoting the militarisation of international relations , the arms race , interference and aggression aimed at ensuring that the major powers control and share the market and natural resources , it is acting in total contradiction to these principles .
Madam President , these are own-initiative reports and therefore they might be dismissed as so much hot air .
But we know that such reports are sometimes used as a means of introducing the policy aspirations of the EU .
Mr von Wogau was once the Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and was instrumental in bringing about the European single currency .
He is now Chair of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , and , when he writes a report saying that the European Union needed its own armed forces , then we can be confident that that is precisely what the European Union intends to bring about in due course .
These reports call for the EU to develop its own armed forces by means of common weapons procurement , a common communication system and an autonomous common command and control structure .
Mr von Wogau advocates an EU standing army of 60 000 soldiers permanently available for deployment .
The EU wants its own soldiers , guns , tanks , aeroplanes and bombs in order to ' fulfil its responsibilities in the world ' .
What are those responsibilities exactly ?
To find out , you will have to wait to see if the Lisbon Treaty is fully ratified and brings about ' a common foreign and security policy , leading to a common defence ' .
No one can say that they were not warned of the EU 's military aspirations .

( FR ) Madam President , however much friendship we feel for the rapporteurs , Mr Vatanen and Mr von Wogau , we are unable to approve their reports .
Firstly , because NATO , the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation , was created in 1949 in response to the terrible threat posed by communism towards Western Europe .
It played a useful , even essential role .
Today , however , this dreadful communist system has collapsed and the Warsaw Pact has been dissolved .
NATO , however , is constantly expanding .
Its activities extend beyond its geographical framework .
Afghanistan , as far as I am aware , does not have a North Atlantic coastline .
Neither does Kosovo , where it contributed to the ethnic cleansing of the Serbs in an unjust war that solved nothing .
NATO is thus violating the United Nations Charter .
Ladies and gentlemen , you are completely inconsistent .
You wish to create a strong , independent Europe and you absorb European defence into a US-dominated command system .
How can Russia and other nations fail to see in all that anything but an aggressive attitude ?
NATO has subjugated us to the policy of the United States of America .
We are their friends , but we do not wish to be their vassals and still less their lackeys .
We have to put an end to this and get out of it .
NATO has had its time .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , as we all know , risk scenarios are constantly changing .
The Treaty is also changing , and with it the opportunities for the European Security and Defence Policy .
What will always be the same , however , is people 's desire for security and stability , for a strong Union and for disarmament , particularly nuclear disarmament .
With the three reports under discussion today , the European Parliament is giving a very strong indication of how it means to achieve these objectives and guarantee security .
Firstly , there is the report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy , which focuses on security in the Balkans , stability in Africa and peace in the Palestinian territories .
Secondly , there is the report on cooperation with NATO , with its clear emphasis on closer cooperation between the EU and NATO and on better coordination .
At the heart of the third report is the further development of the European Security and Defence Policy , with the aim of achieving greater efficiency and better coordination in connection with defence expenditure , and of achieving strategic autonomy for the whole Union and thus , also easing the burden on our Member States .
If we have all these objectives in mind , we must support the calls of these reports : for shared research and development , for the development of common standards and for common procurement systems , for example - all with the objective of interoperability .
This will also mean optimum cooperation between the military in the Member States , cooperation between the police and the military , and also the creation of permanent military structures and the establishment of an Operational Headquarters and / or a Council of Ministers for Defence .
I am convinced that this gives us a crucial opportunity to make our Union into a political union and to develop a security union that gives the public what it expects of the Union : lasting security , stability and peace .
Ladies and gentlemen , up to now the speakers have kept to their speaking times .
We really are pushed for time .
I would therefore ask you to please keep to your speaking times .
Madam President , the CFSP has become almost everything , so you can say almost everything in a debate like this .
In the past , we discussed only security issues and now we even discuss climate change , energy , etc .
Therefore , I have to be selective and say something about EU-US relations and about the disarmament agenda , which I think we can move forward this year .
The new administration has made a very positive start , also symbolically by the announcement to close down Guantánamo .
I think we should work on this issue and try to work together to solve some of the problems with which the Americans are confronted .
The second basic debate this year will be about economic security : are the United States and Europe able together to do things about the crisis or will they try to do it on their own , which will mean a rapid development of protectionist measures ?
Afghanistan is also an important issue .
Will we be able to match the increased efforts of the Americans or not , and under what conditions ?
There , the positive sign is that the Americans have said that they are aware that there should be a political solution as this cannot be solved in a military way .
This brings the European Union in immediately .
Then on the disarmament agenda : last December , Mr Solana , you gave a very good speech here in Parliament on your ideas and those of the Council and the Union on promoting an agenda that is positive , by starting to support the Americans and the Russians to renegotiate the START Treaty and to work with the Americans on the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty .
We will also be in favour of the removal of the remaining technical nuclear weapons in Europe and it would be helpful in supporting ideas to bring the fuel cycle under international control in order to make sure that countries that want to develop nuclear energy have peaceful access but will not be able to abuse that militarily .
We would like the European Union to support this kind of agenda , knowing that President Obama has ambitions .
In his inaugural speech , when he talked about foreign affairs , he first mentioned Iraq and Afghanistan , but then he mentioned his ambitions to do something about nuclear disarmament .

( FI ) Madam President , I will speak about Mr Vatanen 's report and I would first of all like to thank him for the open way in which he prepared it .
I think , however , Parliament is sending a dangerous signal if it insists on strengthening its military organisation and highlights the importance of a military power reliant on NATO in the way proposed in the report .
Cooperation and partnership , democracy and human rights as a guarantee of peace and stability is a viable European model which should be used in all the world 's crisis hotspots .
Furthermore , we are facing a deepening economic crisis , environmental problems and the challenges brought by climate change , none of which can be resolved by military force .
In my opinion , it would be more important to stress the importance of the EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy and to concentrate on the prevention of conflicts and eliminating the causes of crises : the elimination of poverty , for example , and the promotion of democracy , human rights and civil society .
Finally , I would like to remind everyone that in the Union there are Member States that are not in NATO and which have their own reasons for that .
These countries must be allowed to decide themselves on their security policy solutions , without any pressure from outside .
For example , Finland has dealt well with its own defence issues and has been involved in peacekeeping operations in various parts of the world for decades .
There have been a lot of amendments to the report that improve it , but they do not alter its basic tone .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , does Europe have its own geopolitics ?
It does not appear that way to me !
If Karl Haushofer were alive , he would teach this somewhat spineless Europe that it needs a maritime strategy in the Atlantic , Pacific and Indian oceans and with the countries of the north , where the Arctic Ocean holds immense and extremely valuable energy resources .
It is the superpowers of the United States and Russia who are active in these areas , not Europe !
The fight against terrorism also means fighting against those who circulate instruments of terrorism ; people who can be used by terrorists .
As we speak , Lampedusa is in flames because someone has set fire to the detention centres for illegal immigrants .
Europe should concern itself with supporting the Italian Government , which is trying to prevent the invasion of illegal immigrants who can be used by the mafia and by terrorists .
However , I can see no evidence of the firm , practical approach needed .
Europe must defend itself from this threat , not with words but with action , as Mr Maroni and the Italian Government are doing .

( LV ) Madam President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Solana , all three of the reports by our fellow Members are very professional , balanced and , most importantly , have been prepared at the right time .
Without going into the great number of precise facts , assessments and proposals that are set out in the reports , I would like to stress two points .
Firstly , it is important to review Europe 's security strategy every five years , since we can see that in recent years , such security issues as energy security , cyber security and climate security have become very topical , and also the possible conflict zones have moved from one region to another .
Secondly , the European Union must significantly step up its conflict prevention efforts .
I think that this would also have been possible in the South Caucasus but , in my view , the European Union 's position prior to the armed conflict was too restrained .
The European Union has a right and a duty to carry out preventive activities and intermediary missions , since the European Union is a project to create peace , a task it has been carrying out for the past 50 years .
In order to be able to react to challenges and to take preventive measures , we need , first of all , the political will and , secondly , to create and improve a common foreign and security policy together with European security and defence policy institutional instruments .
One of these instruments is the Eastern Partnership mentioned in the report by Mr Saryusz-Wolski , including the creation of the EURONEST joint parliamentary assembly .
That could enhance understanding and also the development of democracy beyond our eastern borders .
Finally , I would like to express my satisfaction with the inclusion of paragraph 33 in the report by Mr von Wogau , since in my country , events in the Caucasus and growing nationalism in our neighbour state are giving rise to grave concerns .
As a wise old saying of my people has it : ' always hope for the best , but prepare for the worst , and God helps those who help themselves ! ' Thank you .
( PT ) I should like to thank the rapporteurs , Ari Vatanen and Karl von Wogau , for their work and efforts to achieve a consensus , particularly on the difficult issue of the nuclear policies , which must be urgently revised by the European Union and NATO at a time when President Obama is reviving the objective of freeing the world from nuclear weapons and when two European nuclear submarines almost caused a disaster .
The Vatanen and von Wogau reports highlight the need for a politically , strategically and operationally independent European Union , through an ambitious European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) .
We need institutional , financial and operational instruments to achieve these objectives .
We therefore need close cooperation between NATO and the EU , based on respect for the political independence of each of these organisations , which are complementary .
We therefore call for the setting-up of a permanent EU Operational Headquarters in Brussels , with the capacity to independently plan and conduct ESDP military operations .
We therefore call on the Member States of the EU to increase efforts to spend their national defence budgets more wisely , more efficiently , and in a more European manner , which they cannot properly do separately .
The message from this Parliament is unequivocal and serves as a warning .
Without a Europe of defence , defence in Europe will be threatened .
Our defence industries may be threatened .
The capacities that Europe needs in order to fulfil its responsibility of protecting civilian populations and preventing massacres and genocides may be threatened .
Europe 's role as a global player in crisis management may be threatened .
The extension of European political integration to security and defence , as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon , is urgent and needs to be speeded up .
This is not only in the interests of the European Union , but also in the interest of NATO , as both organisations will reap the rewards of a Europe that is better equipped to tackle the increasing challenges to the security of Europeans and to global security .
( PL ) Madam President , NATO has proved useful as an international security organisation during a time of relative peace in Europe .
Of course , the sense of security which it gives us is significantly limited by the pace of decision making in the bodies which command the Alliance and also by the decisions themselves .
In spite of this , NATO has a stabilising effect on world security .
Attempts at ' softening ' NATO - weakening its position by enlarging the military structures of the European Union - are a mistake .
The European Union today has a problem reaching agreement on difficult political decisions , let alone military ones .
The EU should concentrate on strengthening internal security and increasing the defensive capabilities of its members , especially Member States which share a border with countries where extreme nationalist ideologies are popular , and also Member States which have attracted the interest of terrorist groups .
The EU should not become too involved in measures which are aimed at the creation of large expeditionary forces intended for operations outside Europe .
( SL ) Mr Solana , High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , has rightly reminded us of where we were at in 1990 .
It would be even more interesting to ask ourselves what kind of a common policy we had at the beginning of the 1990s .
At the time , the European Community was powerless .
We subsequently saw wishes being replaced by visions , strategies , political will and capabilities , which also prompted us into action , not just on a European level , but also on a global level .
During those years , particularly after the historic enlargement of 2004 , the context and the ambitions of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) changed greatly .
Ten years ago , we were still largely immersed in our own concerns .
Today , however , we can look back at the successes which we have achieved and it is impossible to envisage a CFSP or a European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) without a global dimension .
With this in mind , I am not surprised that all three of the reports and many of our fellow members have called our attention to the new situation , the need for strategy amendments , greater unity and greater interinstitutional cooperation .
All this has been backed up by concrete proposals for the improvement of our operational structures and our political decision-making process , which I heartily endorse .
I agree that we have reached a new stage as regards our common policy and would like to point out two issues in this regard .
Firstly , we need to look in detail at how the financial , or economic , crisis might affect the context of our common policy .
I firmly believe that we need to be very attentive to the possible political consequences of the crisis , in particular , those which may arise if we face an even deeper monetary crisis .
Secondly , over the course of a number of years , I have witnessed the surprising fact that many of our partners want the European Union to have a uniform foreign policy and defence identity which is better defined and more powerful .
In other words , the European Union as a global player is the desired solution .
In that spirit , it seems important to me that we should view our bilateral partnerships from a more global perspective than that which we have adopted to date and that we should also develop innovative approaches to multilateral partnerships , which not only take into account bilateral interests , but also serve to stabilise wider regions .
( EL ) Madam President , the international system is in a transitional phase and there are huge challenges for all of us .
We therefore need to reassess and improve relations between the European Union and ΝΑΤΟ in order to address common threats , such as terrorism , the spread of weapons of mass destruction , the increase in international piracy and the new problems caused by climate change .
At the same time , however , I consider that this is the right time for us to confirm the role of the UN Security Council as the basic guarantor of international peace and security .
There is now an urgent need to reform the organisation and we have undertaken to advance this reform , so that the UN can respond more effectively to its important task .
It is also important for us to stress that all states and international organisations , including ΝΑΤΟ , should refrain from the threat and use of any manner of violence , which is out of keeping with the aims and principles of the charter founding the UN .
ΝΑΤΟ and the European Union have common interests and their relations should not be competitive .
We need a more balanced partnership with better coordination of actions and stronger cooperation .
However , each side should respect the independence of the other in terms of decision taking and ensure there is mutual understanding when military assessments differ .
Finally , I should like to emphasise the need for respect for the states ' right of neutrality and , at this point , to ask for the call for the Republic of Cyprus to join the Partnership for Peace to be deleted .
This decision is a sovereign right of every state and Cyprus is an independent and sovereign state able to decide its own future .
( CS ) Let us celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of NATO .
There will soon be some major US-EU-NATO summits .
The return of France to the military structures of NATO , together with the energies devoted to European security and defence policies , provide an excellent opportunity for harmonising European security strategies and potential new strategies for NATO .
Today 's ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in the Czech Parliament marks a step change for European defence and security .
Let us construct a joint European leadership .
Let us rationalise the European defence market .
Let us put resources into science and research , into the European Defence Agency , let us create a law for the European soldier , let us prevent duplicities and let us literally bypass the Turkish syndrome .
Let us seize the chance offered by the new American administration for genuine cooperation in Afghanistan and for missile defences in Europe .
We have before us an enormous opportunity for European security and defence policy to become the motor of further integration and security in Europe .
Let us not waste it .
( CS ) I would like to say a few words on EU-Russia relations .
In my opinion , the creation of a joint foreign and security policy cannot be achieved in the absence of dialogue with Russia .
The European security agency , which brings together the US , NATO , the OSCE and international disarmament agreements , should include dialogue with Russia as well .
I would therefore like to call on both the Council and the Commission to adopt an open and constructive position towards possible negotiations between the EU , the US and Russia on the renewal of transatlantic dialogue on security matters based on the Helsinki process .
It is my view that these negotiations should also include discussions on the topic of missile defence .
The EU should play a much greater role in this issue than it has done to date .
In my opinion , the agreement must not be left to the US and Russia alone .
The European public expects this from us .
( PL ) Madam President , Parliament is in agreement over common foreign and security policy for the European Union .
Consensus exists about this among the main political forces .
The problem , the real political problem , is how to achieve the essential aim .
Firstly , ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon is needed as quickly as possible .
Those political leaders who are delaying the ratification process of the treaty are weakening the development of the common European Union foreign and security policy .
It is difficult to talk seriously about common European Union security policy without the Lisbon Treaty .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the question of human rights in the development of EU external policy .
The policy should support international law - international humanitarian law , liberal democracy and the rule of law .
Thirdly , the policy requires the serious development of a European defence policy , the development of European Union military structures and the development of the European defence industry .
Madam President , I want to make two points .
Firstly , on values .
The European Union is a Union of values .
These values are criteria for accession .
They guide us in our behaviour .
They are a means to build interoperability with our external partners .
However , we should not make the scope of our external policy from exporting our values .
On the contrary , we have to learn to operate in a diversified world and even to respect the other 's right to be wrong .
Secondly , on institutions .
The international institutions and international law of today were shaped and created in a completely different world .
Each day , we realise that they are not adapted to the new challenges , new opportunities and new threats of today 's world .
I believe , therefore , that the European Union should support the idea of a new conference on security and cooperation in Europe in a larger Europe - from Vancouver to Shanghai , not only to Vladivostok - in order to create a new space of security , of freedom and of cooperation .
I think that this should be one of our top priorities , and we should not be afraid that others perhaps have other ideas on that .
( ES ) Madam President , first of all I wish to express my general support for the three reports that we are debating .
Second , I would like to congratulate Mrs FerreroWaldner , above all , on what she has said about the close cooperation and collaboration between her team and that of Mr Solana .

Third , I wish to congratulate Mr Solana because , without his character and creativity , the Common Foreign and Security Policy probably would not be what it is today : the legal and documentary basis , even with the advance of the 2003 strategy paper , would not have been enough to make so much progress on this Common Foreign and Security Policy in the last few years .
Fourth , I would like to say that the Treaty of Lisbon - about which , as has been said today , there is good news that it may be ratified soon - will doubtless be a much greater and much better tool in his hands and in those of the European Union to turn the Union into what it should be : a global actor , in the full sense of the word .
I close with the idea that he himself expressed : Europe must be a civilian actor and power with military means , and not a military power .
Madam President , having returned at the weekend from a visit to Gaza , I am going to spend my 60 seconds talking about what I believe to be a serious problem there .
Our principle of human security is one which obliges us to respond to the humanitarian crisis , but it also obliges us to respond and tell Israel that enough is enough and that no more can Europe turn a blind eye to the abuse of the Palestinian right to self-determination .
The most significant abuse of that right is the relentless and deliberate colonisation of the West Bank and East Jerusalem by Israel .
There are now 500 000 settlers squatting on territory which is supposed to comprise the main territory of the proposed independent Palestinian state .
It is increasingly difficult to believe that Israel really favours an independent Palestinian state , while proceeding to annex more and more Palestinian territory - and does so up to the present date .
Declarations that Europe and the USA are committed to a two-state solution , which includes a sovereign and viable Palestinian state , are not really worth the paper they are written on unless we say ' stop ' to Israel in relation to settlements .
They must be frozen now and eventually dismantled , otherwise there will never be a sustainable peace in the Middle East , Mr Solana .
( RO ) I wish to express my appreciation to the three rapporteurs .
NATO 's role in Europe 's security architecture has proved to be essential , not only up until now , but also offers real prospects for the rest of the 21st century .
I feel that the European Union and NATO must cooperate with each other , avoiding any potential rivalry .
Powerful , productive transatlantic relations can provide the best guarantee for peace , security and stability in Europe , along with respect for the principles of democracy , human rights , the rule of law and good governance .
We are at an historic juncture when transatlantic cooperation has become vital with a view to jointly drawing up a new security strategy for the European Union and the new strategic concept for NATO .
At the NATO summit held in Bucharest in April 2008 , the allies welcomed the political role which the European Union can have if it develops an action capability in the area of security and defence .
The Partnership for Peace promoted by NATO and the Eastern Partnership project promoted by the European Union are of vital importance to the development of democracy and the rule of law , as well as for the transition to an efficient market economy in certain countries in the Black Sea region .


( ES ) Mr Solana , I have been here since 3 p.m. just to speak to you about maritime piracy and to be able to congratulate you on launching the European naval operation against maritime piracy in the waters of the Indian Ocean .
You know that the government of my country is fully involved in this mission .
I wish to remind you that in April , the fishing season begins and that our fishers are concerned about how the forces in the Indian Ocean are currently distributed geographically .
They would like some protection closer to the area where they will be fishing ; that is , further south .
I would like to hear something from you on this subject .
I would also like to tell you that I am interested in this operation enduring beyond the established timeframe .
I believe it would be a shame if so much joint effort involving all three pillars at once were to finish abruptly at the end of one year , especially considering that the situation in Somalia and in the region does not seem likely to change or improve in the short or medium-term .
Madam President , NATO is the backbone of European defence , and we rely on NATO forces for the security of our Union .
But NATO forces in Cyprus - Turkish NATO forces - are not a force of freedom , but one of occupation : occupation of EU territory .
Not only did these Turkish forces cause death and destruction on the island when Turkey invaded in 1974 , but they today continue to keep an EU Member State divided , causing fear and oppression among both Greek and Turkish Cypriots and obstructing the current negotiations between the two Community leaders on the island .
So , in discussing NATO 's important role in European defence , it is fair to remember that the EU has not yet put the necessary pressure on Turkey to get its NATO invasion army out of Cyprus unconditionally and immediately .
Do you not agree with me , Mr Solana ?
Perhaps he is not listening .
Do you not agree that the Turkish army should leave Cyprus immediately , Mr Solana ?
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to quote the example of Georgia to show you how far we are from our stated ambition for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , despite the efforts of our High Representative and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
Now , of course , Mr Solana , you are asking for more capabilities and more aid .
For my part , I would ask you the following question : is the European Union currently able to meet its commitments , particularly in relation to the ceasefire agreement that we have proposed with Russia ?
Obviously I understand Commissioner .
We know to what extent the European Union has been present and how it intervened quickly , but today we must also be aware that the Georgians are confronted by the Russian army , based on the territory of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
I am certainly not questioning the remarkable work of the civilian observer mission on the ground . However , what can our observers do to defend civilians against the daily violence ?
Not much , apart from act as witnesses .
Moreover , the ambition of the CFSP , in this case in Georgia , will be judged against our courage finally to send peacekeeping forces to stabilise a region that we have included in our neighbourhood policy .
( RO ) In the three reports which we have debated today , I have come across some relevant , useful points for defining the European Union 's future policies as a global player .
I would like to make three observations .
Firstly , I would like to stress the importance of the transatlantic aspect to the EU 's foreign policy .
We must capitalise on the current climate in relations with the US to open up a new chapter in this area to boost our power at a global level .
Secondly , the European Union 's security dimension must be harmonised with NATO 's to prevent any duplication of effort and shortage of resources .
Thirdly , I believe that the EU must use the European security and cooperation policy to strengthen stability in the Western Balkans , following the clarification of Kosovo 's status .
Kosovo is now in a phase of ' supervised independence ' , according to the EU 's special representative , Peter Faith .
Even though Mr Faith rejected during a recent hearing of the European Parliament the use of the term ' EU protectorate ' for Kosovo , he acknowledged that the path to ' total independence ' is long and difficult .
' It would be a miracle if we completed our mission in two years , ' says Mr Faith .
However , I believe that we need to evaluate a clear timeframe for the EU 's involvement in Kosovo .
This is why I welcome the Commission 's initiative to carry out a study on Kosovo , as long as it contributes to the success of the EULEX mission .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me just make a few remarks , and one in particular : I think this debate has shown that there is a growing acceptance of the approach Europe follows in crisis management and conflict prevention .
The Munich Conference on Security confirmed the comprehensive approach , because security and development go together - you cannot have one without the other .
I believe this European approach is a core element of our strategy to promote peace and security in our neighbourhood , but also beyond .
It works , but it must be adequately resourced , so we have to work on building our capacities and capabilities in both the civilian and military fields , and we will try at least to play our part as much as we can .
But I would also like to answer your questions , in particular that of Mr Saryusz-Wolski , Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the under funding of the CFSP budget .
It is true that the budget has been reduced this year , but this should , we hope , not be an impediment to our political ambitions in civilian ESDP , provided that there are no new significant missions this year .
It is important to remember that only certain costs are covered by the CFSP budget - equipment costs , contracted staff , special allowances , for instance , the EU special representatives - but Member States also pay for the cost of their seconded staff .
The budget will increase - as you know , not this year but in 2013 - to EUR 400 million .
Concerning transfers between budget articles , which Mr Dombrovskis mentioned , the Commission includes information on transfers within the CFSP budget with its quarterly reports to the budgetary authority , and in recent years , all appropriations under the CFSP budget have been committed .
Let me comment on two specific issues : firstly , on human security .
Human security is something which I am personally very fond of , because it must be promoted : freedom from want and freedom from fear as a good of foreign and security policy .
This is also recognised in our 2008 report on European security strategy ( ESS ) , that we both mentioned before .
Furthermore , the ESS report recognises that without development and poverty eradication , there will be no sustainable peace .
Therefore , this is very important , and the promotion of human rights is also a part of this equation .
Finally , let me say a word on early warning and conflict prevention , which Mr Pīks spoke about .
I agree in general that as a European Union , we must work more on the early parts of the conflict cycle , which means early warning , conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy .
From the Commission side , one initiative we are taking in this field is to strengthen links with NGOs as part of a peacebuilding partnership , and also improving our uses of open sources of information .
However , we will try to reinforce the early prevention side in the future .
We know this is a very important part .
High Representative for CFSP . - Madam President , I shall be very brief .
I would like to thank those Members of Parliament who have intervened , and I have taken note of their remarks and their questions .
I will certainly be in touch with you to respond to those who have to be responded to properly .
I would like to say that this is the second time that we have had a debate of this nature in the European Parliament , an almost three-hour discussion on European security .
I think this is very important , and I hope very much that this idea will be maintained in the future .
To the three rapporteurs , thank you very much for your work , and you can be sure that we will continue cooperating with you in the future .
rapporteur . - Madam President , this is a very broad and , for me , satisfactory , debate about successes , gaps and actions in progress .
Roughly speaking , I would say that it is the syndrome of the half-empty / half-full glass , depending on who is looking at it .
Some questions were answered at least by the mainstream of those who spoke .
Is there progress in this area ?
Yes .
Is it enough ?
No .
Is there more convergence between institutions like Parliament , Council , the Commission and Member States ?
Yes , there is more progress , although this broadband of foreign policy of the Union is not sufficiently big enough , and here I refer to your words , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , on money .
If we had more money , or at least as much as the Commission proposed for broadband in rural areas - EUR 1.5 billion - perhaps Member States , without having to pay , would more willingly participate in CFSP actions .
You know well that this House is appealing for the Union budget to pay for that .
Do the citizens value this foreign policy ?
The answer is , again , ' yes ' .
Do we make sufficient use of foreign policy to legitimise the Union ?
The answer is ' no ' .
Capabilities : in the broader sense of the term , everything that is crisis prevention management and rapid response , we have what we could get and - I could expect that Mr Solana will nod - more .
I have already touched upon finance .
In terms of legal and institutional instruments - Lisbon - everyone agrees that we need more and better equipped instruments under the Treaty rules .
This convergence is being worked out in a discreet manner , and I would like to pay tribute to the discreet action and diplomacy of the High Representative , not only outside , but also within .
How does this like-mindedness come about ?
When you are able , Mr Solana , to speak on behalf of the whole Union , there has to be , beforehand , action to persuade everybody and to get everybody on board .
The question of values was raised .
Do we agree on values ?
Yes , we do , but we have different practices and this axis of values vis-à-vis interest is also present , and the best example is how to deliver it in Central Asia : it was present in the debate on the Central Asia strategy .
To close , I would say that I was touched by what Mr Solana said - that , through foreign policy , the EU identifies itself .
It gets more identity .
What we are adding in our approach in Parliament is that it gives more legitimacy , which means it gives more power .
For that reason it can be an integral part of European integration .
The dominant debate has shown that there is hunger for more Europe in foreign policy and that more pooling of European political and material capital is needed .
We are allowing the rapporteurs a little more time , but now we are short of time and we cannot continue to do so .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to comment on a few points .
Firstly , I wish to explain why I did not include the principles of ' human security ' and ' responsibility to protect ' in my report .
This has been very controversial .
In my personal opinion , these concepts that we have developed , whilst very important , are not suitable for a security policy , as they can be misused to justify military intervention all around the world .
This is a very real risk I can envisage .
Therefore , I do support these two concepts , but not for the security policy .
It has also been said that I am in the process of creating a European army and am calling for this in my report .
I would ask you to read the whole report through once again - you will most certainly not find the words ' European army ' in it .
What the report says is that taxpayers ' money should be spent better in this field than has been the case up to now .
Then there is the European Security Strategy , which now has everyone 's support .
The work that needed to be done on this took several years and was very successful .
In my opinion , the next step must be to produce a work on the implementation of the security policy , a white paper on the security policy .
This is a job for the next parliamentary term .
Last but not least , I believe that the next talks we hold on this subject must deal with the issue of EUBAM Rafah : how to revive this mission and how it can possibly be extended .

rapporteur . - Madam President , I shall just repeat what President Wilson said in 1917 and what , for example , our honourable colleague Mr Swoboda said half an hour ago : the nation alone cannot solve problems .
This House , and the EU , are testimony to that .
We have to learn from our mistakes .
In whatever walk of life , we must work together : there is no cherry-picking , there is no free riding in the real world .
We cannot let the burden be borne by just some shoulders : we have to share it , because we are democratic nations .
That is a noble cause .
Sometimes I have difficulty in understanding why , immediately the word ' NATO ' is mentioned , people - perhaps because of their anti-American feelings , or because they have anti-military leanings - are against it .
Yes , we are pacifists .
Who is not a pacifist ?
Anybody of sound mind is a pacifist .
Who wants suffering ; who wants war ?
But we must have the means to prevent it .
We must be proactive .
Wars come and go if there is this kind of attitude , but we must build peace actively .
I really give credit to the majority of Members in this House who again proved tonight that constructive , responsible common sense will prevail ; that this House is what it is meant to be : a House that looks forward , because , unless we work together , peace will become a casualty .
Let me make one last comment .
Mr Platini - a maestro of football - is speaking in another hall at this very moment .
I was in France when the massacre in Rwanda took place - and this is not directed against France , but is a comment on how the media report information - and the fact that Mr Zidane , the football star , had a wart on his knee literally drew more attention than the massacre in Rwanda .
No , we cannot be silent : we must be proactive ; otherwise we condone these kinds of events in the world .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
How should Europe react to the fact that on its eastern borders , the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation , a regional organisation comprised of several emerging superpowers and states rich in energy resources , is getting stronger ?
Through Russia , the SCO borders the EU , and therefore the organisation inevitably deserves the EU 's substantive attention .
By assaying the members and observers of the SCO , we can safely conclude that these countries own a significant proportion of the world 's oil and gas reserves .
In light of this , addressing the question of a new strategy on Russia and Central Asia is unavoidable , and it must also include a political risk assessment specific to each country .
Let me also point out that , as illustrated by the Russia-Ukraine gas dispute , the EU 's current vulnerability and considerable energy dependency undermines the development of an authentic , efficient and consistent joint foreign and security policy .
In addition , countries react differently based on their historical experience and financial interest .
More so than at any other time in the past , it is especially important today to take uniform political action and to harmonise discordant national interests and positions .
It is indispensable for the EU to improve the efficiency and consistency of its actions on the global scene .
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and the foreign policy tools outlined therein may contribute greatly to this goal .
The increasing need for the EU to operate more efficiently and promptly , and events demanding intellectual answers with increasing urgency , call for a review of the organisational and decision-making mechanisms for governing our foreign policy , and for the provision of suitable structural answers .
in writing . - I congratulate Mr Vatanen on his report which I endorse .
In particular , I support the idea of an EU Operational Military Headquarters being established .
Of course , NATO should be , and is , our first port of call when security is threatened .
Yet during the Bush-Gore debates just over a decade ago , George Bush said that had he been President he would not have intervened in Kosovo .
Now despite my antipathy to the Bush Administration 's foreign policy , it seems to me that it is a perfectly reasonable position for Bush to take on the basis of US self-interest .
Yet it is not a position that Europe could or should have followed .
Apart from the strong moral argument that we had a responsibility to protect those facing the genocide of the Serbs , we also had the consequences of tens / hundreds of thousands of refugees .
We , in our own and their interests , must have the capacity to engage without the Americans .
To do this , it is a small price we pay to have a permanent EU Operational Military HQ ready for such a future eventuality .
Madam President , Finland does not need to be ashamed of its security policy solutions .
Finland outside NATO is in good company with Sweden , Austria and Switzerland .
It is easy to identify with them .
Non-alignment with respect to NATO is the modern alternative for a mature state .
We have started to speak about a softer NATO , as the ' bellicose ' President was exchanged for a ' peaceful ' one in the United States of America .
It is to be supposed that the ecstatic speeches about a soft NATO under Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will become a more common phenomenon .
Let us allow some time to pass , however , and just see how NATO develops .
My own view is that NATO 's fundamental nature has not changed at all , ever since the bipolar security system failed .
On the other hand , the propaganda about a soft NATO has been a success .
Simply gazing in the direction of Russia ( Russia , Russia , Russia ) or waiting around for a new Winter War will lead nowhere .
Neither is NATO the proper answer to the bigger problems facing Finland in the near future , which are mainly economic in nature .
The evaluation of the role of the NATO-EU alliance must start with the acknowledgement that the political landscape in both Europe and the US has fundamentally changed recently , with the European Union now having a legitimate role to play in global security .
This situation requires the alliance to become ' repoliticised ' so that it becomes a forum for open dialogue discussing the major issues in which it is bound to get involved .
An honest transatlantic dialogue about , for example , the necessary approach to tackling terrorism is an absolute must , precisely because the allies have different perspectives about the way in which they must respond when faced with this common challenge .
In the current situation where Member States are facing an ever-increasing variety of challenges to global security , ranging from interethnic conflicts in the immediate vicinity of allied territory to global terrorist networks and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , they must attach particular importance to the process of reflection and dialogue on this issue and support the alliance reform processes .
I am referring , in particular , to the security problems affecting the areas in the immediate vicinity where the alliance can play a key role in the creation of democratic defence and security institutions in the Balkans and extended region of the Black Sea .
We need a common , coherent and up-to-date European security policy which will help strengthen our European identity and allow the EU to speak with a single , credible voice in the international arena .
The current reality we are facing , fraught with major challenges such as the economic crisis , energy security , climate change and migration management , requires cooperation and responsibility from the Member States in order to protect their common interests and promote peace , security and respect for territorial integration .
The EU can only have an impact if it speaks with a single voice and has available and uses effectively the necessary instruments , helping to strengthen cooperation with neighbouring states .
We need to think strategically , become actively involved and act consistently at a global level .
We also need regional security and close ties with the relevant regional players .
Strategic partnerships with neighbouring countries to the east of the EU are a necessity , and we must invest in relations with Russia , deploying a coherent strategy with common , mutually beneficial commitments .
We need to invest in neighbouring countries , especially those to the east of the EU , and offer them the necessary incentives to continue with their reforms and be able to strengthen the EU 's presence in the area .
We have new instruments available , such as the Eastern Partnership , which will help us establish a new consolidated approach at a higher level with our partners in the region .
International security is one of the greatest values for all the subjects of international relations .
Nowadays , we are witnessing a redefinition of that concept and a shifting of the centre of gravity to non-military factors which threaten stability and international security .
Examples of such threats are organised crime , Internet terrorism , piracy ( we can see this off the coast of Somalia ) , climate changes and the dangers arising from the world economic crisis .
The European Union , while directing its attention to building common military instruments , such as Eurocorps , the European Air Transport Fleet and the permanent EU Operations Headquarters , must not , however , forget about other threats which are no less important .
More attention should be paid to building bodies and institutions which would allow us to overcome the financial situation caused by the world economic crisis , and to protect the natural environment and biological diversity .
Internal threats , such as drugs , poverty in society , and Internet crime , must not be forgotten either .
All these elements are important factors which influence international security , the security of the European Union , and of every nation .
Without a solution to these fundamental questions , creation of a stable European security strategy is not possible .
The common security policy is a topic which has been debated many times and about which a great deal has been written .
The European Union is an increasingly important facilitator at regional and global level .
It is precisely for this reason that I feel that the European Union must be visibly active within its borders and proactive in any area of the world .
After examining the three reports today : the 2007 Annual report on the main aspects and basic choices of the CFSP , the European Security Strategy and ESDP and the role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU , I believe that we can come to three conclusions :
1 .
The European Union must have a common security policy capable of supporting the democracies within its borders and the partnerships with the countries neighbouring it .
2 .
The European Union must project the image of being a unitary whole and needs a rapid-reaction force capable of intervening at any time to support peace , democracy and human rights .
3 .
The European Union must consolidate its position globally and continue to act as a facilitator for stability and balance between the major powers in the world .
I wish to express my support for Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report which rightly emphasises that the task of guaranteeing energy security for Europe 's citizens must become a major priority in the EU 's common foreign and security policy .
I would like to say loud and clear : the security of our energy supplies and , in particular , diversification of the gas supply sources , will remain just a beautiful dream unless we build the Nabucco pipeline .
The Nabucco project must be adopted as a strategic goal by the whole EU .
It requires both a serious amount of financial investment and , in particular , an effective European foreign and security policy .
An effective policy provides guarantees of regional stability in the area through which this gas pipeline is going to run .
With this goal in mind , we must make every effort to provide our Common Foreign and Security Policy with the coherent and effective structure that it so desperately requires in order to achieve tangible results .
For instance , I think that the EU needs a Senior Official for foreign energy policy who will enjoy strong political support and have at his disposal the necessary instruments to take action .
I appreciate that the EU needs to allocate sufficient financial and human resources to its Common Foreign and Security Policy in order to achieve the concrete results which European citizens are expecting from us .
I fundamentally reject the report on European security strategy and a European security and defence policy in its current form .
This report is a typical example of the militarisation of the EU and proof of the fact that in the security sphere of the EU , military resources and measures have to replace and even supplant necessary measures of a political nature .
Many of the findings and recommendations contained in the report are in direct conflict with the fact that the EU is supposed to be developed as a project for peace .
It is no wonder that EU citizens , whenever they get a chance to express their opinion , take a stand against the Lisbon Treaty for reasons that include the way it establishes the militaristic nature of the EU .
There is a highly aberrant and dangerous position included in the report which , on the one hand , talks about the security interests of the EU while , on the other , criticising Russia for defending its own perfectly legitimate security interests in the Caucasus .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fact that we are discussing three reports relating to security and defence in this House is an expression of our great political responsibility to the citizens of Europe on the eve of the NATO summit .
The established practice of adopting resolutions on the main aspects and decisions of the Council report on common foreign policy and security is an excellent opportunity to appeal to Member States to apply this practice at national level .
It is especially important to develop independent academic capacity for analysing and assessing European security and defence policy in tandem with national security policies .
This will form the basis for a public debate on ESDP through a network of analysis centres based in the Member States .
It is not possible to work on an EU security and defence white paper if the Member States do not transpose the document into their national strategies .
This includes strengthening national analytical capacity and the ability for computer-based learning and training to test and grasp new concepts in the area of civil-military cooperation .
We must encourage Member States to conduct a joint strategic review in the field of security to establish a sound basis for interaction between the EU and NATO in the process of developing a new strategic concept for NATO in the context of ESDP .
The Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Napoletano , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean .

Madam President , Mrs FerreroWaldner , Mr Vondra , ladies and gentlemen , with this report , Parliament is proposing to make a constructive contribution to the prospect of strengthening the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
The proposals resulting from the Paris summit on 14 July last year put forward two objectives that are worthy of our support .
The first of these is to give practical shape to economic , regional and environmental integration projects and to make them more effective , by creating a secretariat entrusted with this task , receiving public and private funding ; the second is to strengthen political dialogue within the whole process , through new institutions such as the co-presidency , the summit of Heads of State or Government and the regular Foreign Ministers meetings .
In this context , I would like to emphasise the role of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , which was recognised in the Paris text and then in the Marseille document .
Parliament wants to help find a way out of the serious stalemate that has followed the tragic events in Gaza .
Much depends , however , on the policies that the new Israeli Government formed after the elections will adopt .
Nonetheless , I would like to point out that the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly will meet in the near future and demonstrate the role that parliaments have to play , even in this difficult situation .
We wish to highlight the value of institutions that involve both the European Union and the countries in the south and east of the Mediterranean while , at the same time , signalling that it is essential not to reduce the entire process to a solely intergovernmental approach .
We hope for widespread involvement of civil society and social partners , not least because the economic crisis can worsen the already endemic and terrible problems such as unemployment and increasing migratory pressure , making this phenomenon even more difficult to manage .
We are calling for greater attention to be paid to the issues of human rights that affect the behaviour of all the partner countries to a greater or lesser degree .
As regards the institutions , let us remember that with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union may be assured of coherent and structured representation through the new figures of the President of the Council and the European Foreign Minister .
In the meantime , it would be beneficial to ensure continuity in the European presence , at least in the co-presidency .
We know that the Czech Presidency has been sensitive to this , and hope that the Swedish Presidency , too , will be willing to accept this message .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all my fellow Members and the officials of the various political groups and committees that have given their opinion .
They have all contributed to the drafting of this report , which I believe enjoys widespread support .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to contribute to today 's discussion on the issue of the Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean .
I know that Parliament follows this with particular interest .
Pasqualina Napoletano is to be commended in particular . As a result , the motion for a resolution on which you will be voting later constitutes a valuable contribution to our work together .
The Paris Summit last July created the Union for the Mediterranean and established a partnership built on the existing Barcelona Process .
The current rotating presidency gives priority to strengthening this partnership .
Even though the Lisbon Treaty has not yet come into force , I can assure you that , in the spirit of co-ownership , we are placing a particular focus on the development of this initiative and , in particular , the regional projects .
These are important .
They offer concrete signs to the citizens of the region that the partnership works in their interest .
The Union for the Mediterranean is not the only mechanism for cooperation .
The bilateral dimension continues under the European neighbourhood policy , and is complemented in some cases by the pre-accession framework - as well as , in the case of Mauritania , the ACP framework .
These approaches together encourage reform within individual countries , and reinforce regional cooperation .
The neighbourhood policy , of course , also has an important eastern dimension , and we very much welcome the parallel development of this policy .
The Paris Summit agreed to take work forward in four key areas : de-pollution of the Mediterranean ; maritime and land highways ; civil protection ; and the development of alternative energies through , for example , the Mediterranean Solar Plan .
There is also particular focus on higher education and research , as well as on support for business through the Mediterranean Business Development Initiative .
The technical aspects of project proposals put forward in this area will be handled by the secretariat to be established in Barcelona , as was agreed in Marseilles last year .
In addition to these specific project areas , the ministerial conferences of the Union for the Mediterranean will address a number of global challenges that affect us all .
These include the search for peace and security in the region , the social and geopolitical impact of the economic crisis , environmental concerns , the management of migratory flows , and the role of women in our respective societies .
There are two particular areas of cooperation which I know are important to this Parliament and which we also fully support .
The first is interparliamentary cooperation through the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and its committees .
This initiative is key to developing a strong parliamentary dimension to the Union for the Mediterranean .
It will , as is pointed out in your resolution , serve to reinforce its democratic legitimacy .
It will also help promote the basic values which lie at the heart of the European Union .
We very much welcome the way in which you and your President have embraced this particular initiative , and offer you our full support .
The second area which I believe should be a particular priority for us is the development of intercultural relations .
This is absolutely crucial if we are to encourage greater understanding between cultures in the Mediterranean region .
Civil society , local social and regional partners all need to be involved .
The Anna Lindh Foundation has a particularly important role to play in this area .
The Union for the Mediterranean offers us the potential for developing better relations among its members .
Recent events have shown that this is not an easy enterprise , but they have also underlined the importance of our continuing to work to this end .
We are only too aware of the difficulties faced by the populations in the region as a result of the crisis in Gaza .
As you know , this has led to the postponement of meetings of the Union for the Mediterranean , but the Presidency believes that regional cooperation and dialogue is the way to achieve peace , build confidence and create prosperity and we certainly expect to resume work within the Union for the Mediterranean as soon as possible .
Therefore , a démarche of the Czech EU Presidency and the French Union for the Mediterranean Co-Presidency , on behalf of the EU members of the Union for the Mediterranean , possibly together with the Egyptian Co-Presidency , addressed to our Arab partners , is just being prepared .
Its purpose is to appeal for a resumption of all Union for the Mediterranean activities automatically and without any conditionality immediately after the League of Arab States Doha Summit at the end of March .
We intend to use the opportunity of the Donor Conference on Gaza , which will be held on 2 March in Sharm el-Sheikh in Egypt , for further consideration by the three Ministers of Foreign Affairs : Karel Schwarzenberg , the Czech Foreign Minister ; Bernard Kouchner , the French Foreign Minister ; and the Foreign Minister of Egypt .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Napoletano , first allow me to congratulate you on the work done , since it has allowed a report to be produced that is genuinely important on several levels .
Firstly , because it is a truly positive and constructive contribution from the European Parliament to the definition of a coherent Euro-Mediterranean policy , a challenge to which we are deeply committed .
Then , as you rightly point out , the Union for the Mediterranean must be supplemented .
It must not be purely intergovernmental , but must be rightly supplemented by opening it up to the participation of other players , such as local and regional authorities .
It is important to intensify the parliamentary dimension by reinforcing the role of the Parliamentary Assembly , and to establish a lasting involvement for civil society .
It is true the Union for the Mediterranean 's role is to develop the joint nature , at an institutional and political level , of a regional partnership in need of a relaunch .
However , it is all also true that this can only be done on the basis of the Barcelona acquis , which needs to be extended and consolidated .
Regional cooperation financed by the Commission is part of this acquis .
There is , therefore , no reason to call it into question today .
On the contrary , it supports and guarantees the coherence of the European Union 's action in the region , especially as its objectives are perfectly compatible with the ambitions of the European neighbourhood policy , the main framework for our bilateral relations with the countries of the region .
The same is true for compliance with Community methods applied to the mechanisms for making decisions and setting priorities within the European Union , as the Union for the Mediterranean is an initiative that forms an integral part of the European framework .
Mr President , the constituent summit of the Union for the Mediterranean had , as you know , the triple objective of reinjecting political vigour into Euro-Mediterranean relations , of changing the institutional governance of these relations in favour of a joint leadership of the initiative and , finally , of crystallising multilateral cooperation between the European Union and its Mediterranean partners around structural projects , which will bring sub-regional integration and are likely to reduce the discrepancies in development between the two sides of the Mediterranean .
Indeed , we must reduce these discrepancies via social economic development , more trade and increased investments .
We must counter ideological radicalism , for which the lack of development and a sense of injustice provide fertile ground , with dialogue and political solutions to conflicts .
We must pursue responsible and concerted migration policies , as you said , to benefit from demographic stabilisation in Europe and the demographic growth of the Mediterranean countries .
There you have several examples of the challenges we must face together with our partners in the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean .
Indeed , we know that we cannot achieve these objectives without parliamentary support , both from the European Parliament and the Euromed Parliamentary Assembly .
This is the spirit in which we are working , with the firm conviction that , on all these issues , the European Commission will be able to rely on your collaboration , and I would like to thank you for this in advance .
However we also know , of course , that , faced with the most worrying situation in the Middle East following the war in Gaza - we discussed this today - we do indeed have a problem : we cannot leave the Union for the Mediterranean in a political vacuum .
It is what we have always said .
Indeed , it is a fact .
This has given rise to the current suspension of the work that , personally , I regret greatly , but , of course , we hope to get to work again at some stage .
The meeting to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh , where the Commission will , of course , have an important role to play as cosponsor , will be very important .
I hope that various other meetings will be held afterwards .
A lot of work has been done already , in fact , and when the Commission is working , it takes it very seriously .
Moreover , much has been done on the rules governing the secretariat which are in place and which should allow Barcelona to start its work .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Napoletano , ladies and gentlemen , the Union for the Mediterranean should revive the Barcelona Process , which was launched in 1995 .
Unfortunately , we must face the fact today that the recent Middle East crisis has meant the project has not come to fruition .
The opening of the secretariat in Barcelona has been postponed indefinitely , and the money promised cannot come in .
Thus , there have been no tangible results so far , which I greatly regret .
I ask myself whether we have been concentrating too much on institutions , and whether this is the reason for the current impasse .
Have we underestimated the influence of political crises on the Union for the Mediterranean ?
How can we ensure the continuation of the projects ?
In the history of European integration , we have been very successful in the economic and commercial fields .
It is for this very reason that we in the Committee on International Trade have considered how our successful mechanisms could be applied to our neighbours in southern Europe .
One objective is the creation of a free trade area by 2010 , but this , too , has ground to a halt .
It is precisely because political conflicts are blocking this process that we should strengthen the economic field .
International trade could have a beneficial effect not only on the economic but also - and particularly - on the political and social situation in the region .
Regional economic integration is crucial in this regard .
Our southern neighbours must also cooperate more closely with one other .
At the same time , the countries that have already developed a network of bilateral trade relations should be convinced of the added value of a multilateral dimension .
Communicating the benefits of economic integration to local citizens will play an important role in this .
This would be one step towards stabilising the situation in the southern Mediterranean .
I wish to see this for the sake of us all , particularly the citizens in the region .
A poem is never finished , only abandoned , said a Mediterranean poet born in Sète .
I believe that something similar happened to the Barcelona Process : it was not finished , but it was abandoned - in part at least .
That is why Parliament believes that the efforts made under the French Presidency to breathe new life into the Barcelona Process are important .
That is also why , in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , we have actively collaborated on the report by Mrs Napoletano , whom I wish to thank for her patience and understanding .
Why was the Committee on Constitutional Affairs concerned with this subject , Mr President ?
For several reasons .
First , to guarantee the continuity of the Barcelona Process with the Union for the Mediterranean .
Second , to avoid duplicating structures and embed this process into the institutional framework of the Union .
Third , as Mrs Ferrero-Waldner has already said , to say that it is not simply an intergovernmental process but to emphasise the parliamentary dimension .
That is why , in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , we have been insistent on issues already raised by President Pöttering on 13 July 2008 .
These refer to how the Parliamentary Assembly must meet once a year , be organised into groups on the basis of political families and produce consultative reports .
We also tried to help the Council with the important decisions that it had to make .
Mr Vondra , this House wishes to cooperate with the Council and we laid down the criteria that the headquarters of this new Union for the Mediterranean needed to meet .
Coincidentally , these criteria coincided with a city in a country that I know very well ; in fact , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs decided that Barcelona could be a good headquarters .
Moreover , the ministers recognised it shortly afterwards , which , Mr President , reflects once again this desire to cooperate with the Council .
I began by quoting Paul Valéry ; permit me to finish by citing a verse by Paul Valéry as well : ' Tu n 'as que moi pour contenir tes craintes ! ' .
I believe that to soothe the fears that there could be on both shores of the Mediterranean , there could be nothing better than the success of this Union for the Mediterranean .
Let us hope so , Mr President , and thanks , once again , to Mrs Napoletano for your understanding and help .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mrs Napoletano for her efforts and the balance she has brought to this issue , and thank Mrs FerreroWaldner , who is always attentive to our work , for the important job she is doing around the world .
We must all demonstrate great unity because the problems and challenges we have to face in the Mediterranean are particularly difficult .
We must strive for a stronger , more influential role for Europe , given that strategically we are side by side with the United States .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has gone to great lengths , over the years , to build an ever-stronger , ever-more active role for Europe .
Funding is not enough ; funding alone is no longer sufficient ; what is required is substantial renewed political action .
One of the many shared challenges is that of tackling immigration into Europe .
This problem cannot be addressed through cooperation with political opponents , nor can it be addressed through populism ; rather it requires rigorous controls to ensure compliance with the law and the Convention on Human Rights .
The Union for the Mediterranean , the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and the common foreign policy in relation to the south are all excellent and legitimate tools that can be used to carve out a stronger , more significant and credible role for Europe .
For this reason , my political group will vote against the amendments tabled by the far left ; we believe that they are excessively controversial and not very constructive .
My political wing seeks to give renewed impetus to this valuable activity , which will become essential in the near future , and therefore we support the re-launch of the EMPA , no longer as a mere discussion forum , but as a place where important joint decisions can be made for our future and the future of all those living on the shores of the Mediterranean .
On behalf of the Socialist Group , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Napoletano on the excellent report that she is presenting to us this afternoon , but above all , and most importantly , because she has been a Euro-Mediterranean da prima ora .
Without her work and her impetus , we would not have been able to imagine firstly a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum , or subsequently a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , and we would not now be in a position to demand the role that the representatives of citizens should have in what we are trying to set up .
I would like to follow on from my colleague Mr Méndez de Vigo , who always quotes great literary figures , by recalling a phrase from Shakespeare 's King Lear , in which it is said that ' The worst is not , so long as we can say , " This is the worst ” ' .
We have strived to do the opposite , because at a time when the situation in the Middle East is worse than ever , we have established an instrument whose aim is for the region as a whole to contribute to political , economic and social development , as a basic framework for resolving conflicts .
This is what the Union for the Mediterranean is , after all .
This is a Union for the Mediterranean that is not ex novo , but has come from the deep roots of the Barcelona Process , creating new institutions such as the Permanent Secretariat , which will be in Barcelona .
It is something that we welcome as Europeans , as Mediterraneans , as Spaniards and as the parliamentary representatives who asked for it at the time .
It is also an acceptance of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly as what it should be : a way for parliamentarians and citizens to express themselves within this Union .
The EMPA does need to be given what it deserves : the tasks of consultation , monitoring and proposal .
The Union for the Mediterranean needs to be based on joint management , it needs to have sufficient funding and be focused on regional integration and provide for the needs of citizens .
In this way , we will be able to build a Mediterranean of peace , solidarity and also an alliance of civilisations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wholeheartedly support any initiative aimed at developing the Union for the Mediterranean .
From this perspective , I hope to see the parliamentary role of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly strengthened , including by stepping up the Assembly 's relations with the Mediterranean partners and enabling it to make recommendations to meetings of Foreign Ministers and to participate as an observer at meetings of Heads of State or Government , ministerial meetings and preparatory meetings held by senior officials .
I would like to emphasise the need to strengthen the role and initiatives of the Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership and to create a EuroMediterranean Investment Bank , which was announced some time ago but which has not yet been carried out .
I support the proposal to create a Euro-Mediterranean Regional and Local Assembly along the lines of similar , European , institutions , in order to involve regions and cities further , and a Euro-Mediterranean Economic and Social Committee to involve the social partners and civil society .
I also welcome the proposal to establish a Euro-Mediterranean Energy Community within the framework of a policy aimed at implementing large-scale projects in the fields of renewable energy and energy infrastructure .
Furthermore , I hope that the Union will play an ever-more effective role in the search for peace , in conflict resolution , in the strengthening of democracy , in the defence of religious freedom and in the fight against terrorism , drug trafficking , organised crime and people trafficking .
Lastly , the Union cannot evade the task of taking concerted action with the states involved to manage migratory policies and flows in the Mediterranean area .
It can no longer focus solely on security , the rule of law and repressing illegal immigration , but must also , and above all , direct its attention to active policies , sources of shared rules and targeted and sustainable employment .
Thank you , Mrs Napoletano , for this excellent report .
A couple of days before the war broke out in Gaza , I was representing Parliament and the EMPA in Jordan , at the last ministerial conference that took place before activities were once again suspended due to the violence in the Middle East .
It was a conference on water .
It was a ministerial conference on one of the key issues on which there needs to be cooperation across the Mediterranean , which is going to create conflicts , is a question of survival and is also the target of some possible large projects in the Mediterranean , involving solar energy , transferring water and many other things .
This is how crucial it is .
These activities have been suspended and I hope that soon the Union 's activities for the Mediterranean will resume and that there will be progress in the Middle East .
We have had some very ambitious objectives in the Mediterranean .
The results have been much more modest , especially in the fields of human rights , democracy and the environment .
We also need to promote the South-South market and cooperation between the countries of the South , and not just be obsessed with a big free market in the Mediterranean , which is not preceded by cooperation between countries that have deeply entrenched conflicts , one after the other .
At the same time , we need to deal with the energy crisis .
The energy crisis and the current economic crisis could represent an opportunity to move forward with very important projects , both for Europe and for our neighbours to the South , such as plans for thermosolar plants ( high-temperature solar energy ) and the creation of intelligent , clean networks to connect North Africa , the Middle East and Europe in a vast , clean plan to fight climate change and the economic crisis .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Napoletano for her work .
Secondly , I would like to say that as shadow rapporteur , I have asked my group not to vote in favour of this report , for two fundamental reasons .
Firstly , because the most recent conflict , the most recent Israeli attack on Gaza , is of such magnitude that it cannot go unpunished .
Everything has a limit , it is not the first time , but this attack on Palestinian sovereignty is of such magnitude that it genuinely prevents the Annapolis agreement from becoming a reality and blocks the prospect of the creation of a Palestinian State , which is the only possibility of having a Union for the Mediterranean in peace and solidarity .
The second reason why I have recommended that we do not vote in favour is because with regard to the free trade area , regional differences are not taken into account .
We feel that it is essential that trade issues be taken into account in terms of treating everyone equally , taking into account regional differences and the particular characteristics of each country .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that I , on the other hand , will vote in favour of Mrs Napoletano 's motion for a resolution , because in my opinion , it is undoubtedly strategic to identify major projects to be carried out and equally useful to highlight the need to adopt a ' programme agreements ' approach in order to do so .
These agreements should , however , be based - and I believe it is very important to emphasise this - on the principle of subsidiarity .
Frankly , I am somewhat puzzled by the call to give fresh impetus to the management of common migration policies , although I recognise the importance of collaboration between the Member States , and not only this ; collaboration with the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean is certainly important and should be implemented .
In all honesty , I also have some doubts about the economic and commercial initiatives intended to pave the way for the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area .
This is not because I am prejudiced , but because I would appreciate some clarification on how it could be mutually beneficial .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Ms Napoletano on her report .
Certainly , the Union for the Mediterranean is a significant step forward in the efforts for the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
One of the impediments to this partnership so far has been visibility : the capability of the populations of the partners to acknowledge the impact of the Barcelona Process and our Union for the Mediterranean .
Let me give you an example .
When I was asked to prepare a report on de-pollution of the Mediterranean , the programmes involved are the following : the Mediterranean Hotspot Investment Programme , the Strategy for Water in the Mediterranean , the EU Marine Strategy , the UNEP / MAP , the Mediterranean Strategy for Sustainable Development , the Mediterranean Environmental Technical Assistance Programme , the Mediterranean EU water initiative and the MYIS , which have been running under the umbrella of the Horizon 2020 programme .
This fragmentation makes visibility suffer .
The other impediment is the Middle East problem .
I salute the position of Mr Solana that the Quartet will this time operate in a different way to the past .
This is not due to the lack of will on the part of the European Union , but due to the previous policy of the American Administration .
I hope that , this time , with the dispatch of Mr Mitchell to the area , political progress will be made .
We have done a lot on this issue .
I visited Lebanon very recently , and I saw there that UNIFIL , with the presence of the European contingents , makes a repeat of hostilities in southern Lebanon and Israel impossible .
( PT ) My thanks go to my colleague , Pasqualina Napoletano , for her excellent report .
Fourteen years after Barcelona and five years after the first Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , we have the Union for the Mediterranean with economic and parliamentary power , with civil society , and with the heads of government deciding together .
Everyone wants to do more and better in this territory where 720 million citizens represent real potential for development and peace in the world .
Restricting ourselves solely to the economic and business dimensions is clearly a mistake .
Responding to the growth crises naturally requires a political response , but responding to the humanitarian crises , to emergency situations and to military crises , such as the one witnessed at the end of 2008 and beginning of 2009 , is crucial .
Politicians and citizens must respond to the world 's problems .
The world asked them for answers and yet , months later , we , the citizens and politicians , particularly in a platform such as the Union for the Mediterranean , are still taking time to react .
I hope that , at the very least , this time of crisis will make us learn and progress .
Although we can only learn through our mistakes , making progress by speeding up the reaction is absolutely crucial .
( PT ) In her speech , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner summarised the objectives of the new Union .
In truth , this Union was born during the French Presidency under the star sign of mistakes .
The first mistake was to remove from its agenda the conflicts in the region , particularly the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the Western Sahara conflict .
The second mistake is for the Union to try and assert itself by sharing economic and environmental projects , without questioning the free trade context in which it sits .
The third mistake is to insinuate that there is a possibility of transferring to this Union Turkey 's application for accession to the European Union .
Mrs Napoletano 's report does not tackle the first mistake , and that limits its scope .
No economic and regional integration will come to fruition if the Union does not have the courage to tackle existing conflicts and to do this based on international law .
On the other hand , the report does contain clear recommendations on the second and third mistakes , and these are all heading in the right direction .
The Union for the Mediterranean cannot act as the waiting room or back door for Turkey , provided that it meets the accession criteria , and the Union for the Mediterranean cannot be an add-on to the European free trade strategy , without any social integration policies .
The report 's recommendations are important : a Union with a citizen and representative dimension involving the League of Arab States ; regional projects with a social dimension ; and the extension of projects to areas essential to people 's lives , namely water , agriculture and education .
There are also clear rules on the programme agreements and a Euro-Mediterranean Investment Bank .
The Union was born with mistakes , but at least it exists .
I support this report because I believe that this Union will end up being what we manage to make of it .
I therefore give it the benefit of my support .
( PT ) Many of the issues of greater political importance to Europe involve the Mediterranean Basin .
The ' Union for the Mediterranean ' initiative therefore deserves our support as it can give new impetus to a process that is necessary and useful , but which has not had the requisite success or visibility .
The question raised concerns how we can pursue this strategy .
The model followed in Barcelona has not had the expected results .
Can this new partnership bear fruit ?
Mrs Napoletano 's report goes against this perception .
However , we do not want the Union to suffer the same problem as the Barcelona Process .
It apparently encompasses many projects and many areas of action , but the priorities are not correctly ranked .
Relegating intercultural and inter-societal understanding among the peoples on both shores to paragraph 26 and leaving the issue of democratising and promoting human rights to paragraph 27 and migratory flows to paragraph 28 , after having talked so much about other sectors and other issues , leaves a mistaken impression of what the priorities of this partnership are , or must be .
There must be a clear strategy .
In our opinion , this strategy must involve offering more benefits and more cooperation to our neighbours , but also asking them for more results at the economic , social and democratic levels , and concentrating on well-defined and perhaps a smaller number of sectors to prevent all areas having equal priority , which runs the risk of nothing ultimately being a priority .
Clearly , this can only be achieved with appropriate support and funding .
Recognising the need for an investment bank for the Mediterranean must ultimately be favourably received .
It is essential to be ambitious , which means properly doing everything within our power .
Finally , Mr President , I must mention the Middle East conflict .
This process , although not an alternative to peace negotiations , can , and must , make a contribution to better understanding , interdependence and mutual respect between the opposing sides .
These are essential factors - as we are all well aware - for bringing peace to the region .
The list of speakers has been exhausted . There are four requests from the Chamber for leave to speak under the ' catch the eye ' procedure .
Mr President , would the Commissioner , in her reply to Parliament , explain exactly how the newly phrased ' Union for the Mediterranean ' - as opposed to ' Mediterranean Union ' - remains an EU policy ?
I think it is very important that she also considers two other EU seas : the Black Sea , and its synergy , and the Baltic Sea , and its strategy .
My country has an interest in the Mediterranean .
I think we have observer status too .
Member States are Commonwealth members , and - though I do not wish to irritate my Spanish colleagues - Gibraltar , as far as I know , still is technically part of Her Majesty 's Dominions .
It is very important that this is not just some sort of regional hive-off in which the rest of the EU is not fully involved - as I hope they will be fully involved in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea .
( RO ) The economic and social development and prosperity of the citizens from the states in the Union for the Mediterranean must be sustainable .
I feel that the newly created Union for the Mediterranean must also tackle the issue of climate change .
Approximately one billion citizens live in the Euro-Mediterranean region , which produces a third of the world 's GDP .
Regional cooperation is most needed in the area of tackling threats to the environment .
Population growth and the reduction in the amount of precipitation in this region , due to climate change , make drinking water one of the main elements at risk in this area .
Water shortages , water pollution , shortage of water treatment plants , oil spills caused by maritime accidents , forest clearances and soil erosion must feature among the concerns of the partnership for the Mediterranean .
I believe that one of the fundamental values promoted by the Union for the Mediterranean must be environmental protection and the fight against climate change , both in terms of adapting to it and of reducing the causes contributing to it .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I would also like to thank Mrs Napoletano since , during the first discussion on the Union for the Mediterranean , I was rather sceptical and whilst this may still be the case , I now believe that there is hope .
The challenges are absolutely enormous .
Do we have the resources to confront them ?
We know that we do not .
The objectives are certainly noble : environment , energy , the fight against desertification , immigration , etc .
We must not , however , just descend into a disconnected list that would only lead to disappointments on the other side of the Mediterranean .
However , if you would allow me , Commissioner , I would like to mention a particular country that is not a Mediterranean coastal state but has been included ; it is an ACP country and also a member of the Union for the Mediterranean .
This country , Mauritania , is today going through a very serious political crisis .
I think that , as a partner in the Union for the Mediterranean , as an ACP country and in the name of the neighbourhood policy , this country deserves our support to help it get out of this crisis .
I believe that this is what the two parties to the conflict are asking us to do and we have a responsibility to commit ourselves to help it out of this major political crisis .
Mr President , water is a key issue of cooperation across the Mediterranean .
So too , I hope , is a pan-European super-grid , or HVDC interconnection , including a connector between Spain and the north-western coast of Africa .
It is of critical importance to mainstream the use of renewable energy including wind , hydro , various solar technologies and others .
Being able to rely on it at peak demand depends entirely on spreading the input into our grids from as many sources as possible so that the output can always respond to demand .
If the wind is not blowing off the north-west coast of Ireland - and Ireland has been described as the Saudi Arabia of Europe in terms of wind energy ! - it will be off the north-west coast of Africa , or the solar thermal operations in the Mediterranean , especially Spain , will be feeding the grid , or the range of PV installations across the region will be inputting .
This scenario is a win-win for the Mediterranean region , for energy security , for energy politics and , above all , for a serious regional decrease in our carbon dioxide emissions from our current dependence on fossil fuels for industries , transport and heating and cooling .
Mrs Figueiredo has joined us and will present the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
The opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality highlights the need for all Member States to pay closer attention to ratifying the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women , and all other United Nations and International Labour Organisation human rights instruments .
It also draws attention to the situation of women , regretting that no special consideration has been given to this issue in the Commission communication , particularly in the ' projects ' dimension , which should include the promotion of geographical , economic and social cohesion and which should always take into account the issue of equal opportunities for men and women and the gender perspective .
Finally , I simply want to stress the concern about poverty and social exclusion , which seriously affect women .
I will end with a final word on the serious cases of Palestine and the Western Sahara , where women and children are the main victims of war and exploitation , in short the whole process of discrimination that affects these people and which seriously affects women and children .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , first of all , thank you very much for this useful debate , which brought forward a number of ideas .
You have prepared a really interesting document .
Where are we now ?
We know why we are doing this : the Mediterranean region is the cradle of our civilisation and therefore it is logical that we in the European Union want to give it special attention .
Last year , there was a French initiative , and we need to keep this process in motion and to develop its full potential .
So we know why we are doing this and what we want to achieve .
Many of you have stressed how important it is that the Mediterranean becomes an area of peace , stability and security , where democratic principles , human rights and fundamental freedoms - including gender equality and the role of women in society - are upheld and fully respected .
We also know how we want to achieve that , so we have the Union for the Mediterranean and a broad spectrum of activities .
You are very well aware of the most important areas , the emphasis on renewables , the solar programme and the water management programme .
I was in Portugal just a week ago and that country could serve as an example of how to develop a sustainable , dynamic programme for a renewable source of energy , which is very important for the Mediterranean region .
We just need to move .
When we met last year , both in Paris and in Marseilles , we could not have anticipated the situation that would arise in Gaza , but the Presidency , together with the Commission , is doing enough to be able to start with the implementation of all the agreements which we reached last year .
So I think we can reasonably expect to move on after the end of March , as I informed you , with the latest activity of the Presidency .
The programme of our activities for 2009 is very substantial : about nine sectoral ministerial conferences are scheduled .
There are the resources which , as far as I know , come to over EUR 1 billion .
So I think we are ready .
There are certain realities related to the situation in Gaza which have caused some delays , but I believe we will be able to overcome that .
Thank you very much for a useful debate .
We are certainly ready to assist you further .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , much remains to be said , of course , but I will start with the following question : what is the Community dimension in all this ?
Firstly , I can tell you that the Community dimension is important in this issue , because the Union for the Mediterranean project is based on the Barcelona process and has also inherited the acquis of the Barcelona process .
All the acquis is there then .
We have worked a great deal on that .
Secondly , the Union for the Mediterranean is part of the framework of the neighbourhood policy .
The neighbourhood policy represents the bilateral policy and the Barcelona process , while the Union for the Mediterranean constitutes the multilateral part .
Of course , I can also tell you that the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea are part of the same framework , although they are in the North .
Do not worry then .
Fortunately , everything is there .
This , in fact , is what the French Presidency wanted , in other words , to share the copresidency with the Mediterranean countries - as I said before - and to work together .
Now , we - the Commission - are also managing all the future Community projects , because it is necessary and because we are also under Parliament 's control .
Only those projects that may be financed by private funding are managed differently .
The secretariat , which will be located in Barcelona , will promote the projects .
That is how we imagine the promotion , then we will try promotion using private funding because , for the rest , that will remain under the Commission 's control .
The decision will be taken initially by the 27 , as always , and afterwards , once again , the copresidency will be able to work in cooperation with the 143 , the South and the North .
As for Mauritania , Mrs Isler Béguin , it participates only in multilateral relations , namely the Union for the Mediterranean , but is not involved in the neighbourhood policy .
That is the only difference .
That said , I might add that , despite this temporary suspension , we are working at the Commission in a constructive spirit , of course , to implement the four to six projects that have been put forward as priorities .
These are civil protection , de-pollution of the Mediterranean sea , maritime highways and also a solar plan , within the framework of which we are doing a lot of work on renewable energy , particularly solar energy , as the latter , along with wind energy and other energy sources , is very important .
In total , the Union for the Mediterranean can now benefit from financial support worth EUR 60 million in the 2008-2009 budget , particularly via regional programmes .
Moreover , EUR 50 million has already been committed to the Neighbourhood Investment Fund to support investment projects in the region .
We also wanted to support the promotion of university exchanges and that is why , for example , I decided to extend the Erasmus Mundus programme to the countries of the southern Mediterranean to offer them extra university grants .
As regards the issue of women , Mrs Isler Béguin , we are naturally also involved as it appears in the Barcelona acquis .
I remember that I was at the first women 's conference for the Mediterranean , held in 2007 in Istanbul .
We continue , of course , to deal with this issue .
However there is still , as you know , on the one hand , the bilateral aspect , concerning the relations with each country and , on the other , the multilateral aspect , which is now one of the core concerns of the Union for the Mediterranean .
I would just like to say a quick word about the secretariat : we envisage the creation of a drafting committee that will soon be handed the responsibility , in particular , of preparing the secretariat 's legal statutes .
The Commission has already made much progress in the preparatory work .
These statutes will confer a legal personality on the secretariat ; then they will need to be formally approved by the senior officials of the Union for the Mediterranean .
To conclude , I would like to tell you again that the participation of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly as an observer at all the meetings of the Union for the Mediterranean is very important and we support the reinforcement of this role within the Union for the Mediterranean .
Moreover , when Mrs Kratsa went to Marseille , we gave her a lot of support on this issue .
I believe that I have raised the most important points . Of course , there is still a lot to be said on the subject .

Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Vondra , ladies and gentlemen , I think this debate has been very useful and has clarified certain aspects of our fairly complicated system of instruments for bilateral and multilateral partnership with the countries of the south .
I subscribe to the explanation Mrs Ferrero-Waldner gave , pointing out that the Barcelona acquis remains in place , and that for precisely this reason , we in Parliament would perhaps have preferred the first definition , which was : ' The Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean ' .
Perhaps it would then have been clearer that we were reinforcing a system for which there was already an established basis .
Similarly , I hope - I say so quite openly , I will no longer be rapporteur - but I hope that Europe 's institutional framework can itself evolve .
Why ?
Because once we have a European Foreign Minister who will , in part , represent the Commission and the Council , I hope that this minister will not be a 28th foreign minister to add to all the others but , at least on the European side , the Member States will feel that they are represented by this person .
There will then perhaps be no need to add more states to the Union , but if we have a senior representative in the Foreign Minister , we may be able to consolidate the role of the European Union .
This is something we have all worked towards , and so we give our wholehearted support not only to the fact that the regional programmes should continue but also , as the Commissioner knows , that Parliament attaches great importance to these programmes , which have arguably produced better results .
Thank you all for this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Close partnership between the European Union and the countries of the Mediterranean Basin should be based , first and foremost , on respect for human rights and the rule of law .
The proposal entitled ' Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean ' , adopted in Paris on 13 July 2008 , contributes towards peace and prosperity and may be an important step towards economic and territorial integration , as well as ecological and climatic cooperation .
It is a pity that since the launching of the Barcelona Process , no substantial progress has been made in some of the partner countries as regards adherence to , and respect for , some of the common values and principles highlighted in the 1995 Barcelona Declaration , to which they subscribed ( especially as regards democracy , human rights and the rule of law ) .
In the countries of the Mediterranean Basin , the incidence of poverty and social exclusion , which seriously affect women and children , is disturbing .
It is essential that Member States and partners engaged in the Barcelona Process emphasise inclusion of the gender perspective in all policies and specific measures which promote equal opportunities for men and women .
All States taking part in the Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean should ratify both the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ( CEDAW ) and all other United Nations and International Labour Organisation human rights instruments as soon as possible .
in writing . - I welcome the efforts made to further develop the EU 's relations in the Euromed region , but I would like also to underline that the EU should not neglect its two other seas - the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea .
The Baltic Sea strategy will be one of the priorities under the Swedish Presidency .
Also , the Black Sea Synergy carries strategic importance .
The EU has to take care and find a common spirit in developing all these regions in a balanced manner .
The EU is an integrated community and the long-term strategic development of all its regions has equal importance .
There is clearly a need to have a close partnership with non-EU countries in the Mediterranean based on respect for human rights and the rule of law .
Regrettably , there are still several countries that have serious problems in this domain .
I urge the EU Member States to address these issues with the utmost seriousness .
Involving the Arab League is a significant opportunity to bring all states together to jointly find solutions for conflicts in the region .
I call on the EU Member States to take a balanced stand and play the role of negotiator rather than taking sides in different conflict situations .
Only by being balanced can we contribute to achieving long-term peace in Middle-East .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( HU ) In Romania , the history of Székely Land 's autonomy goes back several hundred years .
The founding documents of the modern Romanian state guaranteed the regional autonomy of Székely Land , which existed even during communist times .
Taking into consideration the different forms of autonomy guaranteed in EU states , on 8 February 2009 , in Sepsiszentgyörgy ( Sfântu Gheorghe ) , a crowd several thousand strong demanded that the President withdraw his offensive statements toward Hungarians in Transylvania , guarantee representation in state institutions commensurate to ethnic populations , cease targeted relocations into the area , stop deliberately crippling the economy of Székely Land , expedite the return of ecclesiastical and public property , halt the expansion of military units , establish state-funded independent Hungarian universities , recognise Hungarian as an official language of the region and recognise collective rights and the regional autonomy of Székely Land .
( BG ) We must congratulate the Lower House of the Czech Parliament for ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
This is yet another victory for the European idea and further proof that ever more people believe in European values .
And for that reason , I appeal to us to set ourselves apart from those who would encroach upon these values and destroy our belief in them .
How can we write up our fundamental rights in gold in the Charter on the one hand , while tolerate them being scorned and denounced at the same time ?
We speak of religious and ethnic tolerance , and the rights of the elderly to a dignified life and to participate actively in it while , at the same time , the leader of a Bulgarian political party , a full member of the European People 's Party , demarcates various ethnic and age groups , and imposes the idea of different classes of people .
How should we treat such leaders ?
My question is addressed to the right side of this House , because the president of the EPP , Mr Martens , has recommended that same person for the next prime minister of my country .
Let us reject double standards and respect our own actions and words , and remember that what brought us together more than 50 years ago were human rights .
( BG ) The European Economic Recovery Plan is now in place .
The crisis is a general problem , but protectionism and the promotion of national industries and employment is creeping in .
The fundamental freedoms of free movement of labour and free trade are being put to the test .
The crisis is following different paths in different countries .
In the recently emerging economic tigers of the European Union , which include Bulgaria , the banking system is relatively stable , unemployment levels are not high , there are highly-skilled workforces and stable currencies .
In view of the dynamics of the crisis , I appeal for the recovery plan to be updated to be more in tune with the real economy .
At times of crisis , capital looks for low-risk areas , and there is the chance to invest in new greenfield technologies rather than in unviable industries .
The potential of the last economies to fall into recession should be used to revive them first and , with the help of this funding and know-how , they can become centres of stability around which the economic and financial system of the European Union can more quickly recover .
( PL ) Mr President , at a time of spreading crisis , I would like to congratulate the European Commission on the destruction of Polish shipyards .
The egoistic approach of the European elite , their joy at the loss of the jobs of over 100 000 people in the shipyards and the firms which work with them will surely result in a large part of these workers appearing on the job market in western Europe in the near future .
This decision has only deepened the European crisis .
I am curious to know how the European elite will behave ; will they show solidarity with Member States where the crisis has grown to a huge scale , or will they only look after their own interests ?
It is precisely at a time of crisis that European society will see if the declarations and principles which lie at the foundation of the European Union are true , or if it is only a game being played by some States against others within an institution which was founded on noble principles .
In this context , I am surprised by the lack of reaction from the Commission to measures currently being taken by many members of the EU which break prevailing principles , while Poland has been punished for taking similar measures .
Mr President , I received some strange news from Northern Ireland last week .
It was that Mr Sammy Wilson , the Environment Minister in the regional government , banned a UK information campaign organised by the UK Government on energy efficiency .
I cannot believe that the good reasons behind our common climate and energy targets - 20 % less CO2 , 20 % renewables and 20 % more energy efficiency - are not accepted in the regional government of a Member State .
I am therefore asking the Commission to find out what the reasons are behind this strange and quite bizarre ban in Northern Ireland .
I think even a climate sceptic like Mr Wilson should take care of citizens and support energy efficiency and efforts to decrease the energy bill .
( PT ) Today , I should like to highlight a scandalous situation involving Corticeira Amorim in Portugal .
This company 's profits , in the last two years combined , were in excess of EUR 30 million , with more than EUR 6 million being recorded in 2008 .
However , this month Corticeira Amorim has announced that nearly 200 workers will be laid off .
It has blamed the effects of the crisis .
However , the company is forgetting that it was these workers who helped to build the group , which is worth millions and which has received public aid , including Community funds , in order to generate the millions in profits that it is still making .
I therefore want to protest in this House and express my indignation at this announcement , which is a scandal , and I hope that everyone will join together to condemn companies that are taking advantage of this crisis in order to lay off workers , even though they are still making large profits .
Just before I call the next speaker , let me announce with pleasure that Dr Ayman Nour , the Egyptian parliamentarian who was imprisoned some years ago for reasons which the EU Council said were not serious , has been released today .
He has been the subject of many resolutions in the European Parliament , so I am very pleased to announce that he has now been released .
( PL ) Mr President , Poland returns Members to the European Parliament , but their ability to act in their own country is limited .
Polish legislation does not give MEPs any legal instruments which ensure the effective fulfilment of their mandate .
This concerns significant issues , such as exerting an effective influence on the administrative authorities of central and local government .
Senators and Members of the national Parliament have a series of rights : the right to be given information by state bodies , the right to request information from the administrative authorities of central and local government and a statutory 40-day period within which an answer must be given .
In Poland , hardly anyone sets any store by an MEP , except the media when they are looking for a cheap sensation .
On my website , I have informed electors of the lack of statutory forms of action open to MEPs .
The legislative slovenliness of successive groups of legislators in Poland is , in this case , well known .
I believe that the European Parliament should demand greater possibilities for its representatives to act in their own countries .
Mr President , EU funds distributed by the lottery of ' first come , first served ' is wrong .
Yet that is what we have seen in Northern Ireland this week .
The minister who decided on cavalier distribution of EU rural development funds on this basis , leading to the demeaning and bizarre spectacle of farmers queuing for two days to get some of their own modulated money back , is a minister not fit to hold office .
In that , at a stroke , she both humiliated hard-working farmers and displayed crass ignorance of basic requirements for the distribution of EU funds .
The source of this embarrassment is the wanton refusal of the minister to allocate sufficient funds to rural development .
The pitiful GBP 50 million she put into Axis 1 - and only GBP 15 million of that into the modernisation fund - is what caused the spectacle of Tuesday .
Let me say on another matter , in defence of Mr Wilson , the Minister of the Environment in Northern Ireland , that I am glad he does not fit the stereotype that unthinking climate-change hysterics expect in this House .

Mr President , the recent poll in the Irish Times on Monday showed growing support for the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland , with 51 % of voters now saying they would vote ' yes ' , particularly at this moment of Irish economic fragility .
This is an increase of eight points since the last poll was taken by the Irish Times in November of last year .
The ' no ' vote has also dropped six points to 33 % .
Concerning our current strained relationship with the European Union , in the absence of leadership from the present government , an attempt must be made to address the root causes of the Irish electorate 's periodic disenchantment with the EU .
There must be a meaningful engagement with the Irish people to rebuild an understanding of , and support for , the European process .
This communication shortfall can be breached by allowing more positive information to flow freely about the advantages of being part of the EU .
I believe it is important that the positive role of Europe must be highlighted through our education systems .
This should not apply to Ireland alone , but also to all Member States .
I would urge that the communication deficit be tackled at the earliest possible date .
( BG ) I should like to draw your attention to the problem of the renewed schism in the Bulgarian Orthodox Church .
This schism arose at a time when the country was highly politicised , at a time when the Bulgarian Orthodox Church , like many other structures , had to uphold its position in the democratic face of Bulgaria .
Unfortunately , this led to the so-called ' Second Synod ' of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church , despite the Bulgarian Religious Denominations Act .
This legislation is very liberal , which allows any religion to be registered in Bulgaria provided it does not serve inhumane purposes .
However the so-called ' Second Synod ' wants to register as ' the Holy Synod of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church ' .
The Act states that the Bulgarian Orthodox Church is traditional to Bulgaria and exempt from registration .
The election of the patriarch and members of the Holy Synod is not subject to legislative action .
I appeal to all those who value the freedom to worship in accordance with one 's personal spiritual needs not to succumb to the manipulative definitions of the so-called ' Second Synod ' .
This Synod cannot be registered and has no legal basis .
Mr President , last week 's elections in Israel showed that the majority of citizens support the parties that see the reinforcement of the military as the best way to protect the country .
Even though the centrist party , Kadima , received the largest number of votes , the fact that the right-wing parties now hold 65 seats in the Knesset , compared to 50 in the previous elections , reflects the changing views of the Israeli citizens about the Israel-Palestinian conflict .
Those parties are in favour of taking a hard line rather than relying on seemingly endless and ineffective peace talks .
The Middle East must be one of the top priorities in the European Union 's common foreign and security policy and the stability of the whole region depends largely on Israel-Palestinian relations .
It is absolutely crucial , therefore , for the European Union to continue pursuing the peace talks and to restore hope to Israelis and Palestinians that a peaceful coexistence is possible .
( PL ) Mr President , tomorrow Vaclav Klaus , President of the Czech Republic , will visit the European Parliament .
Mindful of the scandal which has developed in Prague , we hope that the President of the State which is the holder of the European Union Presidency will be received properly and accorded due respect .
The justified opinions expressed by President Klaus about the Treaty of Lisbon have become the subject of attempts to cover them up with an uproar in order to conceal the fact that the main source of opposition to introducing the treaty may turn out to be Germany .
The decision of the Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe will be pivotal .
According to media reports , half its bench have serious doubts and think that the treaty may breach the national constitution .
This shows that no one should be in a hurry where such an important decision is concerned , and this is understood not only by the visiting Czech President .
( RO ) After the autumn elections in Romania and the formation of the new government , we have seen the return with a vengeance to political life in Romania , just like in Slovakia , of anti-Hungarian incitement .
The demonstration that took place on 9 February in Sfântu Gheorghe , organised by the Hungarian churches , was precisely in protest against this incitement .
In the petition raised at the demonstration , thousands of local residents of the Szekély Land region protested against the change in the ethnic proportions in the area through directly populating the region with groups of Romanians from other areas .
President Traian Băsescu has absurdly accused the Hungarians in this region of ethnic cleansing .
At the same time as this , during the municipal elections in Cluj , the democrats ' flyers were inciting hatred against the Hungarian candidates , using the same slander .
After decades of discrimination and denial of rights , who is accusing who ?
I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that in Romania , even now , there is an ongoing process , using subtle methods , of homogenising and making Transylvania Romanian by artificially altering the ethnic proportions .
Mr President , on 12 February 2009 , the Dutch MP , Geert Wilders , was refused entry to the United Kingdom by order of the Home Secretary .
Never before has a democratically elected politician , representing a democratic party from a democratic European country , been denied entry .
It seems odd that the British Government can find the legal means to ban Mr Wilders , but is powerless to prevent the entry of assorted terrorists , political and religious extremists , gangsters , criminals , rapists and paedophiles from the European Union and , indeed , the wider world .
Perhaps Mr Wilders ' banning had something to do with the alleged threat by a British peer , Lord Ahmed , that , were Mr Wilders to appear in the House of Lords , 10 000 Islamist demonstrators would appear outside .
This was an act of appeasement to a Dark Age ideology and it seems that we do not quite have the free movement of ideas across European Union borders .
Mr President , on the theme of the Lisbon Treaty , my colleague has spoken about the increase in support among the Irish electorate for the Treaty , but I would warn that one swallow does not make a summer .
I think that must be taken against a background of a recent Eurobarometer poll , which shows that support for Irish membership of the EU has dropped by 10 percentage points from 77 % in the spring of 2006 to 67 % in the autumn of 2008 .
Yes , there is a job to be done to persuade the Irish electorate about the positive benefits of the European Union .
That is why I would be concerned about those who want an earlier date for a second referendum in Ireland .
I believe that we need to be cautious , we need to give time for the clarifications to be given on the issues of concern to the Irish voters and we need time for those issues to be debated in full and in public - and in due time allow the electorate to give their view .
( RO ) The current economic and financial crisis is an important test for Europe which , now more than ever , must show unity in taking measures which will facilitate the economy 's recovery in the shortest time possible .
Member States ' budgets are under great pressure in facing up to these challenges , which is why the best instruments and actions need to be found to prevent them from greatly exceeding the limits envisaged by the Commission for the budgetary deficit and to prevent protectionist measures from being adopted by some Member States or in favour of private manufacturers .
Such decisions must pass quickly through the adoption procedures to avoid prolonging the crisis and , above all , to make it possible to restore confidence in the financial markets and avoid prolonging the crisis from a political perspective too , bearing in mind as well the approaching European Parliament elections .
One possible solution for financing public expenditure could be to issue euro bonds .
However , we need to factor in the risk that , based on the measures taken , we are indebting ourselves to the hilt and it is difficult for us to avoid reaching the situation where we are leaving future generations to shoulder the payment of these debts .
( ES ) Mr President , a year and a half ago , we adopted the Audiovisual Media Directive .
That text had at its heart the principle of respect for the country of origin , which we established as essential for ensuring free movement of audiovisual information within the European Union .
However , the Directive cannot be applied within my country , Spain , because it is within a Member State .
The Community of Valencia imposes exactly the opposite principle , and for political reasons it is forcing the closure of the relays which , hitherto , enabled its citizens to receive public television signals from Catalonia .
In other words , there is complete freedom of circulation of audiovisual information between the Member States of the European Union but , at the same time , it must be reported that in Spain , there are authorities that are fearful of this same cultural freedom , which is so essential .
It is so essential that it has been imposed across Europe and nevertheless , within Spain , some are prevented from receiving the television programmes broadcast by others .
This was the paradox that I wanted to share with you .
( PL ) ( initially the microphone was turned off ) tragic periods in the history of humanity .
During its course , tens of millions of people met their deaths .
Many of those victims had their lives taken in one of over twelve thousand German extermination camps and concentration camps which operated on the territory of the Third Reich and in occupied countries .
Today , attempts are being made to distort the truth about those tragic years , and information is being disseminated that these camps were Polish or Latvian camps , and not German .
A leading force in this is the German press .
Recently , Die Welt wrote that Majdanek was a Polish concentration camp .
In connection with this , I have prepared a draft resolution which intends to standardise the nomenclature of concentration camps by adding to their names the words ' German ' or ' Nazi ' concentration camp .
My initiative has been taken up by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , but unfortunately , I have received information that it has been blocked by the Conference of Presidents .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Union can endure and develop only when it is guided by historical truth and respect for human rights .
I therefore address a request to my fellow Members for support of the UEN initiative , so that no one will ever again distort history or make executioners of the victims and victims of the executioners .
( RO ) As some of my Hungarian fellow Members have been complaining recently that their rights are not respected in Romania , I would like to state a couple of facts .
The approaching electoral campaign should not give rise to attacks and insults targeted at a legitimate state which , through its legislation , has offered a model in the area of interethnic relations .
Respect for minorities ' rights is guaranteed by the Romanian constitution .
Citizens of Hungarian origin are represented proportionally in the local administrative structures .
For instance , the Hungarian minority 's parties have 195 mayors and four chairmen of county councils , 2 684 local councillors and 108 county councillors .
As they hold the majority in the local and county councils mentioned above , they manage local budgets according to their discretion .
This is what local autonomy means .
At parliamentary level , the Hungarian minority have three MEPs in the European Parliament , 22 MPs and nine senators in the national parliament and have participated in governing Romania during the last 12 years .
The complaints that have been heard are outright political electioneering .
( ES ) Mr President , the referendum in Venezuela has ended in a victory for the ' yes ' campaign , which has been graciously acknowledged by the democratic opposition .
It is also true that there has not been equality of opportunities during the campaign , and that the ruling party has had the overwhelming support of the entire State apparatus , while the opposition has suffered constant harassment and coercion .
Even under these conditions , the country has been practically split down the middle , and it will be very difficult to build a future with just one of these groups .
The European Union must promote dialogue , inclusion and consensus between the Venezuelan political and social leaders for the good of the country .
Visceral attitudes , condemnation and insults will not be the way to help Venezuela to find the way onto a democratic , pluralist and free pathway .
We therefore criticise the decision of the Venezuelan Government to expel a Spanish Member , and especially the way in which this was done .
However , we urge this House to prevent our representatives , when visiting third countries , from making statements that violate current local legislation and especially that insult a head of state , however worthy of criticism he might be .
Such attitudes are compromising future European Parliament missions to other countries .
Mr President , I want to refer to the issue of transparent and accurate food labelling and , in particular , I refer to poultry and pigmeat .
Right now , meat can be transported from outside the EU into the EU , substantially transformed - and by that I mean encased in breadcrumbs or batter - and then labelled and sold as EU produce .
This is an absolute nonsense , and the labelling is designed to fool the consumers .
We need country-of-origin labelling so consumers are able to make informed choices .
We also have the situation where pigmeat and poultry meat has been frozen , then defrosted , labelled and sold as fresh .
Not only is this an example of inaccurate labelling , it is potentially dangerous for human health .
I note that Hilary Benn , the UK Environment Secretary , and the Shadow Secretary , have called for clearer labelling .
I am sure that many across the EU would support this , as nobody would want to fool consumers .
I would ask the Commission to deal with this matter as a matter of urgency .
( PL ) Mr President , at a meeting today , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group unanimously adopted a draft resolution calling for 25 May to be established as Heroes of the Fight against Totalitarianism Day .
Its text will soon be sent to representatives of the highest authorities of the EU , including Mr Pöttering .
The choice of 25 May is not incidental - it was on that day , in 1948 , that the Soviet authorities murdered cavalry Captain Witold Pilecki , the Polish soldier who voluntarily became a prisoner in the Auschwitz extermination camp in order to build the resistance movement there .
He later escaped and up to the end of the war , fought against the Nazis , and then , after the Soviet armies entered Poland , he began an underground fight against the successive occupants .
Pilecki was only one of many Europeans who lost their lives in the fight against brutal totalitarian systems .
Many remain unknown , but the bravery and devotion of all of them deserve to be remembered .
Therefore I ask you , Mr President , to support the initiative of our group .
( RO ) The recent history of the European Union offers a record of the success stories in terms of protecting minorities ' rights .
This also applies to the Hungarian minority in Romania .
This minority enjoys a variety of rights , including administrative posts , and these rights have been continually supported by Romania 's President Traian Băsescu .
However , in other areas we still have a great deal to do , and I would like to speak now about the problem of the Roma community .
This offers a test of the European Union 's ability to integrate groups at a high risk of exclusion .
The case of the Romanian handball player Marian Cozma , brutally murdered by two members of Hungary 's Roma community , shows us once again that crime knows no borders and that ignoring the problems of this community is counterproductive .
The situation of this minority , which is inherently transnational and at great risk of exclusion , can only be improved through adopting a concerted policy at European level .
With this in mind , I have tabled , along with my colleague Rareş Niculescu , a resolution on creating a European agency for Roma .
The EU has a strategy for the Roma minority but does not have any agency to implement it coherently and effectively .
In order to remain a relevant force on the international stage , while preserving internal cohesion , the EU needs to be able to create a pan-European environment of tolerance .
( ES ) Mr President , I have just come back from Venezuela , where I was invited by its electoral authority as a member of an international electoral support group for the referendum on 15 February .
The European members of the group have submitted a report to the National Electoral Council with a positive overall evaluation of the process in terms of its organisation , transparency , participation , freedom and secrecy of voting and security in all its phases .

Regarding the statements that Mr Herrero made on Venezuelan television , I can tell you that they served to delegitimise the electoral process , made serious accusations against democratic institutions in that country , and bordered on interference in the internal politics of a sovereign country .
Parliament should not encourage any type of confrontation with the democratic institutions in Venezuela .
However , it is up to Mr Herrero himself to give explanations to the House for an action that affects us all .
( RO ) I refute the accusations levelled by my fellow Members , Csaba Sógor and László Tőkés , against Romania .
Romania is a Member State of the European Union , NATO , the Council of Europe , the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe and respects , in accordance with European standards , human rights and the rights of persons belonging to national minorities .
Romania applies the letter and spirit of all the relevant international treaties in this area .
The Hungarian language is used by law for administrative matters in any location and county where those belonging to the Hungarian minority account for more than 20 % of the population .
This is a de facto and de jure situation .
Romania offers extensive educational opportunities for Hungarians in their mother tongue in nurseries , primary schools , secondary schools , vocational colleges , university faculties , right up to master and doctorate level .
In the areas where ethnic Hungarians live alongside Romanians , it is a well-observed rule that schools operate sections where the language of instruction is Hungarian for all children of Hungarian origin .
Just in case they have also somehow forgotten , the Babeş-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca has three sections offering instruction in Romanian , Hungarian and German respectively , plus the flourishing development of Jewish studies at the institution , as well as special places for Roma .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the makers of the official homepage of the European Parliament , the EP press service , for respecting multilingualism , and for indicating place names in the national language of each webpage .
This allows EU citizens to acquire information in their mother tongue about the other 26 countries .
The Czech page about Germany displays Köln as Kolín , while the French page displays Cologne .
The Slovak pages about Hungary indicate town names in Slovak , as they should .
It should be just as natural for Hungarians living in Slovakia to refer to the village or town where they were born in their mother tongue , Hungarian .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that the Slovak Parliament has passed legislation on public education providing for geographical names to be presented in minority language textbooks in the minority 's language .
Thus , if the law is implemented , the former status quo may be restored , and Hungarians will be able to use Hungarian place names once again .
Mr President , I would like to draw to your attention the situation that occurred in my constituency yesterday morning when farmers were forced to queue outside government offices , in some cases for two nights , in order to apply for a European Union farm modernisation grant scheme .
Our local Agriculture Minister decided to allocate these grants on a ' first come , first served ' basis .
This can only be described as an inadequate way to deal with the allocation of EU rural development money .
I was glad to hear , therefore , that a Commission official yesterday questioned the validity of this allocation procedure .
We are aware that not every farmer can benefit from this particular funding package .
However , I feel the situation clearly demonstrates the dire straits of the agriculture industry , certainly in my region , if farmers have to queue for days outside , during winter months , in an attempt to secure modest sums of EU funding .
( RO ) The implementation of the energy and climate change package assumes significant investments in measures aimed at cutting greenhouse gas emissions .
Buildings are responsible for 40 % of the consumption of primary energy .
Increasing buildings ' energy efficiency helps reduce the consumption of primary energy and the level of carbon dioxide emissions .
Next year , the Commission along with Member States , will evaluate , in the middle of the 2007-2013 period , the operational programmes and the degree of absorption of structural funds .
I call on Member States to review the method for using structural funds , giving priority to energy efficiency in buildings and urban mobility for the 2010-2013 period .
I urge the European Commission and Member States to increase from 3 % to 15 % the amount allocated to each Member State from the ERDF for costs linked to boosting energy efficiency in buildings and using renewable energy .
This increase will offer Member States greater flexibility in using the structural funds , thereby speeding up their absorption , especially during the current economic crisis .
( PL ) Mr President , it is with great sadness and anger that I would like to say that one of our countrymen , a Polish engineer , died recently in Pakistan , but he was yet another citizen of an EU country to die in that region .
It is yet another death which shows the existence of a world of anti-values , a world of people who do not acknowledge something which , in other civilisations , is considered sacred - human life .
I think that this dramatic fact and , indeed , this successive fact , should be for us another significant signal and inducement to unite in the fight against the world of anti-values , and also to unite in the political fight and in context - and this should be said directly - in a common front against terrorism .
I think that those politicians in the European Union who feel that terror can be fought without violence are mistaken .
Mr President , a large coalition government was set up in Romania after the elections in November of last year , with a parliamentary share of 73 % in the two houses of the Romanian Parliament .
One of the first measures taken by this coalition was to work out a scheme to divide among themselves the leading positions of state-controlled public institutions and the public administration of Romania .
This is an unacceptable situation for two reasons .
Firstly , it leads to renewed partisanship in state administration , which contravenes the law on the public servants ' statute .
Secondly , in the regions where the Hungarian population forms a large majority , the measure has an anti-minority facet as well : ethnic Hungarian public servants are being replaced by ethnic Romanian persons .
On 8 February , a public gathering in Sfântu Gheorghe / Sepsiszentgyörgy , Romania , was attended by more than 3 000 people protesting against the political games of the Romanian parties and requesting that the Hungarian communities ' rights be respected .
Mr President , regarding the report on patients ' rights in cross-border health care , I would like to emphasise the issue of the right of patients to be informed about the available medication and treatment options .
European patients should have access to quality health information regarding the latest medication available , the treatment options home and abroad , the legal and financial implications of being treated abroad , the reimbursement of the treatment costs and many other areas .
For the moment , we do not have this type of quality information .
We may have some national initiatives , but nothing that could be effective at European level .
The problems we face are European .
I therefore support the idea of setting up a European health literacy network .
Such a network should consist of patients ' organisations from all the Member States and should work closely with the health sector and the policy makers .
In the hope of making the Commission aware of the need to better inform the 150 million European patients , I have initiated a written declaration on health literacy .
We have all been patients at some point , and we never know when it will happen again .
( RO ) Today and tomorrow , you will come across in our building some young students from the Republic of Moldova .
They have come to the European Parliament because in their own country , they cannot speak out , or if they do , they can expect reprisals .
All the European Commission 's reports , our hearings in the Commission on human rights and the reports from civil society in Moldova indicate to us that the freedom of expression is frequently violated and that the mass media cannot be independent .
Dozens of young people who were using Internet forums to express their opinions were investigated and threatened with criminal records in 2008 .
Please show an interest in them , invite them into your offices , listen to them and sign written declaration No 13 / 2009 which was created for them in order to give them the freedom to express themselves , this generation from the eastern border of our united Europe .
Mr President , under Directive 2000 / 84 / EC , summer time begins on the final Sunday in March and ends on the last Sunday in October .
I would like to propose that this period be expanded in order to maximise many economic , safety and environmental benefits which are associated with the summer time period .
In 2005 , the United States implemented a programme of extending daylight saving time by four weeks - an additional three weeks in the spring and an additional week in the autumn .
There is already clear evidence that this has helped reduce both energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions .
In fact , a report by the United States Department of Energy found that extending daylight saving time by four weeks saved enough electricity to power some 100 000 homes per annum .
Similarly , a recent study by the University of Cambridge also suggests that increasing summer time would lead to a decrease in both energy consumption and carbon-dioxide emissions as , during the peak demand period from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. each day , many of the more expensive and carbon-emitting ancillary power stations are switched on .

As the rapporteur of the review of the EU ETS , which formed the cornerstone of the EU 's climate and energy package adopted last December by this House , I urge you to consider this proposal as a contribution to meeting the 2 ° C target . So I would like a review , please , of the Daylight Saving Time Directive .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to put forward two suggestions .
The Treaty of Lisbon has been mentioned repeatedly today .
The least we should expect of this House is that it be able to distinguish between an opponent of the Treaty of Lisbon and an opponent of the EU .
In addition , if the Irish should have to vote once again , it is desirable that they be given a fair chance rather than there being manoeuvring to undermine the rules that have applied up to now , according to which ' yes ' and ' no ' have an equal chance to appear in public , and this then being hailed as a triumph of democracy - or of what ?
My second point is that , of course , this House is being noticeably boastful with regard to the forthcoming elections .
I would suggest an investigation into the specific approach this House has taken to the problems of the global financial crisis over the years , and into who voted which way , for then we shall discover that most of those who are now acting as fire-fighters actually helped start the fire .
( LT ) This January , the European Commission provided a package of additional proposals on the funding of energy and broadband network projects laid out in the European plan for economic revival .
It is proposed that EUR 5 billion be allocated to these projects , using EUR 3.5 billion from the 2008 agricultural budget .
However , last week 6 states blocked the Commission 's proposal .
Apparently , these are the very countries which are forming the current financial perspective and have demanded a reduction in payments to the EU budget to 1 % of GDP .
We are returning to nationalism and protectionism , which have been consistently rejected for 50 years , ever since the Community was first founded .
Fellow Members , only solidarity among states can help us face the challenges of the financial and economic crisis and ensure the future of the EU .
That concludes the item .
The review of the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument ( debate )
The next item is the report by Konrad Szymański , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the review of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
Mr President , I would very much like to address myself to a representative of the Council as well , but the Council did not decide to send anyone to this debate .
I think that this is a pity , and that it is a bad habit .
And I think that the President should react to this situation .
Returning to the subject of neighbourhood , we must admit , we must be aware , that the countries which surround the European Union are changing very dynamically .
Therefore , we need changes in neighbourhood policy .
The Union for the Mediterranean is our answer to the needs of the south , and the Black Sea Synergy answers the challenge which intensified with the last enlargement of the European Union .
The Eastern Partnership is a timely answer to the expectations of our European neighbours to the east .
In order to achieve the objectives which we have set in recent years for neighbourhood policy , citizens of neighbouring countries must feel a real political and economic rapprochement with the EU .
This is why such importance is attached to establishing a deep free trade area and to rapid action to reduce visa fees , with the proposal of visa liberalisation for a significant part of these countries as the ultimate goal .
Inclusion of energy in the most important objectives of neighbourhood policy should be our common goal , our mutual interest , and this includes engagement of our money in the modernisation of independent energy transfer networks , especially in the east and the south .
Only in this way will we achieve political rapprochement with Ukraine , Georgia , Moldova , Armenia and , ultimately , with Azerbaijan , and in the future - also maintaining appropriate balance - with the five republics of Central Asia .
When we talk about the eastern aspect of neighbourhood , we inevitably come to the problem of Russia and our partnership with this country .
Today , as we stand at the threshold of negotiations over a new agreement , we can , however , say only one thing - Russia is a challenge for security in our common neighbourhood .
It is very difficult to see Russia as a partner in this area .
Here , we come to the fundamental political problem of expansion of the EU to the east .
The neighbourhood process does not , of course , replace accession , but it cannot be separated from the perspective of membership in the case of European countries .
Without that perspective , our efforts will be significantly impaired .
Taking this opportunity , I would like to give many thanks to all the coordinators of foreign affairs of the political groups , the co-rapporteurs , and also the Secretariat of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , without whose help it would not have been possible to prepare a report which today enjoys broad support , as can be seen by the very small number of amendments submitted in the plenary session .
This will significantly facilitate voting tomorrow .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , two and a half years ago , Parliament and the Council adopted the Commission proposal for a simplification of the external financial instruments .
We streamlined many different instruments , one of which was the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) .
This is a highly important instrument because it makes our external cooperation stronger , more ' policy driven ' , and better targets our funding in support of key sectors .
I was very pleased to read Mr Szymański 's comments and to see that he considers that the ENPI regulation is adequate and valid for the purpose of cooperation with our neighbouring countries .
The preliminary findings of our review point exactly in the same direction .
The ENPI country programmes underpin the implementation of ENPI action plans and reflect the ambition of the EU and the partner countries .
In a way , they have been transmission belts for the political and economic reforms that we seek to encourage through the ENPI .
Moreover , instruments such as twinning and TAIEX provide support for institution building , legislative approximation and regulatory alignment .
Sector and budget support operations are used to promote the agreed reform agenda .
The different ENPI regional approaches and dimensions are supported through specific regional programmes .
A multi-country programme was created , particularly to implement highly visible initiatives common to all neighbouring countries such as TEMPUS , Erasmus Mundus or CIUDAD .
The innovative cross-border cooperation component has been successfully launched .
All of this clearly shows that the 2006 agreement on the ENPI regulation gave us a tool which allows us to deliver and produce tangible results .
There is always room for improvement and I am always grateful for suggestions .
Let me also say that the report , firstly , underlines the need to further develop consultations with civil society and local authorities , which is what we are already doing .
Secondly , I have noted your call for even more ambitious actions in the fields of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
As you know , these topics are already at the forefront of our cooperation with partner countries , and political reforms and good governance are at the very heart of the ENP .
We have also targeted projects to strengthen the judiciary .
However , let us be honest .
First , because our partners face important structural challenges , we cannot expect things to change overnight and , as Lord Patten once said : ' democracy is not instant coffee ' .
I think that is really true .
Thirdly , I see that the report calls for more resources .
Clearly , more resources improve our leverage - that is true .
In the first two years , we had to come back to the budgetary authority several times , asking for sufficient supplementary funds , for instance , for Palestine and Georgia .
Therefore , we have proposed to draw on fresh funds for an ambitious Eastern Partnership , which we will soon be discussing in Parliament .
Finally , let me say that I am very pleased to see that the report welcomes the recent Commission proposal on the Eastern Partnership , which we consider has a very important multilateral dimension , together with the Union for the Mediterranean and the Black Sea .
I hope that I will continue to have your support and understanding in the future .
The ENPI established after EU enlargement in 2004 applies to 17 countries , of which 15 are classed as developing countries .
The instrument includes the EU 's new Eastern neighbours Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus .
The security of our Eastern neighbours , in particular , energy security in Ukraine and Belarus , also constitutes EU security .
This was demonstrated by the Ukraine / Russia gas crisis in the New Year which has already become a tradition .
Last summer 's military conflict in Georgia forced us all to consider the security of EU States and the threat to independence .
Faced with such a situation , I propose , as I did before , that an Eastern Neighbourhood assembly , Euroeast , with the participation of the European Parliament and based on the principles of the Euromed and EuroLat assemblies , be created with a view to implementing the ENPI in the countries of Eastern Europe .
I am delighted that this has also been approved in the report .
Euroeast would give the European Parliament the opportunity to devote equal attention to all neighbours and developing countries .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Szymański , on his very good report .
On behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , I welcome the inclusion of cross-border cooperation within the scope of the ENPI Regulation as an instrument to develop common projects and to strengthen relations between ENP countries and EU Member States .
At the same time , I would like to highlight the necessity of regularly monitoring the management and implementation of joint operational programmes on both sides of EU borders .
Cross-border cooperation should contribute to integrated sustainable development between neighbouring regions .
We ask the Commission to prepare a detailed overview of all joint operational programmes approved for the current financial period , with an assessment of how the principles of transparency , efficiency and partnership have been respected .
Such an assessment , together with an inventory of the most frequent problems faced by the managing authorities , should contribute to finding more appropriate solutions for the next programming period .
I would also encourage the Commission to facilitate the exchange of experiences and best practices in cross-border cooperation between ENP programmes and projects , on the one hand , and actions taken under the European Territorial Cooperation objective and under the already completed Interreg IIIA Community Initiative , on the other .
Finally , the Regional Development Committee considers that ENPI should focus on a balanced strategy between the east and the south , with specific approaches for both areas .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Szymański on his comprehensive report , which will have the support of our group in the vote tomorrow .
I would also like to congratulate Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , both on the success of the ENPI and of the projects that lie ahead , with the need for an Eastern partnership concerning , in particular , our Eastern neighbours and partners , as well as the Black Sea Synergy .
Once these are constituted and take on their own identity - for example , with a parliamentary assembly , etc . , as we are doing for the Mediterranean - perhaps they will all assume a distinct identity , even in the way they are financed .
I discern some kind of rivalry - or , let us say , anxiety - among Members .
We have just heard about not creating one thing to the financial detriment of another .
That should not happen .
We know that the Union for the Mediterranean , the Eastern Partnership and the Black Sea Synergy , etc. are in the interests of the European Union .
Those arrangements should not be a reason for countries aspiring to join the European Union to have to be told time and time again that this is not the alternative to membership that some are worrying about .
Mr President , the neighbourhood and partnership instrument needs to be revised so as to secure simpler procedures and , at the same time , improve transparency .
The basis for the European neighbourhood policy is the creation of a climate of trust in the immediate vicinity of the European Union .
It is in everyone 's interest for there to be stronger economic growth and stability in all neighbouring countries , both to the east and in the Mediterranean area .
However , criteria and approaches specific to each country need to be defined , depending on its political priorities in terms of human rights , democracy , the rule of law , minority rights and so forth .
It is also important for Community aid to reach all the interested groups of citizens .
That is why the capabilities of the neighbourhood instrument need to be promoted in the right way .
In order for these ambitious targets to be achieved , the distribution of funds between the countries of Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean countries needs to be equally weighted , as provided for under the financial framework for 2007-2013 .
The Barcelona process should be supplemented by the European neighbourhood policy and the objectives must be clearly defined .
At this time in particular , with the economic crisis now affecting all the countries which benefit from the neighbourhood instrument , it must be made clear that the European Union is helping to address the crisis through this financial aid .
That is why the European Commission should publish evaluations on this question .
Finally , I should like to mention the Black Sea Synergy : this region needs to be included in the European neighbourhood policy .
The support being given by the European Union to this regional cooperation must target the production of tangible results in certain priority sectors such as energy , transport , immigration and the fight against organised crime .

Mr President , I fully support Mr Szymański 's report , particularly the proposal to increase the financial envelope in the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
We need to engage more with our neighbouring countries , particularly after the three conflicts that have occurred in the last six months , in Gaza , Ukraine and Georgia .
A considerable number of amendments proposed by our group , including the 11 amendments I suggested as shadow rapporteur , have been adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
However , now I wish to submit two additional amendments on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Whilst I agree with the idea of further cooperation with Turkey and Russia to resolve certain ongoing conflicts and to strengthen the links between the Black Sea countries , the wording of Paragraph 39 could lead to confusion .
Cooperation on the Black Sea is carried out on four different levels : the member countries , candidates for accession , the countries covered by the European neighbourhood policy and Russia , as a strategic partner .
As Turkey is a candidate for accession , it is not a part of the European neighbourhood policy and benefits from the pre-accession aid instrument rather than the European Neighbourhood Instrument .
Therefore , the European neighbourhood policy will certainly not provide an appropriate basis for cooperation with Turkey .
Platforms for cooperation with the Black Sea countries already exist .
We should perhaps try to create links with these regional initiatives to reinforce this synergy instead of looking for new forms of cooperation .
The second amendment deals with the energy issue .
Paragraph 44 of the report only refers to Ukraine and Moldova , although most of our neighbours are important countries for the energy sector , as source countries or as transit countries .
I am thinking , in particular , of Georgia and Azerbaijan , whose importance will grow with the launch of the Nabucco project , which was the subject of an international conference in January .
It therefore appears to me that the measures in the energy field should include all the countries in our neighbourhood .
Mr President , the European Neighbourhood Policy was developed with the objective of integrating the countries included in the programme with the structures of the European Union .
This assumes strong cooperation in the areas of economy , culture and politics , without favouring some countries at the cost of others .
With this in mind , it is difficult to understand the differences which occur in the division of financial means between Mediterranean and eastern states , to the disadvantage of this second group .
The idea of separating European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) according to these regions is justified in view of the different problems which these regions face .
It cannot , however , be a justification for inequality in the distribution of financial means .
This seems especially unfounded in view of the tragedy which recently hit one of the countries included in the ENP - Georgia .
It is now , especially , that the citizens of Georgia require our help and the feeling that they are being treated in the same way as other countries which are working with the European Union .
Another important objective which the ENP was supposed to achieve is energy security .
The present crisis in Europe is , however , an evident manifestation of the incoherence of the principles of cooperation within the framework of neighbourhood policy .
Without doubt , the crisis has shown the need to identify measures within the framework of this policy and the need to strengthen the energy sector as part of the Eastern Partnership .
I am glad that the European Commission has noticed this problem and wants to introduce just such a policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Szymański , for a very good report .
The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) can be an effective instrument only if it provides incentives for democratic reform and promotes sustainable - ecological and fair - development .
To make it possible to verify the effectiveness of this instrument , clear , specific , measurable objectives must be defined for all the action plans under the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance make a particular call for coherence in all the human rights instruments in the context of the ENP action plans , and also a thorough investigation of the ' Justice ' projects promoted by means of the ENPI .
A further important point also rightly emphasised in the report is the increased involvement of civil society in the design and monitoring process with regard to the ENPI .
The war in Georgia in the summer of 2008 made it clear that , up to then , the European Union had not developed and implemented a sustainable conflict resolution policy for the Caucasus region .
Frozen conflicts , such as the one in Nagorno-Karabakh , still hinder the further development of the ENP in the South Caucasus region .
Therefore , we call on the Council to work more actively in the field of conflict resolution .
This instrument gives the European Union the opportunity to play an active role in its neighbouring region , in order to take forward democratic reform and sustainable development .
Particularly with a view to preserving its - our - credibility , the European Union must finally start taking the democracy and human rights clauses in its agreements with third countries seriously and taking the appropriate action - ideally positive but , if necessary , negative .

( PL ) Mr President , in thanking our fellow Member Mr Szymański for a good report , I should like to share a reflection on the subject of why neighbourhood policy is so important for us .
We must answer this question .
Firstly , because neither the European Union nor Europe is a kind of isolated island .
The EU is located in Europe and this is important for us , all the more so because we are ambitious and we want to ' export ' our values , our ideas and our experiences to other countries .
I think that alongside the larger decisions - concerning transport , energy , free trade and mutual exchange - there are also smaller matters which are very significant , such as education , and scientific and cultural exchange , and , above all , interpersonal contacts .
I see the European Union as a family of people who communicate with each other .
Europe - at least this is how I see things - will be strong when every part of it has a role to play and is able to fulfil that role , and so this must include not only the countries of the EU , but also its neighbours .
Commissioner , I think that , for today , we have in large measure finished building Euromed , which is an interesting structure .
We are giving a great deal of money , perhaps too much , as our fellow Member from the Union for Europe of the Nations Group said , and now we should strengthen the idea of Euroeast .
This is very important , and I think that after the recent energy crisis , no one has any doubts that this is a dimension which is very , very significant for us .
The issue here is one of the Community and regional programmes , which should be supported , but which , unfortunately , require financial support .
Appropriate amounts should be set aside for this .
We are making good decisions here , which countries and neighbours will put into effect in cooperation and while working on joint projects .
Mr President , in 2008 , several new regional initiatives were launched under the umbrella of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Although the financial instrument was designed in 2006 , it proved a sufficiently effective tool as it was oriented towards the future .
The EU has decided to strengthen multilateral and regional cooperation with and between its neighbouring countries .
The instrument already allows the EU to receive co-funding from other international organisations and to cooperate with other multilateral organisations in its neighbourhood .
Let us actively use these opportunities .
My second point concerns the distribution of financial allocations between our neighbours on the south and eastern shores of the Mediterranean and our neighbours to the east .
Ultimately , it amounts to a question of credibility of EU policy .
Therefore , the EU needs to stick to its commitments and maintain the geographical distribution of financial allocations , as laid down in the financial perspective for the years 2007-2013 .
However , there is another important allocation gap between the neighbours .
I am speaking about the gap in allocations spent on programmes in the future democracies relating to the rule of law and human rights .
Between 2007 and 2010 , 21 % of the total funding for the Eastern neighbours is spent on allocations to support democratic development , but for the Southern neighbours , this amounts to only 5 % .
I ask the Commission to take this concern into consideration .
( PL ) Mr President , financing initiatives for the Mediterranean Basin and the future Eastern Partnership under the European neighbourhood instrument should not take place , as it does today , to the detriment of either of these regions .
What is important is to take into consideration the specific nature of both the eastern and the southern partner countries .
Recent geopolitical events involving our eastern neighbours have clearly demonstrated that there is also a need to better adapt the European Neighbourhood Policy to the needs of the region .
Ukraine may serve as an example .
The largest eastern neighbour of the European Union should be offered specific incentives and advantages under the Eastern Partnership which will have a motivating influence on a country with European ambitions .
In addition to this , it would also be important to accelerate the establishment of a free-trade zone and to conclude talks with Ukraine on the subject of visa freedom .
The ENP does not merely involve the activities of governments and national politicians .
I am , therefore , glad that the need for greater social engagement on the part of the citizens and local authorities , in terms of planning and implementing the ENP , has been stressed in the report .
We should also remember that in order to ensure good , effective and mutually beneficial cooperation with our neighbours , it is extremely important and valuable to have an exchange of experiences and best practices , as well as training initiatives , including programmes for learning the languages of neighbouring countries .

( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating my fellow Member , Mr Szymański , for his balanced report on the review of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
Let us remember that the main objective of this report is to avoid the emergence of new dividing lines , or worse , splits , between the enlarged European Union and its immediate geographical neighbours , but also to enhance the stability and security of the area under consideration as a whole .
Spreading peace is an oft-repeated desire but one that , very often , is hindered along the way by the reality of hatred and intolerance .
Consequently , the proper functioning of this policy determines , in part , Europe 's international geopolitical standing .
How can we effectively review this neighbourhood and partnership instrument ?
The main point can be summed up by just one word : ambition .
More ambition , indeed , in dialogues with civil society and local authorities , to enhance their involvement in the conception and control of the implementation of this instrument .
More ambition in aid support , with the aim of enhancing administrative , local and regional capabilities in neighbouring countries and , also , of promoting exchange programmes for civil society .
More ambition in the areas of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
This budget support , however , must be subject to a selection process so as to make it accessible only to those who can make use of it , with a country-specific approach , under political conditionality , without forgetting to improve evaluation of policies .
It is also imperative to clarify the relationship between European neighbourhood policy , a framework policy par excellence , and regional initiatives , such as the Black Sea Synergy , the Union for the Mediterranean , and the future Eastern Partnership .
Indeed , by reducing policies to increasingly limited geographical areas , we run the risk of losing the overall direction , visibility and transparency of the neighbourhood policy that the European Union wants to pursue .
That is the price at which we will enhance the Union 's cohesion and synchronisation , our dedicated budget will be deployed , comprehensively , in the desired directions , and the European Union will , at last , fully assume its role as a centre of stability .
( RO ) The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument has made a significant contribution to the development of relations with states neighbouring the European Union .
One financing option is the Neighbourhood Investment Facility which , on top of the sum allocated from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , EU Member States have the opportunity to participate in by making donations . We are aware that in this study , the funding which the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument benefits from is not sufficient to meet the ambitious objectives for this area .
We urge the European Commission to conduct an analysis regarding the allocation in the future of more consistent sums to this instrument , especially in the situation where other initiatives , like the Black Sea Synergy need to be supported too with adequate funding . Romania has supported and will continue to support the relevance of the Black Sea region for the European Union , based on the obvious opportunities the region offers for stability , economic development , energy security , security of its citizens and environmental protection .
( RO ) The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument can and must be used more in the Black Sea region .
In my view , the synergy in the Black Sea region is positive , but I feel that this region is of special geostrategic importance and merits a more structured cooperation framework , based on a model of the same scope as the Nordic one or of the Union for the Mediterranean .
The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument should contribute more to developing transport links between the European Union and the Black Sea , as well as between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine .
Romania would like to develop more cooperation programmes between towns in Romania and the Republic of Moldova .
I welcome the launch of the CIUDAD programme which encourages the development of dialogue between towns .
The development of Community ports located on the Black Sea , the construction of liquefied gas terminals , as well as the development of rail and road links between states in the Black Sea region and Member States , must feature among the priorities which this instrument will be used for .
In addition , I feel that this instrument must also be used for cooperation in the energy sector , as well as for expanding and integrating the infrastructure for transporting electricity to the Western Balkans region .
I must apologise to Mr Alexandru Nazare as , due to an error by the Bureau , we did not give him the floor during the normal period , although he was on the list .
I will give him the floor after the ' catch-the-eye ' period .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to three issues in this debate .
Firstly , it is essential to maintain a geographical division with respect to financial aid from the EU budget for Mediterranean countries and the countries of Eastern Europe , in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013 , and also to continue providing support to these countries in the form of European Investment Bank loans .
The sub-ceilings for loans to these countries anticipated by the EIB for the years 2007-2013 - EUR 8.7 billion for Mediterranean countries and only EUR 3.7 billion for Eastern countries and Russia - appear to be unfavourable from the point of view of Eastern European countries in the sense of being disproportionate to their needs .
Secondly , it is essential to foster cooperation in the field of energy with these countries , under the auspices of the Eastern Partnership , and to create conditions which will ensure the supply of energy resources from these countries to Europe , thereby providing Europe with alternatives in terms of its energy supply .
Thirdly and finally , it is essential to deepen the EU 's economic integration with the Eastern Partnership countries by extending the free-trade area to include these countries , as well as through social integration , the ultimate objective of which should be the abolition of visa requirements for residents of ENPI countries .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we draw up a policy for the neighbouring states of the European Union , we must not ignore the democratic deficit in these countries .
It is a democratic deficit that stems from their history .
Well , in order to establish a democratic society , we need all the citizens of these countries to have an awareness of democracy .
The report discusses - and , moreover , rightly so - people-to-people contacts , and I would ask you what better way of establishing these people-to-people contacts is there than by allowing the citizens of these countries to travel freely to the European Union ?
I therefore call on the Council to allow the citizens of the Republic of Moldova which , by the way , is the only country to share an official language of the European Union , to travel within the European Union without a visa .
Of course , pending such a measure , I would ask the Commission to do everything necessary to get the ' common visa centre ' in Chişinău , up and running .
We must set a real example .
( RO ) During the last six months , the European Union has faced a series of challenges which have raised question marks about its role , cohesion and capacity to act and react .
The crisis in Georgia and the gas crisis highlighted to us that we cannot continually face threats from the east which target international stability and our energy security .
I welcome an eastern partnership as ambitious as the one proposed in this report , all the more so as it is aimed at more effective cooperation and supporting the reconstruction of Georgia , while also suggesting for the future setting up a free trade area and lifting visa requirements for the European Union .
However , I think that we must attach more importance to the situation in the Republic of Moldova from where we are getting worrying signals about the freedom of expression and the integrity of the elections which are due to take place this spring .
( RO ) The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument is of fundamental importance to the success of the European Neighbourhood Policy , especially the Eastern Partnership and cooperation in the Black Sea region .
The Eastern Partnership project can only be successful if it has the funding required to achieve clear objectives .
At the same time , we must streamline the mechanisms for evaluating the impact of the actions and finances involved in the Eastern Partnership so that European assistance is not misappropriated and misused by some governments against the political opposition .
Our actions must always be well conceived so that citizens can see specific benefits from them .
I feel that the European funding offered by the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument should give priority to the measures aimed at cross-border cooperation in the area targeted by the Eastern Partnership .
Cross-border cooperation has the specified mission of making a decisive contribution to regional development , building trust between neighbouring states and interethnic harmony , while facilitating the cross-border movement of people and trade flows can have particularly beneficial multiplier effects .
( RO ) The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument is vital for ensuring stability , democracy and prosperity in the area .
In addition , this instrument transforms the concept of a border , an area of confinement and exclusion into an area of cooperation and political ties .
Recent events in the area to the east of the EU , which have been mentioned previously in the house , namely the gas crisis and the crisis in Georgia , have demonstrated once again the need for a strategy capable of ensuring that the European Union plays an active role in this geopolitical area .
We need to adopt a more coherent approach in dealing with the area to the east of our borders .
We need clear objectives which meet the interests of the EU and the specific needs of our partners .
I fully applaud initiatives such as the Black Sea Synergy and Eastern Partnership which consolidate cooperation with the countries in the region , especially the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine , as well as states from the Caucasus and the Caspian Region .
We also need more active involvement in the Black Sea area , to provide a basis for consolidating relations with Turkey and Russia as this area is in the vicinity of the European Union , Turkey and Russia .
The partnership is also a welcome incentive for the participating countries which will want to apply for Member State status of the European Union , such as the Republic of Moldova .
This partnership significantly raises the level of commitment by both sides .
Furthermore , I would like to say a few words about the EURONEST initiative as well , which is only one example of a specific solution for improving the application of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument in states such as Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Moldova , Ukraine or Belarus .
The application of this policy cannot be improved without raising the level of financial assistance .
Apart from the need to increase this financial package , we must also pay as much attention to the way in which these funds are spent .
I feel it is imperative to guarantee transparency with regard to the financial mechanisms for allocating funds .
I also think that resources must be allocated with a view to involving civil society in the partner countries in common projects and to supporting the mobility of citizens in these countries , which includes easing visa requirements .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this discussion on the ENPI has in fact already pre-empted the next Commission communication on the Eastern Partnership .
Many of the ideas that you have put forward are in the Eastern Partnership communication and I am sure that when you get this , you will , hopefully , be quite satisfied .
Let me just say a few things .
I am , of course , very thankful for many of the suggestions .
In this Eastern Partnership , the idea is that we want to work with our Eastern partners - Ukraine , Moldova , Belarus - if necessary on democracy and human rights , but also with the three Caucasian countries , on trade , to try to make more profound association agreements , secondly , on energy , and thirdly , on more mobility .
With regard to your suggestions on being visa-free , we will start with visa facilitation , although even that is not easy , as many Member States here are still very reluctant .
Then , of course , there are all kinds of different platforms which I have already mentioned - for instance a platform for civil society , on energy and on transport - or indeed where best practices can be exchanged .
With regard to financing , I can only tell you that , unfortunately , I do not have more funds available .
Of course - as I always say as a mother of the neighbourhood policy - I would love to have more .
You are a very important budget authority so please give us a chance in the future and really support us on that .
This goes for both the Union for the Mediterranean in the south and for the Eastern Partnership and the ENPI in the east .
The funding figures are currently EUR 3.6 per capita per annum to the east and EUR 3.4 per capita per annum to the south .
So , as you can see , we are nearly at the same level .
At the same time , however , it is never enough , because there are huge necessities and challenges .
Therefore , we have also established the idea of a so-called NIF - the Neighbourhood Investment Facility - that can be used for bigger projects .
This is all I can tell you at this stage , but perhaps at a later stage , when we start to discuss the Eastern Partnership , we can go into all the details .
In any case , thank you for this debate and for your suggestions .
They are very much in line with the direction in which we are going .
Mr President , I would like to make a few comments in reference to this debate .
The simplification of procedures , the monitoring of how the neighbourhood policy is implemented and the supervisory role of the European Parliament are issues with which we have been grappling since 2005 , and it seems there is not much more we can do in this regard .
Today , however , it is certainly important to add political content to our neighbourhood policy .
That political content includes issues such as visas , a common market and energy .
If we do not overcome these challenges , we may lose the opportunity to create our neighbourhood on our own terms .
Time is against us .
Countries which today are part of our neighbourhood may lose their stability and slide towards other principles for establishing regional order .
We will not be happy with this kind of outcome and history may never give us such an opportunity again .
Such events will also affect our own security and we should , therefore , also think of the problem in entirely selfish terms , namely the interests of the European Union , so that our neighbourhood will be an area of stability and affluence .
As far as the budget is concerned , I know very well that , with regard to reforming the neighbourhood policy , many sections of this Chamber agree on matters concerning the financing of specific areas of the policy , as well as particular regions , but we should remember that the neighbourhood policy is only one section of the budget and that nothing will change during the next financial perspective .
If we manage to finance the Mediterranean , Eastern and Black Sea neighbourhoods well , we will all be winners .
We cannot achieve success in any part of the neighbourhood at the cost of another part , because the EU budget has been structured to prevent this .
We should , rather , concentrate on reforming the EU budget so that all the parts ( Mediterranean , Eastern and Black Sea ) will benefit from the future financial perspective .

( PL ) Mr President , I regret that Mr Szymański 's summary of his excellent report could not , unfortunately , be heard by Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , because she continues to be occupied with other matters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I wholeheartedly support the provisions in the report aimed at raising the level of the European Union 's political commitment to the states targeted by the ENPI , along with the prospect of signing association agreements which are tailored to each country .
In order to implement this policy effectively , the states concerned must fully commit to the process of democratic reform in society .
Effective implementation of the reforms , especially those relating to the areas of democracy , rule of law and freedom of expression , remains a serious problem for these states and is dependent both on the political will of their authorities and on the degree of commitment from civil society and their citizens .
It is important that the populations of these countries understand that European integration offers not only the opportunity to legally cross borders , but also a real chance to get the country out of its impasse .
In this context , European projects must provide for more specific provisos and special funds for informing the population .
Familiarising the population with both the benefits of integration and with the commitments which they assume once a country has joined the EU will have the effect of involving them actively in the democratisation process in society and considerably reduce the ability of the elite who are in power to use coercive measures against opposition political parties and civil society .
Mr President , the initiative which Poland and Sweden were advocating only last year is today no longer a matter of debate .
Closer cooperation with our neighbours from across the eastern border is not only beneficial for both sides , but it is also essential and strategic in terms of Europe 's security .
The political and economic situation beyond our eastern border has a direct influence on the situation in the entire EU , and on our economic equilibrium and security .
Last year was a test of Russia 's credibility in terms of relations with its neighbours , a test which the Kremlin quite simply failed .
This is why the development of the European Neighbourhood Policy requires our active involvement in the situation in the Southern Caucasus region , and in events concerning our closest neighbours .
That involvement is the prerequisite for our cooperation in specific areas .
I am thinking here of support for civil society and for democratic and institutional reforms , and guaranteeing Europe 's energy security .
Let us show that we can be the main player in the East and not allow Russia to implement its own neo-imperialistic game plan .
Use of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument to finance both the southern and eastern European Neighbourhood Policies should not be implemented to the detriment of either of these regions .
With regards to the use of this funding , it is particularly important to ensure the transparency of other sources , including private finance .
During negotiations on a new EU-Russia agreement , we should focus on greater cooperation on the part of Russia , in terms of identifying clear financial cooperation priorities which would lead to better planning and multi-annual programming for aid , on guarantees that any financial assistance granted to the Russian authorities contributes to strengthening democratic standards in Russia and on ensuring that there are more jointly-owned projects earmarked for funding .
I should also like to emphasise the need for effective political conditions and guarantees to be established , in order to ensure that assistance for Belarus will have an immediate and direct impact on citizens and will not be misused by the authorities to attack their political opponents .
The European Union should give more effective support to civil society and to political parties which are defending democracy .
Recent geopolitical events in the European Union 's Eastern neighbourhood underscore the importance of developing the European Neighbourhood Policy further by adapting it more effectively to the needs of the partners , which includes enhanced EU involvement in the Black Sea region .
As the head of the European Parliament 's Moldova delegation , I am naturally interested in the development of the ENPI 's Eastern dimension .
I fully understand and support the interests of the southern Member States of the European Union in promoting the development of the ENPI 's southern dimension .
At the same time , I am convinced that we cannot neglect our neighbours in the east .
From the point of view of the security and welfare of our common home , both eastern and southern neighbours are equally important to us .
On the basis of the present system , which is in effect until 2010 , the ENPI 's funds are divided unequally - 70 % goes to the southern dimension and just 30 % to the eastern dimension countries .
New financing discussions will begin this year .
I sincerely hope that the present system will be amended during these discussions , and that in future funds will justifiably be divided equally .
Due to the events of the past summer - here I refer to the Russo-Georgian conflict - our eastern neighbours in my opinion justifiably expect a greater contribution from the EU to the safeguarding of stability .
The EU 's involvement must not be limited just to declarative political support , but must also contain very real cooperation and assistance with the implementation of reforms .
I am incredibly happy that Estonia is one of the 15 founding members of the recently founded Neighbourhood Investment Facility .
During the present economic recession , the allocation of EUR 1 million is quite a big act - and a concrete one .
in writing . - Mr President , I welcome the notion that ' the Eastern Partnership should not hinder the European Union membership for neighbouring countries wishing to apply ' , as it was stated in the report .
The possible future membership incentive is an integral part of the Eastern Partnership as it forms the basis for a successful conditional approach .
Although the progress towards a completed democratic transition varies from country to country - in Belarus there have been only minor advances , while in Ukraine and Georgia , some significant steps have been taken - the European Union should always sustain the possibility for the Eastern Neighbourhood countries to accede to the EU , since the efforts to establish functional democracy , rule of law and respect of human rights can sometimes be exhausting to the point of relapse .
The primary objective of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument as well as the accession incentive vis-à-vis Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Moldova , Ukraine and Belarus is to ensure continuous progress towards consolidated democracies in those countries .
Financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation ( EC ) 1905 / 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Berman , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 .


I , too , am pleased that Mr Deva has taken a seat , for now Mrs Ferrero-Waldner will be able to hear me , which is a great relief .
This unprecedented economic crisis , which is biting hard , spells renewed disaster for developing countries .
The crisis leads to a drop in prices for raw materials , fewer investments , less trade credit and less money being sent home by immigrants .
Meanwhile , the gross domestic products of all the rich countries are dwindling fast , which means that the budget for development cooperation is also being decimated as this is 0.7 % of GDP , or at least that is what it is supposed to be , and even then , most countries fail to live up to their promises .
This is the context of the discussion about the new policy instrument that is being held here .
If Spanish students receive a grant to study in Latin America for a few months , or vice versa , then such an exchange is useful , necessary and desirable , but a project such as this cannot be exclusively financed with funds that are intended to fight poverty .
Whilst EU funding in this area is to be welcomed , it is not fighting poverty .
It is frustrating to have to withdraw projects like this simply because there is no legal basis on which to back them .
That is why we have been looking for a modest instrument with which the EU can implement policy in developing countries that does not , strictly speaking , fall within the scope of fighting poverty .
A financial source and a legal basis that do not come under development policy will need to be found .
The legal basis cannot , therefore , lie in Article 179 of the Treaty of Nice , because that is precisely the statutory basis for development policy that should be avoided here .
The EU 's own interests - European students making study trips - may not be financed under Article 179 .
Moreover , the EU , when spending development funds , has to meet the criteria legally prescribed in respect of development cooperation , namely those of fighting poverty .
With a little bit of creativity , there are other sources .
Extending the Industrialised Countries Instrument is an option which the Committee on Foreign Affairs has put forward and which is also backed by my own committee .
What is also an option , though , is a combination of Articles 150 , 151 and 170 , education , culture and research .
With this combined legal basis , the European Parliament would maintain complete codecision with regard to this instrument , and the money , about EUR 13 million at the moment , is not taken out of the development policy kitty .
Neither is it taken out of the foreign policy kitty .
As rapporteur - and the Committee on Development will back me up on this - I cannot agree to Article 179 as the legal basis .
If it was , this new instrument would become ineffective , seeing as its exact aim is to prevent development funds from being used for other purposes .
There should not , therefore , be a legal basis for this instrument that could make this compulsory .
For this reason , I plead with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to withdraw its amendment as a matter of extreme urgency .
It flies in the face of our shared desire to protect the budget for development cooperation , even in times of economic crisis .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to confirm the undertaking I gave , on behalf of the Commission , to carry out the mid-term review of the financial instruments in 2009 .
This was in response to Parliament 's request during the final negotiations on the instruments .
That review will take the form of a communication , accompanied by legislative proposals where appropriate .
The adoption of the communication is foreseen for April 2009 and is included in the Commission 's legislative work programme .
The review is about the implementation of the instruments .
It should be distinguished from the other mid-term review currently underway - and also foreseen in the regulations - which relates to the programming documents and the strategy papers for 2011-2013 .
This new programming will give rise to a round of democratic scrutiny , as for the first programming exercise covering 2007-2010 .
The two exercises are different , but they are complementary .
It is important to fix issues related to instruments before the new programming period .
The strategy and programming review will take place during 2009 in order to be ready in 2010 for democratic scrutiny by Parliament .
As regards the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) , our preliminary reflections confirm an issue that will be at the core of the review : the legislative gap as regards non-ODA activities for countries covered by the DCI .
What are these non-ODA activities ?
They are of various natures , but the current four preparatory actions initiated by this Parliament give a good outlook on what we are talking about : cooperation with middle-income countries in Asia and Latin America , which is not covered by the DCI , and business and scientific exchanges with China and India .
On these kinds of activities , we agree with you on the need to have legislation to cover measures which promote EU concerns in DCI countries .
This could be done either through a new legal instrument or through amending the existing Industrialised Countries Instrument ( ICI ) Regulation .
When we prepared the new external relations instruments in 2006 , we agreed that they should also cover the external dimension of our internal policies .
We agreed that this could be done under the legal basis for external actions .
This represented a considerable simplification compared to the previous situation .
It will be difficult for the Commission to follow this approach .
We consider that the legal basis must reflect the objectives and content of the instrument .
We recognise that there is a problem with non-ODA activities .
By their nature , such activities do not qualify as development assistance .
Therefore , a proposal that deals only with such activities cannot fall under development cooperation - under Article 179 , as you mentioned .
Given that we want to cover known ODA activities , it seems likely that Article 181a of the Treaty will be the most appropriate legal basis , since it covers economic , financial and technical cooperation .
However , before making any proposal , the Commission will consider the question carefully in the light of the position expressed by Parliament .
It would be helpful to have Parliament 's position so that we can finalise our proposals before the elections , as we promised .
Finally , I see that the report calls for more resources .
We will have to look into it .
You know the very tight situation of Heading 4 of the financial framework .
One could argue that emerging countries are in transition and that the current assistance envelope should accompany that transition - that is , with a gradual shift from the development focus to non-ODA activity .
We will examine this as part of the review .
These are the Commission 's initial considerations on the report that we are discussing today .
We consider it to be a good basis for our common work , and I look forward to hearing what the Members have to say .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgets believes that it is of the utmost importance that each of the budgetary instruments be clearly demarcated .
Therefore , the most realistic option seems to be the creation of a new instrument for actions other than public development aid for countries falling under the Regulation .
From a budgetary point of view , the financing proposal from the Committee on Development does not appear to be adequate , as this money does not exist and these lines do not have funds allocated on a multiannual basis .
There is funding for 2009 , but not beyond that .
In any case , given that the financing of this new cooperation instrument must be compatible with the 2007-2013 financial framework , it is worth pointing out the importance of the mid-term review of the financial framework .
This should allow an adjustment of the different headings ' ceilings .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I welcome very warmly the statement made by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner just now , and I ask my political group to withdraw its amendment so that this report can go through .
If not , I am in a rather difficult position , but I will have to support the Socialist rapporteur on this issue .
I have to say that I believe the development instrument is for development purposes .
But if one looks at what the development instrument - particularly Article 179 - gives , even with all the constraints , the ODA instrument allows the promotion of museums , libraries , the arts , music in schools , sports training facilities and venues - all these count as ODA .
But , of course , sponsoring concert tours or athletes ' travel costs does not .
Cultural programmes in developing countries , whose main purpose is to promote the cultural values of the donor , are not reportable as ODA .
It excludes military aid but it does not exclude peacekeeping .
It covers a wide variety of activities - even civil police work to supply and increase the capacity of training of policemen , the demobilisation of soldiers , monitoring of elections , removal of mines and landmines - all this is ODA .
So here we are asking ourselves , in this Parliament , how many angels are dancing on the head of a pin when , in fact , the main area of the work is covered by the ODA instrument .
So , I welcome Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's statement that Article 181a is there to make it possible to look for the funds to do what some of my colleagues are hoping to do .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , it is crucial to solve the current legislative gap concerning the financing of non-ODA actions in countries covered by the DCI .
This proposal for an instrument to address this gap must preserve the DCI unequivocally as an instrument for ODA and it must allow for a clear separation between financial sources allocated to pure ODA development cooperation and those allocated to other types of non-ODA development cooperation with developing countries .
This separation is a very relevant political message in itself and it would give proper visibility to the EU 's development cooperation policy .
The new or revised instrument should also be sufficiently broad to cover a wide range of actions that do not comply with the OECD DAC guidelines , but which are crucial for the EU 's cooperation with developing countries , for instance , the development of the Akkas gas fields in Iraq or cooperation on aviation security with India .
This is why I am not in full agreement with the restrictive legal basis proposed .
I fully back Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner in finding Article 181a , possibly , a more adequate legal basis , which would provide for these kinds of concerns that I am highlighting .
However , I am not convinced either by the alternative presented by the PPE-DE Group amendment that we are supposed to vote on tomorrow .
Therefore , I hope that , under the guidance of our rapporteur , Thijs Berman , we may find more time to have a thorough discussion on this matter and consider what is the best legal basis , namely , the proposal made by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Thijs Berman for his report .
It points out an important aspect in development aid that the Commission should , in my opinion , seriously consider .
Activities such as cultural , scientific and economic exchange programmes , citizen-to-citizen contacts or political dialogue are regrettably not covered by existing European legislation , those being just a few examples .
The European Union has set up numerous programmes and financial instruments under the auspices of different agencies , each covering only certain limited aspects of the problems that the developing countries are currently facing .
I find that , without a central European Union agency and a comprehensive and coherent policy , the efforts that we are making to improve the situation in developing countries are not of notable extent .
We all agree that the purpose of the European Union development cooperation policy is to reach as many people in need as possible , but yet we have chosen a rather inconvenient path to that goal .
At the moment , the European Union is both institutionally fragmented and legally hindered as far as development aid is concerned .
This much appreciated report deals with the results of those deficiencies .
The European Union and its Member States have contributed immensely to the official development assistance and it should never be underestimated , but much remains to be done to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the institutional framework as well as congruence of the legislation covering development aid .
( DE ) Mr President , to be quite honest , I was somewhat surprised to find that the Berman report had already been drawn up and a proposal was being presented before the completion of the Mitchell report , the actual report that is to assess the experience gained with the DCI .
My fellow Member is right in terms of the substance of his proposal .
Given the design of the DCI , the legislative gap was inevitable .
I support the conclusion that a different instrument is needed to close this gap for non-ODA ( Official Development Assistance ) activities .
I can conceive of both the alternatives he proposes in paragraph 3 of his report .
I should like to make it clear , however , that non-ODA actions are also relevant to a country 's development : it is only the choice of legal basis that is in dispute .
In my opinion , it is the rapporteur and his committee against the rest of the world in this regard .
The Committee on Development opts for a narrow interpretation of Article 179 and must therefore resort to articles intended for domestic policies as a legal basis .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , the Committee on Legal Affairs , Parliament 's Legal Service , the ECJ , the Council and the Commission all read Article 179 differently .
Therefore we , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , decided today not to withdraw this motion tomorrow , but to table an amendment to change the legal basis envisaged , nor shall we be supporting the postponement , as we agree that only the legal basis is at issue in this matter .
I am therefore sure that we will achieve clarity in the matter tomorrow .
( RO ) The report from our fellow Member , Mr Berman , offers a clear solution for plugging the gap in the legislative structure for financing external actions which are not an emergency and which do not come under the category of development actions as defined by the Development Cooperation Instrument .
Financing actions of this kind is important from a political perspective as it can ensure continuity of the European Union 's presence in the countries and regions which have already gone beyond the initial development stage .
However , it is vitally important that the funds used to finance these actions do not come from sources earmarked for development , but from different budget lines .
The purpose of the legislative proposal requested by this report is to encourage development and not to restrict it by reducing the funds available for development policies in favour of other measures .
This is why it is vital for the distinction between actions provided for under the Development Cooperation Instrument 's scope and those provided for by the new legislative provision to be reflected when determining the funds earmarked for financing them .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for this report .
I endorse his first comment about the economic crisis , its particular impact on the developing world and , indeed , the fact that we are not reaching our target of 0.7 % in aid .
This is very regrettable because , when the developed world shrinks , the developing world really takes the brunt of it .
I came to this debate because I was anxious to hear the arguments about legal bases .
It seems to me that , underneath all of this , there is a fear that the budget will be spread too thinly .
Let us just call a spade a spade .
Let me quote the comments made by an aid agency which contacted me today : ' While we support Parliament 's request for a financing instrument for non-ODA activities in developing countries , we strongly believe that it must be established on a legal basis which is appropriate to the activities which it intends to finance .
The use of Article 179 as the legal basis for non-development activities is clearly not appropriate and , as such , would contravene both the EC Treaty and the acquis communautaire .
It also opens the possibility that , in future , non-ODA activities may be financed from budget lines which are intended for genuine development activities .
We very much hope that the amendment will be withdrawn . '
So , as a member of the PPE-DE Group , I am here tonight to listen to both sides of this argument , but also to put forward some of the lobbying that I am receiving from very genuine people in the development area , whose concerns I need to address .
I repeat the point that , if we were awash with funds , our legal basis might not cause us so much grief .
The difficulty is that we are not .
There is concern among those involved with the development agenda - the focus of concern - who are fearful that the money available will be spread over too many activities .
However , I remain to be convinced .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to discuss not the legal basis but the basis for survival .
Small and medium-sized enterprises have a very special role to play in this .
Creditworthiness is particularly important during financial crises , so that these enterprises can still obtain microcredit .
I wish to point out in particular that the instrument of microcredit has actually very much proved its worth worldwide and that , particularly within the framework of the WTO round , which is hopefully approaching the final stages , we should consider how to bring about the relevant trade facilitation for the affected families in these areas .
After all , prosperity is created where something is produced , where people can live off the proceeds themselves and feed their families .
If , in addition , they manage to sell something , prosperity is assured .
It is with this in mind that I hope development policy takes the right course .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , after hearing all the different contributions , it is clear that the Members ' main concern is the choice of the legal basis .
I stated in my introduction the direction in which the Commission seeks to go , but I will certainly be very happy to take up your suggestions also .
You know that we want the best development assistance for all countries , and this is the main thrust of our thinking .
So let us work together in order to find the right solution .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am not a lawyer , and I am not well versed in law , but I know that one should avoid stretching the interpretation of legal texts .
That is my fear if we use Article 181a , because it talks about economic and technical cooperation , whereas we are talking about students who go abroad on exchanges between universities .
It is a bit hazardous .
I am not against this if the Commission sees it as a way out for the non-ODA activities we all deem necessary and important , and I will go along with it .
Perhaps I am concerned because I am a journalist .
I like texts and I take words seriously , which is the essence of Europe - its humanism , taking texts seriously and taking language seriously .
You have to be very careful when using words , so Article 181a is a maybe , but I am not very happy about it .
I was happy , however , with the comment made by Mairead McGuinness , to the effect that she needed to be convinced .
She is Irish , she has her convictions and she is firm in her principles , as indeed we all are .
If it is impossible tomorrow to reach agreement on the right legal basis , then I would prefer to refer this back to my committee and to take time to decide on a proper legal basis , because we all know that non-ODA actions are necessary .
I thank the Commission for its comment that non-ODA actions will , over time , become more and more important in developing countries and in middle-income countries , etc .
We all agree on their necessity , and we all agree on the need to find a legal basis .
Some of us agree that Article 179 is not the basis we are looking for .
If I cannot reach agreement with the PPE-DE Group before we vote tomorrow at noon - which will be a pity - I shall ask for a referral back to my committee .
I am ready to do that and I will do so when the amendment is voted on tomorrow .
I would be very sorry if this is the position of the PPE-DE Group , because we all agree on the need to maintain development aid at the level it is today , and we all know that it is shrinking with the economic crisis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The review of the new foreign policy financing instruments has revealed defects in cooperation with third countries , and so we propose reforming the industrial instrument .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs does not consider it desirable to limit the new legal basis for the instrument to a few areas of cooperation .
In addition , the policy fields currently envisaged ( culture , youth , research ) are borrowed from European domestic policy and have not , up to now , been intended to define cooperation with third countries .
This is just one of the uncertainties that worries the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
What happens , for example , if , in the near future , it becomes desirable to cooperate with other countries in matters of climate policy ?
Do we have to create a new legal basis for the instrument each time ?
Do we mean to do that every time there is a change in the area of cooperation ?
The reform of the foreign policy instruments is very important to us all , and so it should be made clear that we are not fighting against one another .
This is the only reason why the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , together with the second rapporteur from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , withdrew the amendment on Monday .
In terms of content , we believe our proposal is more far-sighted and that it is the one that enables a coherent foreign policy .
However , this report is just a recommendation to the Commission .
We shall see what it does with it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is the world 's largest donor of development aid , accounting for 60 % of all funding .
The Union 's central role as a key actor in development cooperation should be strengthened even further in the future .
In order to stabilise the economies of the developing countries and bring peace to them , it is vitally important that the Union keeps to its target to increase its share of development aid by 0.7 % of GDP by the year 2015 .
This alone , however , will not be enough .
It is essential to achieve general coherence in development cooperation among the different institutions .
Financial investment and projects intended to build infrastructure and for more satisfactory adherence to the notion of human rights need to be undertaken in such a way that they support one another .
The EU needs to establish the necessary instruments for implementing coherent development policy measures .
The Union 's current legal basis for development cooperation , however , is flawed in terms of legislation , and that is why I would like to thank the rapporteur for raising what is an important issue .
Projects aimed at improving the transport , technology and energy sectors and the dialogue between the scientific community and NGOs are essential for the social viability of developing countries .
The main goal of such projects is not , however , to foster economic development and prosperity in the developing countries , and they do not therefore meet the criteria for official development aid as set by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development .
In future , official development aid should focus specifically on the elimination of poverty and improving people 's living conditions .
Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Riera Madurell , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) - C6-0306 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to point out that unanimity was achieved in the ITRE Committee regarding this report .
Unanimity was possible thanks to the good work and cooperation of the shadow rapporteurs , whose contributions also largely helped to achieve a useful report on a subject as important as the European research infrastructure .
I must say that Parliament agrees with the Commission that , in view of the globalisation of research and the emergence of new scientific and technological powers such as China and India , we urgently need to speed up , and , to that end , incentivise , the construction of a new European research area .
It is very important that we ensure as soon as possible that the European Union is an area in which researchers , technologies and knowledge can move freely , where there is effective coordination of research activities and where the best possible use is made of resources .
This requires , amongst other things , that we have large research infrastructures at the European level .
These infrastructures can also provide an excellent opportunity for cooperation between the different Member States , with significant effects on the scientific education of our young people and a strong economic impact on European industry .
They are therefore essential to the progress of science in Europe and consequently , we must facilitate their development .
Parliament therefore applauds the Commission 's initiative in proposing a legal framework and the conditions for it .
In fact , from the beginning , we considered the development of European research infrastructures to be one of the pillars of the European Research Area .
However , we were always aware of the difficulties that needed to be overcome , not only because they required significant financial resources - it should be remembered that the ESFRI roadmap identifies 44 projects that should be implemented in the next ten years - but also due to the technical and organisational complexity of the issue .
On this point I would like to say once again that in an initiative of this calibre , Parliament should have played a much more decisive role .
However , the urgency of these measures and the absence of a better legal basis in the current Treaty sufficiently justify the use of Article 171 , which does not take away from the fact that this is one more reason to proclaim the need to have a new Treaty as soon as possible .
I will briefly point out some of the contributions that the report makes .
Firstly , it clarifies the definition of ' European research infrastructure ' in order to avoid confusions between the legal entity and the actual research infrastructure .
It also clarifies and completes the requirements for a piece of research infrastructure to be considered European , adding important issues such as an impact assessment for the proposal at the European level , justifying its financing capacity and ensuring that there is a good policy of access to the whole European scientific community .
We also propose extending this initiative to existing infrastructure , and we give our full support to the Commission 's proposal for exemption from VAT , which we think is the key element of this initiative .
We therefore want to send a clear message to the Council to resolve its problems on this issue as soon as possible and to say once again that if we want to promote research in Europe , we must release it from tax burdens .
This is something that we have recommended on several occasions in order to encourage SMEs to participate in R & D tasks , and which we now need to support in relation with the creation of large research infrastructures at European level , because they are essential for the progress of science .
To conclude , I would once again like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission for their excellent contribution , and also the services of the ITRE Committee for the help that they have given me in drawing up this report .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first and foremost , I wish to express my gratitude to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) and particularly to the rapporteur , Ms Riera Madurell , for supporting our proposal for the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure .
Listening to you was music to my ears !
Let me also thank the ITRE shadow rapporteurs for their constructive support .
Together , we are coming an important step closer to a legal framework which will allow Member States to collaborate on the construction of new large research infrastructures , which are becoming increasingly complex and expensive , and which can only be built if several European countries work together .
You have discussed the new legal instrument in depth , and you have made many amendments which will help to clarify the text and give it a better structure , notably regarding definition , scope and status , and by introducing references to the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures ( ESFRI ) .
The Commission will make all possible efforts to support the implementation of these amendments by the Council .
We are especially glad to see that we agree on the most vital aspect of the discussions taking place right now in Council , and which risks blocking adoption - I mean the VAT issue .
As you know , all Member States agree that it is necessary to exempt research infrastructures set up by several countries from taxes in the host country .
Many times , for working purposes , it is addressed as a tax exemption issue , which creates some confusion .
In reality , it concerns only the implementation of the existing VAT Directive , which has already been agreed and adopted by the Council .
The real question is whether European research infrastructure should be given the status of international organisations , as defined in the VAT Directive and , as such , be exempt from the VAT payment .
Therefore , we are not talking about fiscal harmonisation but about setting up the legal entities related to research infrastructures .
Both the legal services of the Commission and of the Council have clearly stated that this is the right place .
This is consequently purely a political decision on how important Member States consider the setting up of new world-class research facilities in Europe to be .
Your unwavering support in this issue could be of great importance !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr van Nistelrooij once said that this was about defining the ' fifth freedom ' .
The fifth freedom is simply the freedom of researchers , who cannot be tied to regional , national or international level .
We simply need to create the grouping and legal framework for researchers to do the job society expects of them .
We are talking here not only about research carried out at universities - academic research - or in industry but also , in particular , about research carried out in small and medium-sized enterprises .
After all , it is also important that these research results continue to be presented and made available .
Last year , we introduced the Energy Club in this House - which Vice-President Onesta attended - where the scientific community and those responsible radiated enthusiasm for inventions with the potential to bring us all very great benefits .
Creating such research instruments is the right answer , particularly in the present economic and energy crisis , so as to enable the development of new products and services that can then be marketed worldwide .
The Commission 's initiative on this is particularly to be welcomed , therefore , as the organisation of such initiatives of course reinforces the international possibilities .
International cooperation , in particular , is increasingly important for us in Europe , as it is for our partners .
After all , we in Europe have made ourselves the part of the world with the greatest purchasing power , and our 500 million citizens have the right to have the research results drawn up as quickly and efficiently as possible .
Thank you .
Mr President , the aim of the European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) is to create unique research centres managed by the most distinguished specialists working in specific fields .
They should , in my opinion , possess a great deal of expensive , cutting-edge equipment , and be staffed by a team of scientists .
The ERI will be used for the experimental study , mainly using inductive methods , of phenomena in the world around us , with the aim of producing practical solutions .
The ERI should also serve to train young scientists .
I think that the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures is not intended to copy present centres of excellence but , by using structural and national funds , to create different research units which will complement the centres of excellence and create an infrastructure of specialist research units , a uniform network spanning the entire EU .
Young , ambitious European researchers will not be forced to travel across the ocean to implement their ideas .
Thus , I think that the preconditions for the effective functioning of the ERI include a high degree of specialisation and mobility in terms of the research environment .
Research will become more effective if time constraints are introduced and if it is spread across several locations , i.e. if basic research tasks are carried out simultaneously in various international specialist ERI units which , as they are not economic entities , would be exempt from tax .
In thanking you for your attention , I congratulate Mrs Madurell , and I wish the Commission a speedy realisation of this concept for a regulation which , while interesting , requires further specification .
I would like to congratulate Teresa Riera Madurell on this report , which brings us closer to successfully establishing a European Research Area .
I am convinced that by setting up a network of scientific research partnerships among Member States , we will be able to achieve a competitive and profitable economy based on knowledge and innovation .
It would not be possible to exchange knowledge without the relevant infrastructure , because it plays a key role in establishing an effective environment for carrying out up-to-date and extremely necessary research .
Currently , all activity is limited to cooperation between individual research establishments .
We also have not had the relevant legal instruments which would make it possible to set up a suitable partnership with participants from various states which is , in fact , the key to success in this area .
The lack of such legal instruments has greatly held back the processes of research integration of the new Member States , and these Member States have a huge research potential which needs to be incorporated into the European Union .
This report is not merely a step towards establishing the legal groundwork for setting up a research infrastructure .
It would be instrumental in achieving the movement of knowledge in the European Union , increasing the prestige and authority of European research centres at a world level and increasing employment , and will contribute in the search for adequate solutions to new environmental challenges .
I would once again like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Riera Madurell .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Do we need a European economic legal entity in the research sector or is this yet another example of the EU 's persistent fight against European pluralism ?
The truth is , of course , that institutional competition is necessary for successful institutional reforms .
Imagine if an international legal research framework had been established 50 years ago .
Development in this area would have ceased .
Changing international treaties is difficult and proceeds far too slowly .
Progress is made if countries can easily reform their national institutions .
Successful reforms then spread to other countries .
The Commission 's proposal is certainly not a straightjacket .
It offers an alternative to existing national proposals and , to that extent , represents an improvement .
However , the proposal is ruined completely by the fact that the Commission also wishes to regulate the taxation of this legal entity at EU level .
This proposal must therefore be rejected .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I feel that this is a very significant step forward in European research policy .
It is a result of the evaluation report of the Sixth Framework Programme , but it is also a consideration that has been retained throughout the drafting of the seventh .
You said , Commissioner , that some Member States are now allowed to join forces .
It is absurd , to say the least , to note that special permission is required from the European Union for that but still , it is progress .
What concerns me is your statement that VAT will be applied at its minimum rate and that the situation regarding international status is not yet absolutely clear , at least that is how I understood it .
Article 171 was cited for the vote on the SESAR Joint Undertaking .
We have voted twice on this draft since , in the initial version , the international status had not been confirmed and , therefore , it was not possible to establish the joint undertaking .
Another joint undertaking , Galileo , has not been established at all .
My questions are as follows .
What will be the share of Community funding ?
Will funding be provided for those who work together to prevent the squandering of resources intended for research infrastructures and to encourage them ?
Will it finally be possible to tap into the cohesion fund for research so as to combine excellence and cohesion ?
( RO ) 2009 is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
Setting up a European research infrastructure to operate on a non-economic basis will help to streamline the Community 's research programmes , as well as distribute and optimise the results in the field of research , technological development and demonstration activities at Community level .
I welcome the fact that these infrastructures can receive cofinancing through Cohesion Policy financial instruments , in accordance with the regulations on the European Regional Development Fund , the Social Fund and Cohesion Fund .
I want to emphasise that it is vitally important that these infrastructures establish the link between research institutes and structures , universities , academia and the private sector , with industrial sectors benefiting from the use of research results .
However , I would like to mention that , above all during the current crisis , we need to make sure that at least 1 % of a Member State 's GDP is allocated to research .
( RO ) The notion of a common European Research Area and of a Community legal framework that is applicable to European research infrastructures has been the basic principle for achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy relating to economic growth , the creation of jobs and establishing a dynamic , knowledge-based economy .
Research infrastructures are playing an ever greater role in the advancement of knowledge and technology , thanks to their ability to mobilise human resources and investments so that a critical mass is achieved , thereby successfully making a crucial contribution to European economic development .
We have proposed to provide research with competitive financing , adequate infrastructures and intellectual property regulations , as well as efficient mobility for researchers in our desire for the European Union to be a top international research partner .
Today , through this proposal for a regulation on the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure , we are consolidating the creation of the fifth freedom in Europe : the free movement of knowledge .
The current regulation will be a pillar of European research development as the European Research Infrastructure will guarantee scientific excellence in Community research and competitiveness of the Community 's economy , based on medium and long-term forecasts and through effective support for European research activities .
In the current economic crisis , the quickest possible implementation of this regulation , combined with encouraging investment in research and development , establishing common standards in the knowledge sector , and modernising national education systems , will provide real solutions aimed at overcoming this crisis .
I feel that at this time , we need to promptly focus our attention on the existing differences in the area of developing an infrastructure for innovation and research between developed Member States and those with a developing economy so that we do not trigger a major migration of researchers from the economies of the states which have recently joined to the Member States whose economies are at the forefront of the global economy .
Homogenous distribution of these infrastructures and of research opportunities within the European Union would be beneficial to the whole European Union and would help to combat the migration of scientists from East to West .
I would like to conclude by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Riera Madurell , and her colleagues from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their contribution in compiling this report .
Mr President , could you share the five minutes between the two applications that have been made ?
I would be interested in taking two minutes , if that was in order ?
Well , you present me with a quandary .
The Rules of Procedure state one minute .
One minute .
Mr President , with the greatest respect , we have already wasted two minutes talking about it .
There are five minutes from the floor under ' catch the eye ' .
I have participated in other debates where there were perhaps one , two or three speakers and we share the time .
I want just two minutes - I do not know about the other colleagues .
Thank you for allowing me to trespass on your patience , Mr President .
I fully support the establishment of legal status for new European research infrastructures for pan-European research projects and pan-European funding .
I have two quick points .
I have in front of me - and I would like to compliment the Commissioner and his staff - a publication entitled ' A more research-intensive and integrated European Research Area : Science , Technology and Competitiveness key figures report 2008 / 2009 ' .
I think the figures may be well out of date , given the collapse in GDP across the EU and elsewhere .
I particularly pick up the point that public funding of R & D can be counter-cyclical , as happened in Japan and the US in the early 1990s and early noughties respectively .
When there were collapses in their GDP , the public sector investment in R & D went up .
Could you extrapolate from what we are experiencing at the moment in the EU , with what we have available in FP7 and from Member States , in view of the collapse of economic growth throughout the EU at the moment - we are not alone globally - whether we will be able to compensate with increased public sector funding in R & D ?
My second point concerns the frightening prospect as regards the EU 's world share in patent applications , which has declined by an alarming figure .
The high costs of patents in Europe , you say , might possibly explain this .
In Europe , the costs and corresponding costs for patent applications are over 20 % higher than in the US , 13 times higher than in the Japan Patent Office , while the costs of maintaining a patent protection in the 27 Member States is over 60 times higher in the EU than the US - frightening implications .
Perhaps you could tell us , Commissioner , how we could resolve this as soon as possible ?
I should like to congratulate you once again , Commissioner , on a fascinating publication .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
I will refer here to a statement made by Mrs Doyle .
At a time when we are experiencing economic collapse , we should not allow ourselves to make the mistake of neglecting research and development or the people who work in these areas .
Therefore , I endorse the measures concerning the establishment of a legal framework for the European Research Infrastructure .
We must be aware that for the ERI , it is necessary to have legal frameworks and also adequate funding , but that this money cannot come from contributions made by individual regions , or even countries .
The question of appropriate taxation is also important in this case .
I also think that better cooperation is needed between research centres and the economy , including small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am convinced that the ERI will also contribute , if it is properly correlated with the framework programmes , to improving the situation of the people who work in research , and especially young people , as Mr Gierek has said .
This may also prevent a brain drain in Europe .
We should remember that the Lisbon Strategy provides for a share of three per cent of GDP for expenditure on research and development .
In the European Union today - my figures are for the year 2007 - that indicator stands at 1.84 % .
I trust , therefore , that the ERI will improve this situation .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank you for your support .
I think we all understand how important it is that we talk .
I may not follow the order of the questions but will try to respond briefly to what you asked .
Ms Doyle , as regards public funding , the experience of the past has shown that , in times of crisis , private financing most likely goes down .
That is why public financing should not make the terrible mistake of following that pattern because that would be the way which , after the crisis , would lead us to a completely improper situation .
That is why public financing has to act counter-cyclically and that is why , even in Europe , we have had that kind of example .
Finland was the case at the beginning of the 1990s .
I think we should do something like that and we should follow that path .
On the cost of patent application , it is very striking .
I think there is no simple answer .
' Better ' would certainly be an answer which would be more horizontal than anything which we could do .
Last year , we tried to do our best by proposing to clarify this patent picture in relations between private and public institutions , but certainly that is not the answer to the depth of the problem which we are facing in patent application .
Now I turn to the proposal about the questions about the financing from the Seventh Framework Programme .
What we have financed until now is the preparatory phase of the projects which are released .
It is not intended that we finance institutionally the infrastructure .
This will be done by the Member States and also Member States will decide , for example , where this will be located .
When this is finished , however , we will certainly , as for any other infrastructure , finance the grants .
That is really the only way ahead .
I can remind you that , when we discussed the issue of the budget of the research infrastructure , this was the budget which , in percentage points , was really mostly cut for the Seventh Framework Programme .
I am , however , quite optimistic .
We are well ahead , and I think that legislation is bringing good solutions .
Concerning VAT , I would like to be precise .
We do not propose VAT exemption in the legislation .
We believe that if more countries are joining in efforts to build a common infrastructure , say between Germany and Slovenia or the United Kingdom or anywhere , then at the end of the day , none of the countries will agree to pay VAT in that country .
That is the case also today - but what exactly is the case today ?
Today , the countries are individually negotiating with the host country on that kind of exemption .
What we are trying to do , via that legislation , is to guarantee the status of an international organisation which would , as a consequence , due to the VAT legislation which exists today , guarantee VAT exemption .
That would , in essence , be the end of the story anyway , but time was mentioned .
Time is the crucial question here , so we are talking about whether we can speed up and simplify how we are building the research infrastructure together .
Unfortunately , today 's situation in research infrastructure is so complex that we are losing time and thus money also .
In essence , that is the story .
I have forgotten cohesion .
The answer is yes .
To finish , that is exactly the point which we have to underline .
We need infrastructure .
We need it as soon as possible .
This is the step to speed up the whole process .
I thank you for understanding that and I thank you for your support in that context .
Before giving the floor to our rapporteur , I would like to clarify something for Mrs Doyle .
We have looked into the technicalities .
A little over a year ago , on 8 January 2008 , you received a communication from the Deputy Secretary-General , on a decision of the Conference of Presidents of 27 October 2007 .
Point 3 ( B ) very clearly states that ' catch the eye ' time is a maximum of five minutes , and is limited to a maximum of one minute per speaker .
That is the rule , but it was such a pleasure to listen to you that we took great delight in hearing what you had to say .
We now come to our rapporteur , Mrs Riera-Madurell .
Mr President , I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in this debate for their contributions , and also I would like to thank the Commissioner for his words and say that I entirely agree with his very clear explanation regarding the VAT issue .
To conclude , I would simply like to say that the majority of us are in agreement with the basics .
The message is clear : excellence in research requires high quality research infrastructure and , basically due to high construction and operational costs , it is important to share a large proportion of this research infrastructure .
In other words , it is more than reasonable to think about creating European infrastructure that can serve the whole European scientific community .
The roadmap drawn up by ESFRI was certainly a step forward towards better planning of research infrastructure at European level .
What we need to do now is implement this roadmap .
One of the main problems is certainly funding , as some of my colleagues have pointed out , because despite the increase in the funding allocated to the Seventh Framework Programme and the possibilities of support for the infrastructures in the cohesion policy programmes , which some of my colleagues have also mentioned , the European Union budget is not sufficient to fund all of the necessary infrastructure .
It is therefore essential that we mobilise sources of funding , both national and private , as far as possible , especially from industry , although as the Commissioner rightly said , this is not a very good time .
Another difficulty , which is no less important , was the lack of a legal structure .
This was the Commission 's objective when putting forward this proposal : to establish a legal framework and the necessary conditions for developing European research infrastructures .
This is a good proposal , which we are convinced has been strengthened by Parliament , as the Commissioner has already said .
I would like to ask the Council once again to listen to our message .
( DE ) Mr President , may I ask that the heating be kept on until the end of the sitting , as it is too cold in the House .
We take note of this comment .
Perhaps our evening debates should be more animated and more heated so as to warm up the atmosphere .
It is true , though , that the Chamber is large .
On this fundamental issue , which will do a great deal to advance European research , the debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
At times when the economy is in a downward spiral , the authorities are tempted to cut funds for research .
However , I am pleased that by discussing this report on the proposal for a Council regulation on the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure , we are sending out an important signal that research remains a priority activity for the European Union .
I firmly believe that by establishing this institutional framework for supporting research activity , we will see results which will bolster the European economy .
The reason for this is that research is not a fad , but a necessity which guarantees the European economy 's competitiveness at a global level .
I would like to stress one extremely important area where research can play an important role .
In the next 25 years , as a result of urbanisation , it is expected that almost 25 % of land will be withdrawn from agricultural use .
To compensate for this reduction in area , we need greater productivity from smaller areas , with a lower use of water or pesticides .
The solutions may emerge through research , particularly biotechnology , bearing in mind , of course , the principle of food security .
This is yet another reason for supporting greater research activity and ensuring a uniform European framework .
I welcome the report on establishing a legal framework for the European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) , as well as the Commission 's proposal for a regulation in this area .
ERI is a response to a real need on the part of European researchers and will undoubtedly help boost competitiveness in European science .
One of the important elements in this regulation is the opportunity for the European Union to hold a stake in an ERI type entity .
This gives the Community the ability to participate in and guide Trans-European research policies .
Based on this element , I am calling on the European Commission to bear in mind three points when it comes to providing financial support for the ERI :
1 ) The Community 's involvement exclusively in projects with an extremely high scientific potential .
2 ) Encouraging the formation of ERIs in regions which have traditionally been victims of the brain drain , both within and outside the Community .
3 ) Facilitating the access of companies in the private sector to the ERI .
Community policies in this area must combine scientific excellence with triggering an influx of researchers and effective infrastructures into countries , such as the new members of the European Union from the accession rounds in 2004 and 2007 .
The report compiled by Teresa Riera Madurell is particularly important as it creates the legal framework required to develop research infrastructures .
Establishing European research infrastructures guarantees that research will reach a high level .
In addition , it will create new opportunities for closer collaboration between teams of European researchers which may also be joined by numerous students and technical staff , thereby helping attract young people into hi-tech research .
This legal framework must also ensure better cooperation between industry and academic research , thereby facilitating the implementation of innovations .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal which asks the Commission to regularly report to the European Parliament on the status regarding the development of the European research infrastructures .
The cost of establishing large-scale research infrastructures requires several countries to join forces .
Establishing a common legal framework is absolutely necessary in order to facilitate and accelerate the development of these infrastructures .
A special place for children in EU external action ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Kinnock , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on a special place for children in EU external action .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have to say at the outset that I very much welcome the communication which has been prepared by the Commission .
I think it is both comprehensive and ambitious .
In my report , Commissioner , I recommend which practical actions , investments and processes are needed if we are to identify that very special place for children in external action .
The Commission and the Council communication and conclusions on external action will build upon the external dimension of the EU strategy on the rights of the child .
I believe that this is essential work for the European Union .
Commissioner , I now look forward very much to seeing actions intended to match the ambition which I see .
We need to see substance backing up the rhetoric .
That means that resources must be available and , of course - as I am sure you will agree - there must be no backtracking by the European Union Member States on the commitments they have made to fund the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) .
What we know is that , for most of the world 's two billion children , it is a daily struggle against poverty and vulnerability .
As we know , 98 % of the children in our world living in extreme poverty are living in developing countries .
Furthermore , it is now clear that the impact of the financial crisis will be severely felt by children and young people , for instance when the budgets are cut back on health and education .
That is why I think it is right that we make a political commitment , at the highest level , on behalf of and with children .
The EU must see in its partnership with the developing countries the opportunity to influence public policy to save children 's lives .
Priority actions for children must be promoted when the European Commission negotiates the country strategy papers ' regional and thematic strategies , when they are drawn up , and subsequently when they are reviewed .
When there is budget support , including MDG budget contracts , specific objectives and indicators on children must and should be included .
I welcome the Commission 's intention to draw up partner national action plans for children .
We need assurances that even the most marginalised children - including children with disabilities and orphans - have access to equitable health , welfare and judicial services .
I believe there needs to be more and better training of Commission staff - both in Brussels and in delegations - particularly in how they manage the participation of children .
We need to see a radical rethink in the European Union about how we ensure that we listen to children and invite children to participate , because we understand that it is children themselves who give lives to the values that are enshrined in international law through the Convention on the Rights of the Child agreed in 1989 .
It is my experience that the children themselves - the young people - have a wealth of understanding and experience - which we must tap into - on how to tackle poverty and environmental degradation .
I welcome the fact that the Commission recognises the importance of consultation during the preparation of the EU strategy on the rights of the child .
I also understand that this has been planned for the first half of 2009 .
Commissioner , would the Commission be able to confirm when this process will begin ?
I trust there will not be any decision that the public consultation - including with children - will be put on hold until a new Commission and Parliament is in place .
Finally , to quote Kofi Annan , ' There is no trust more sacred than the one the world holds with children .
There is no duty more important than ensuring that their rights are respected , that their welfare is protected , that their lives are free from fear and want and that they grow up in peace . '
I think all of us would agree that those are fine objectives .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is a pleasure to be here today to talk about children and also about the report you will adopt shortly .
Let me talk for a few minutes about how we got to where we are today , and what will come in the future , and about child participation , which is most likely our biggest challenge regarding children .
Today is an important step in a long process that started several years ago internally in the Commission .
We recognise that the EU needs a strategy on children .
We need a strategy on how we , the European Union , will implement the commitments .
We and the rest of the world have signed up to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The first step was the Commission communication ' Towards an EU Strategy on the Rights of the Child ' in 2006 .
This was followed in 2008 by the communication package on children in external actions , which outlined a comprehensive approach to children by the EU using all available instruments in external cooperation .
Let me digress for a moment , since I am convinced that some of you will be asking the question : what about the EU strategy on the rights of the child , which was announced in the above-mentioned communication ?
I can confirm that the Commission is working on such a strategy , which will be presented under the next Commission .
During the Slovenian Presidency in May 2008 , the Council adopted conclusions on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child in the European Union 's external action - the development of humanitarian dimensions .
The Committee on Development then started drafting a report .
We are now at the end of this process and tomorrow , you will be voting on this excellent report .
In addition , the EU 's policy on children is based on the two EU guidelines - the Guidelines on Children in Armed Conflicts and the Guidelines on the Rights of the Child - both being implemented in a number of selected priority and pilot countries .
The Commission welcomes the report - which is an excellent complement to our communication - the Council conclusions and the guidelines .
We will surely use it in our work on children .
Let me focus my final comments on what is probably our biggest challenge today : child participation .
How do we ensure that we involve children in decisions that concern them ?
How do we ensure that children have access to pertinent information ?
How do we ensure equal access for children to express their views ?
We have to recognise that , amongst everything that we all agreed to in the Convention on the Rights of the Child , this might be the major challenge .
We have to admit that we are still far from achieving anything significant in the area of child participation .
In the Commission , we are starting to reflect on how to design and implement proper child participation that is not just tokenism .
It should be relevant , meaningful and informed child participation .
We have also ensured relevant funding for child participation under the thematic programme ' Investing in People ' .
Why is this difficult for us adults ?
Essentially , because it questions what is fundamental to us : the way we behave .
What will the Commission do in its external action to promote this participation ?
The Commission will make the tools available for our delegations to consult children , but these tools will be used not only by our delegations but also by partner countries .
We are also developing a tool kit , together with UNICEF , that should not only address child participation but also overall child protection , legal reform , child budgeting .
In addition to the tool kit , we are also recasting and strengthening our collaboration with UNICEF in general in order to be able to improve our support to partner countries in their efforts to ensure that children have a voice at country level .
We also cooperate closely with various NGOs to learn from them about possible formats , often involving children and having meaningful child participation .
Let me be honest : it is not going to happen tomorrow .
This is just the start of a long process .
Let me just make one comment on the report .
The report underlines how the Commission should pay attention to child participation , but , colleagues , you will also have to do so , and I can assure you that the Commission will be happy to work with you on advancing this .
We should build on the collective force of the two institutions to advance this important issue .
Let me once again express the Commission 's appreciation of the report and underline that we will do our utmost to carry out these recommendations .
We are counting on the continued support of Parliament in this area .
In answer to Ms Kinnock 's question , I am happy to confirm that the position of the Commission has not changed .
The idea of using 2009 for consultations was launched in the Commission itself and we are working to put in place the conditions for a process of consultation with children that avails itself of all existing tools .
Let me also underline that the Commission is keen to ensure a process of consultation that fully respects the rights of the child .
Finally , let me thank you , Ms Kinnock , for a very fruitful collaboration on children and child-related issues , not only as regards this report , but also over the years .
I know that I was too long , but you can never be too long when you are talking about children 's rights .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
Indeed , your speech was very interesting and on an issue that is also very important .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - It is a sad day when we have to acknowledge that every day , more than 26 000 children under the age of five die around the world , mostly from preventable causes .
It is tragic that many lives can be saved with the appropriate measures , be they medical or financial , and still the situation is aggravating .
Special attention has to be given to the most vulnerable and socially excluded girls and boys , including disabled children , migrant children and children from minorities .
The report is commendable .
I only disagree with those aspects which refer to abortion .
The Committee on Development adopted this own-initiative report ( drafted by Glenys Kinnock ( PES , UK ) on a special place of children in EU external action in response to the Commission communication on the subject .
The committee welcomed the communication and the four guiding principles of the Commission 's Action Plan on Children 's Rights in External Action , which include a holistic and coherent child-rights-based approach .
Without loosing any more time we must :
undertake a thorough analysis of children 's rights ;
build up existing youth and children 's networks as sustainable platforms for consulting children ;
ensure that international agreements between the EU and third countries should contain a legally binding clause on the protection of children 's rights .
It is our duty to ensure that we are the ones who build a better future , not only for Europeans , but also for the developing countries .
It is children who represent the future and we must ensure that their rights are enforced and respected in third countries which receive European funding .
It is a matter of priority that in relations with third countries , the European Union ensures that children 's rights to education and access to medical services are guaranteed .
It is true that we are going through a period of financial crisis , but we cannot overlook the fact that somewhere in the world , a child dies every three seconds and every minute a woman dies in childbirth .
Given that children make up half of the world 's population , we must consider that the rights of children are a priority in the European Union 's development policy .
Every Member State , according to its possibilities , should get involved in the policies for cooperating with developing countries .
In fact , the European Commission should exert pressure on developing countries to transpose into national legislation the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
I am pleased that I was able to write an opinion on this report in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I have taken a particular interest in the issue of children 's rights in the context of foreign relations .
My opinion was unanimously approved .
It states above all that the EU foreign strategy as regards children 's rights should be based on the values and principles set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , in particular Articles 3 , 16 , 18 , 23 , 25 , 26 and 29 .
These are particularly important for the wellbeing of individuals and society as a whole .
My opinion stresses that all measures in the interests of children 's rights should give priority status to parents and immediate relatives of children .
The fact that the European Parliament has adopted my opinion underlines the importance of protecting human life right from the outset , and of giving each child its own identity .
I succeeded in introducing statements condemning gender-based eugenic discrimination , which is increasingly common in some countries .
The opinion asks the Commission to emphasise the importance of the need to register every child at birth in all third countries as part of the Commission 's development policy , and to make its aid programmes dependent on this requirement .
I support any attempt to promote development aid .
I do , however , insist that humanitarian organisations and international bodies responsible for allocating aid guarantee that the aid and funding allocated actually reaches the children it is destined for , and is not squandered .
Implementation of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC establishing a general framework for informing and consulting employees in the European Community ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Cottigny , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the implementation of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC establishing a general framework for informing and consulting employees in the European Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the various shadow rapporteurs for their open-minded work during our collaboration on this text in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The Member States must improve the implementation of the directive on informing and consulting employees , particularly in the current context of the financial crisis and of its consequences for companies as they restructure , merge or move abroad .
This is the message the Committee on Employment was seeking to send out in this initiative report .
The European Union has 23 million companies with fewer than 250 employees .
They represent 99 % of companies and employ over 100 million people .
Workers ' rights to information and consultation are essential components of the social market economy .
The transposition of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC has been considerably delayed in some Member States .
In this own-initiative report , we point out that the impact of this directive is evident in the countries where no general system of worker information and consultation existed .
I am calling for an improved transposition of the directive in the Member States .
We ask that the Commission takes measures , as soon as possible , to ensure the proper transposition of this directive by the Member States , and to bring infringement proceedings against those that have either not transposed it at all or have done so incorrectly .
The report also emphasises that , in their transposition measures , some Member States have not included some young workers , women working part-time or workers employed for a short period on temporary contracts .
We ask that the Member States define precisely the term ' information ' by allowing workers ' representatives to examine the data supplied and not to content themselves with awaiting the end of the information procedure if the companies ' decisions have direct consequences for the workers .
Member States without effective , proportionate and deterrent sanctions are asked to introduce them .
Finally , in an improved coordination of the different legislative instruments , we also invite the Commission to examine what is required to coordinate the six directives and the regulation on informing employees , so that any amendments to get rid of overlaps and contradictions can be made .
As this type of advance in workers ' rights is more than beneficial , the Union owes it to itself to guarantee that the Member States transpose the obligations of the directive correctly and in full .
It is essential that all European workers know that Europe supports them in their involvement in the life of their company , in their daily lives as workers , and especially at the present time .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I take due note of Mr Cottigny 's report on what is an important directive which consolidates at European level a fundamental social right of employees .
The Commission attaches great importance to informing and consulting employees at both national and transnational level , particularly in the current difficult context of the financial crisis .
We proposed the recasting of the directive on European work councils .
This has been successfully completed .
We are continuing our work on the anticipation and socially responsible management of restructuring and the questions arising at European level from the negotiation of transnational agreements .
As explained in its communication of 17 March 2008 , the Commission 's prime concern for the implementation of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC is that it should be comprehensive and effective in collaboration with the Member States and the two sides of industry , which have an extremely important role to play , as you know .
It should be borne in mind that the directive only establishes a general framework that can be implemented and expanded by the two sides of industry , particularly at company level .
The Commission conducts and supports activities for raising awareness , promoting the exchange of best practices and boosting the capacities of all the parties involved by means of seminars , training courses , studies and financial aid for projects particularly under a specific budget line .
The Commission also monitors the correct application of the directive in its capacity as Guardian of the Treaties : for example , if complaints are made by trade union organisations .
So far , however , the Commission has received very few complaints concerning the implementation of this directive .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The transposition of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC establishing a general framework for informing and consulting employees in the European Community has been subject to considerable delay in certain Member States .
I feel that there is a need to increase the democratic involvement of workers in making decisions which have an impact on the company , bearing in mind the global nature of the current financial crisis , which is affecting Member States indiscriminately in their economic network and is generating fears about restructuring , mergers or relocation .
In the case of restructuring enterprises , I would call on European funds to be made available and for assistance to be provided to workers , not only enterprises .
I also feel that it must become an obligatory practice in the situation where a multinational company is being restructured for trade-union representatives from all branches of the company to be invited to negotiations and consulted , not only those from the Member State in which the company has its head office .
I feel that it is important to regularly update the legislation concerning the rights of workers to be informed and consulted and include this item on the agenda for European social dialogue , both at an interprofessional and industrial level .
Social economy ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Toia , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on Social Economy .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased and proud that the European Parliament is looking at the social market economy and laying down practical proposals to provide real support for this sector .
My report has three objectives .
The first is to draw attention to and shed light on a sector that has a great impact on many areas , including the economy ; 10 % of European businesses belong to this sector , as well as 9 % to 10 % of jobs .
It is a sector comprised of different operators - cooperatives , mutual societies , foundations , social enterprises and associations - which share specific values and make a significant contribution to GDP .
We thus hope to give it greater institutional visibility .
The second objective is to confirm that this is not a marginal sector or an exception ; rather it is firmly established in the market economy , with its own rules that the internal market must recognise and respect .
It represents an alternative way of doing business , of producing , consuming and providing employment , that has nonetheless earned the right to be part of the market .
It is a method characterised by a number of distinctive traits that must not be smoothed over and that consist primarily of the desire to combine and reconcile production and employment with values of solidarity , responsibility and human dignity in all areas including the world of work .
As someone once said , in my opinion quite rightly , these enterprises operate with capital but not for capital .
These are concepts that form part of the ideological heritage of the European Union - one need only think of Delors - since we have often acknowledged the social economy as the keystone of the European social model , but then done very little about it .
Now is the ideal time to rediscover the relevance of these businesses , as the current crisis in manufacturing has shown many traditional economic actors to be very fragile , very weak and sometimes very unscrupulous .
The world of the social economy is , by contrast , more locally rooted , closer to the real economy and to people and therefore protected from speculation , as has proved the case .
It is also a sector with a wide range of actors who do a lot of welfare work , and constitutes a recognised hub of social utility .
It can , I believe , help to sustain our social systems when times are hard .
The third objective is to decide what we can do in practice to support this sector .
I will very briefly describe one or two proposals .
First of all , we need a clear definition to accurately understand the profiles and definitions of these highly diverse entities .
It is also crucial to record the contribution made by this sector accurately in national statistics in different countries .
It does not belong to either the capitalist economy or the public economy , and therefore requires its own definition .
The Commission has gone some way towards this with its handbook , but it needs to be applied .
I believe that the world of academia , research and universities can also help with this .
Finally , some legislative initiatives are called for .
A number of things have been done , such as the cooperative statute and the foundation statute , and I see that the Commission has reopened its consultation .
So , we need to understand what is useful and whether it is worthwhile continuing along this route .
We do not want to bog down a sector that thrives on ideas , motivation and freedom with paperwork , but where Community laws are needed , or will be needed in future , it would be wise to create them .
One final request is to involve this sector in social dialogue .
Where and at what level should consultation and dialogue with the European Commission take place ?
And lastly , what direct support should be provided by European programmes - should we have ad hoc programmes for the social economy , or create space within existing programmes for these operators ?
It is up to the Commission to assess this .
Before I finish , I would like to thank the national associations and European networks that have lent me much support in this work , Parliament 's intergroup on the social economy , which is working well , the shadow rapporteurs , and also Mr Verheugen and Mr Špidla , with whom we have had a frank and thorough exchange of views .

We pass on this report , to which social actors and associations have contributed a great deal , to the Commission , in the hope that despite the short time remaining before the end of this electoral term , it will find the time , Commissioner - you represent the whole Commission here today - to put together some initiatives , and give a clear signal , so that the next Parliament and the next Commission do not have to start again from scratch but have something solid to build on .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's initiative to formulate an own-initiative opinion on the social economy .
Especially in the context of the present financial and economic crisis , this important sector deserves to be promoted more .
Social economy enterprises have a unique way of doing business since they combine economic performance mutually between members , and often also the achievement of social and societal objectives , as a business purpose .
Thus , they are well placed to contribute to Community policies and objectives , particularly in the field of employment , social cohesion , regional and rural development , environmental protection , consumer protection and social security .
Social economy enterprises are an integral part of the Commission 's enterprise policy .
Since , in the majority , they are micro , small or medium-sized enterprises , they already benefit from the Small Business Act and all actions targeting small enterprises .
With regard to the social economy , our objective is to create a legal and administrative environment , at European level and in every Member State , in which social economy enterprises of whatever form and size can thrive and meet the challenges posed by globalisation and the economic downturn .
More specifically , the Commission 's policy aims to guarantee that social economy enterprises can grow and prosper alongside other forms of company .
To this end , the Commission pays particular attention to ensuring that all other Community policies in areas such as competition , accounting , company law , public procurement , health , social affairs , agriculture , fisheries , banking , insurance , public and private partnerships and regional development , do take into account the specific needs , particular goals , efforts and working style of this kind of enterprise .
To conclude , the Commission services are currently working on a document which will take stock of the progress made since 2004 on the promotion of cooperatives .
It will also assess the situation of other social economy enterprises and propose new actions if necessary .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) Non-lucrative activities and not-for-profit organisations are experiencing continual growth in Europe .
At this time of economic and financial crisis , which has serious repercussions at social level , strengthening an economy founded on social benefits rather than profit is a strategic choice that allows us to alleviate the impact of the crisis and to pursue the development of the Lisbon strategy by realising one of its primary objectives , namely the call to social responsibility .
Secondly , the social economy is able to initiate action at local level , becoming a reliable partner for public administrations which need to plan measures to support the vulnerable in society .
We should therefore welcome the move by the European Parliament to recognise , in legislation and statistics , those organisations that operate and are deeply rooted in the European fabric due to their ability to achieve social objectives .
This is a grass-roots vision that represents a fundamental contribution to the European social model .
The social economy can play a vital role in the European economy , by establishing a new type of economy based on democratic values , an economy which puts people first and supports sustainable development .
However , the social economy is facing a huge obstacle : the lack of institutional visibility due to the fact that it is not recognised as an economic sector which is distinct from the main two : public and private .
We call on the Commission and Member States to develop a legal framework which will recognise the social economy as a third sector and apply regulations that clearly stipulate which entities can operate in this sector so that no other type of organisation can benefit from the funding or public policies intended to encourage enterprises in the social economy .
We also call on the Commission and Member States to offer financial support , training and consultancy and also to simplify the procedures for setting up enterprises in the social sector .
In this way , the social economy will fulfil its effective role against the general backdrop of the European economy , by not only helping combat poverty , but also by facilitating access to resources , rights and services which citizens need to be able to participate in society .
in writing . - First of all , I would like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Patrizia Toia , for the quality of the report she presents today .
As a matter of fact , it is important to provide some clarity in defining the concept of social economy and ensuring its legal status through the wide range of national experiences .
Social economy indeed requires visibility - through better knowledge of EU-wide data - for better achieving the objectives of solidarity , employment , entrepreneurship , growth , competitiveness social cohesion and social dialogue in the Union as a whole .
Social economy is increasingly becoming an important actor at local and regional levels and has now , more than ever - due to the serious impacts of the financial crisis - a major role to play in European social and economic development .
The Union needs to concentrate its efforts in supporting the social and economic dynamics to overcome the mere separation of public and private sectors if we really want to find new and innovative solutions to provide our citizens with sustainable jobs and a better living environment with quality services of general interest in an inclusive society .
We have been trying to mobilise all the EU institutions and resources for several months in order to alleviate the effects of the growing crisis .
The silver lining of this dark cloud is that Mrs Patrizia Toia 's report is now on the agenda of the plenary session , since initiatives focusing on solidarity , as well as on social and regional cohesion , are especially important these days .
This is the focus of the social economy , as the latter is a conglomeration of organisational forms whose goal is solidarity and common financial interest , instead of profit .
Such institutions cannot be replaced by any market-oriented organisation .
They provide an opportunity to reduce the effects of economic stratification on the marginalised members of society , provide honourable work , and with their various forms ranging from self-employment to social cooperatives , they are able to reapply the fruits of their labours to the benefit of the community .
We have talked and written a lot about the social economy , but without a European statistical base it will not become visible in our everyday lives .
If this concept is unknown to society , its solidarity is unable to help .
Participating organisations , on the other hand , are too small to become known on a macro-economic level .
Mrs Patrizia Toia 's report can help eliminate the suspicion legislators and market stakeholders have that the money and products generated by the social economy are simply organisations seeking to evade competition rules .
Here and now , the report may provide an opportunity for the social economy to manage the crisis efficiently , and with relatively little effort , to prevent job losses and guard against the loss of means of subsistence .
The social economy ensures job stability as it is not subject to delocalisation .
I feel that the European Union and Member States should encourage and support forms of implementation of the social economy , e.g. cooperatives , mutual societies , associations and foundations , in their legislation and policies .
It is important to devise a series of measures aimed at developing microcredits and tailored EU funding as the values of the social economy correspond to the European objectives of social integration and contribute to establishing a work-life balance , as well as improving gender equality and the quality of life for the elderly or disabled .
I feel that the role of women in the social economy must be reinforced , given their involvement in associations and voluntary organisations .
I urge the Commission to integrate the social economy in the other policies and strategies for social and economic development , especially in light of the Small Business Act , as the structures of the social economy are primarily targeted at small and medium-sized enterprises and services of general interest .
These efforts could also be supported by creating a statistical register of enterprises in the social economy in each European Union Member State and by inputting the data into the EUROSTAT European statistics system .
Mental health ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Tzampazi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on Mental Health .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is now an ever-increasing awareness that there is no health without mental health .
We realise that mental health problems frequently have an impact , from a humanitarian and financial point of view , both on the personal , family , professional and social lives of the individuals and their families and on society as a whole .
The figures speak for themselves : one in four people will experience some form of mental disorder .
Depression is one of the most common disorders and , by 2020 , will be the most common illness in the developed world .
Some 59 000 suicides are committed in the European Union every year , 90 % of which are attributable to mental disorder .
Vulnerable and marginalised groups , such as disabled people , are more likely to suffer mental health problems .
Also , in an ageing Europe , neurodegenerative disorders are becoming ever more common .
We will therefore all agree that there is a need to take a concerted approach to the challenges posed by mental health and that it concerns us all .
We all have an obligation to defend mental health and safeguarding the rights of mental patients and their families is an ideological and political position whereby the state provides social support and protection to those who need it .
The first step was the Commission 's Green Paper ; the next step was the European Conference ' Together for Mental Health and Wellbeing ' , which also established the European Pact for Mental Health and Wellbeing .
In keeping with this , the report on mental health , which was approved unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , includes a series of recommendations to promote the mental health and wellbeing of the populace , to combat the stigma of discrimination and social exclusion , to strengthen preventive action and self-help , and to provide support and adequate treatment to people with mental health problems and to their families and carers .
In the report , we stress the need to provide high-quality , accessible , effective and universal mental health services and up-to-date legislation .
We call for emphasis to be placed on the training of everyone in key positions .
We call for access to appropriate education , training and employment and for the creation of a supportive environment , with particular emphasis on vulnerable groups .
We call for emphasis to be placed on the prevention of mental ill-health through social intervention .
We call for the Member States to empower organisations which represent people with mental health problems .
We propose the adoption of a platform to monitor the implementation of the Pact .
We call on the Commission to present the conclusions of the thematic conferences .
We stress the need to produce appropriate indicators with a view to improving the assessment of needs at national and European level .
At the same time , we are formulating proposals within the framework of the five priority areas of the Pact .
Within this framework , we stress that , in order to prevent depression and suicide , we need to implement multi-sectoral programmes and set up networks , to develop a healthy climate in schools , to improve working conditions , to adopt measures to improve the quality of life and , finally , as regards combating stigma and social exclusion , we stress that public information and awareness campaigns are needed .
For this , I should like to thank the members who contributed with their proposals and I hope that we shall send out a message that mental health is a valuable social commodity and that we all need to work to promote it .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I congratulate the European Parliament and its rapporteur , Ms Tzampazi , on this own-initiative report on mental health .
The report quite rightly underlines the great impact mental health has on general wellbeing , on education , on learning , and on social cohesion in the European Union .
The fact that Parliament is adopting this report only two years after a resolution responding to the Commission 's Green Paper on mental health signals the urgent need for more action in this field .
In my view , there is some reason for optimism .
There is more awareness of the importance of mental health and wellbeing across all sectors , compared to a few years ago .
This was evident from the great support for the Commission 's high-level conference ' Together for mental health and wellbeing ' and the European Pact for Mental Health and Wellbeing , both of which were mentioned by the rapporteur .
Further positive developments include the fact that many Member States have revised their mental health strategies or are setting up action plans , for example , in Finland and Hungary .
Socio-economic learning has been included in school curricula .
In the United Kingdom , life issues are now a subject in their own right in many schools .
Employers are increasingly aware of the links between wellbeing and productivity .
CSR Europe has even created a toolkit for wellbeing in the workplace .
However , let us be clear .
There can certainly be no reason for complacency , and much more remains to be done .
There could be new risks for mental health as a result of the current financial and economic crisis .
Member States could be tempted to reduce budgets for mental health or to reduce their efforts to build up modern mental health systems with community-based services instead of outdated asylums .
The economic downturn worsens the future prospects of young people , especially school leavers .
Job insecurity in the workplace , and its ensuing concerns over the stability of incomes and rising levels of unemployment , create new major threats for mental health .
Over the next two years , the Commission will organise a series of thematic conferences on the five priorities of the mental health pact .
These will be joint events with Council Presidencies and Member States .
A first international conference on stigma and psychiatric care will be organised by the Czech Presidency on 29 May this year .
The first thematic conference on mental health in youth and education will take place in Stockholm on 29-30 September , in cooperation with the Swedish Presidency .
The second thematic conference on the prevention of depression and suicide will be organised with Hungary in December .
In the first semester of 2010 , the Spanish Presidency will host a thematic conference on the mental health of older people .
Furthermore , we are in contact with Member States regarding two further conferences on mental health in workplace settings and on combating stigma and social exclusion .
Parliament 's report includes many concrete suggestions which constitute a valuable contribution to future debates in these conferences .
The report not only highlights the relevance of mental health in the European Union , but also demonstrates that there are many opportunities to act in the area of mental health at European Union level .
One of the suggestions in the report is to set up a structure to oversee the implementation of the European Pact for Mental Health and Wellbeing .
I agree that there would be significant added value in periodically reviewing progress against the objectives of the pact .
We will seriously consider how we can best put such an idea into practice .
Once again , I would like to thank Parliament and its rapporteur for this very supportive report and its very important recommendations .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Mental health is a key factor in people 's lives and there is increasing evidence of its impact on our social , economic and legal systems .
I support this report since it entails a comprehensive approach to the challenges we face in the mental health sector , such as combating stigma , discrimination and social exclusion , but also recognising the need for preventive programs , public support and adequate treatment of people .
As a relatively new science , mental health is not widely recognised as a priority , but recent technological developments have allowed us to explore more of the human brain , showing the way to new , life-changing treatments for individuals .
I believe we should strongly support further research in this area , with special attention to the growing elderly population in Europe , which is hoping for a healthy , dignified and active ageing .
We need accessible structures for care and treatment of mental illnesses , but it is also very important to have a supportive environment such as labour market integration programmes .
Mental health is also very relevant in workplace settings where it can severely hamper performance , so we need to promote good practices among employers that reduce unnecessary stress and preserve the mental wellbeing of their employees .
I would like to thank Mrs Tzampazi for her report on mental health , which I voted in favour of .
One in four people suffer from mental health problems at least once in their life .
It is estimated that by the year 2020 , depression will have become the most common illness in the developed world and the second main reason for incapacity for work .
External factors , such as the consequences of the present financial crisis , will tend to make people vulnerable to these problems .
Not only does mental ill-health entail an expense that is a burden on the healthcare sector and the entire social and economic system ; it also detracts from the quality of life of sufferers and their families to an unnecessary degree .
Although there have been dramatic leaps forward as regards standards of care and general attitude , people who suffer from mental health problems and their families are being marginalised more and more often .
The differences in standards that apply to prevention and the guarantee of first-rate care are too great , both among the EU countries and regionally within countries .
I am pleased that special mention was made of the matter of mental health in young people in Mrs Tzampazi 's report , which proposes that there should be cross-sectoral programmes to address it .
We should not forget , however , that the most important preventive mental health work is always the responsibility of educators and agencies outside the family and home .
This entails promoting healthy lifestyles , and listening to children and young people and paying attention to them .
I consider the high quality , easy accessibility and effectiveness of universal mental health services called for in Mrs Tzampazi 's report to be especially important , as I do greater investment in top quality research .
There should be more funding in particular for medical research into the links between prevention and mental and physical health problems .
Mental health disorders are national health problems in many countries , as they have a significant influence on the people involved , their families and society in general .
Mental health disorders also often lead to disability and can thus cause a significant economic burden on society .
In accordance with the World Bank 's 1993 development report , four of the ten most common causes of disability were mental health and / or neurological disorders .
Whereas in 1993 , depression was in fourth place among illnesses causing disability , if present tendencies continue , by 2020 , depression may become the second most significant cause among the total population , and even the most significant cause of disability for women .
Despite the extent and seriousness of the consequences of mental health disorders , there are still countries in the world and in Europe today where insufficient attention is devoted to the problem .
Such a situation is often caused by the prevalent partly negative public and political attitude in society and the stigmatisation of the mentally ill .
This , in turn , leads to insufficient attention being devoted to mental health , limited availability of services , the shortage of alternative treatment methods and insufficient information about treatment possibilities .
Regardless of the fact that the solution of mental health problems falls within the competence of the Member States , it is important that the volume of financial assistance and knowledge-based assistance provided to Member States by the EU be further increased , in order to help them develop and improve the necessary health , social , care and educational services and preventive measures .
I believe that the promotion of individuals ' mental health and welfare must become a high-priority objective in all Member States of the European Union , because individuals ' mental health has the most direct effect on Member States ' economic productivity and employment .
As we know , mental health is a fundamental value for every person , and we , the representatives of the nations of Europe , must not forget this fact .
I think it is a good thing that , today , we have turned to this issue in the forum of the European Parliament .
Mental illnesses , a flood of suicides and depression have become a threat to contemporary society .
These problems do not only affect people who live under constant stress , but also children , young people and the elderly .
I think that we should take far-reaching steps to defeat these diseases of civilisation .
This is also why I support research and free access to the results of this research , as well as specialists .
In expressing my thanks for the Report on Mental Health , I would , at the same time , like to express my concern regarding whether it is possible , in addition to providing assistance to the elderly , and action to combat stigmatisation and social exclusion , to also include projects aimed at reaching people who are socially marginalised .
Such people very often display antipathy towards others , feel alienated , and have a fear of the censure of society .
In my opinion , the first problem we should focus on is an extensive education programme so that everyone who is in need will know where to turn , what kind of help can be obtained and , most importantly , that it is possible to return to a normal life .
Mental health and wellbeing are a major challenge during this century we are living in .
The World Health Organisation estimates that mental disorders will account for 15 % of all illness by 2020 .
I am particularly concerned about the future of adolescents and children , which is why I have proposed action to make citizens aware of the deterioration in the state of mental health in children whose parents have emigrated , along with the introduction of programmes in schools designed to help these young people face the psychological problems linked to their parents ' absence .
I have insisted on this matter due to the large number of children abandoned by parents who have gone off to work abroad , a situation encountered increasingly often in Central and Eastern Europe .
Still with the support of these young people in mind , I have proposed action to promote setting up counselling functions in every secondary school and offer alternative options which are confidential and which will not stigmatise these children , in order to meet their social and emotional needs .
Bearing in mind that mental health determines the quality of life of the European Union 's citizens , this issue must be dealt with just as seriously as physical health matters .
In fact , a European action plan for this is required in order to respond to the challenges posed by mental disorders .
When we talk about health , we are usually referring to physical wellbeing .
Yet mental illness can be as much of a handicap to the daily lives of sufferers , and has extensive adverse social effects .
Parliament 's initiative to improve information on mental health is a very positive step , therefore .
There should be more public discussion of approaches to mental disorders and , in addition , methods for preventing mental illness should be made accessible to the general public .
The workplace setting should be particularly emphasised in this connection .
Since working people spend a very great deal of time at their workplace and are exposed to stress in connection with their work , it is necessary to promote mental health in that particular setting .
Only motivated , balanced workers are in a position to meet the demands made of them .
Awareness of this issue should therefore be raised among businesses and public bodies .
On the whole , by recognising mental disorders , Parliament is indicating a modern understanding of health and offering many sufferers a positive perspective in the long term .
Follow-up of the energy efficiency national action plans : a first assessment ( short presentation )
You pointed out that we have slightly dimmed the lighting in the Chamber .
I imagine that it is in order to make energy savings .
That is fitting , since the next item is a short presentation of the report by Mr Gyürk , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on follow-up of the energy efficiency national action plans : a first assessment .
Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Commissioner , the gas crisis in January certainly had one positive outcome .
It enlivened the dialogue on energy policy in every Member State .
Likewise , here in the European Parliament , there has been a lot of discussion about various alternative transportation routes , the expansion of storage capacities , as well as the future role of nuclear energy .
However , we have devoted unduly scant attention to energy efficiency .
I am particularly pleased that the report on the National Energy Efficiency Action Plans has provided an opportunity to discuss this topic during the last few weeks .
The significance of energy efficiency lies in its ability to achieve perceptible results faster than by any other means .
As Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs has recently pointed out , EU measures on off mode devices could reduce standby losses by the equivalent of Hungary 's annual energy consumption .
We cannot emphasise enough that energy efficiency may remedy all problems concerning energy policy .
First and foremost , it may help moderate Europe 's energy dependence on third countries .
In addition , energy efficiency may also have a beneficial influence on the competitiveness of European industry , and may reduce the burden on our environment .
Let us also remember that improving energy efficiency can also reduce the burden on the most vulnerable consumers .
Naturally , there are great differences in circumstance and potential as well as in legislative initiatives among the Member States .
Therefore , we agree with the 2006 EU Directive setting out measures for the Member States to summarise in National Action Plans their planned measures for improving energy efficiency .
In the current report , we attempted to draw general conclusions regarding the aforementioned Action Plans .
At the same time , our goal was to define necessary future steps in EU legislation .
I would like to draw attention to a few crucial points in the report .
First of all , the report calls on the Commission to take stronger action against delays in preparing National Energy Efficiency Action Plans .
This time , it must be thoroughly examined whether the plans are accompanied by practical steps taken by the Member States .
A major shortcoming of several National Action Plans is that they are a far cry from their governments ' policies .
Secondly , resources dedicated to improving energy efficiency need to be increased at both national and Community levels .
As a result of the financial crisis , there are very few European citizens who can afford to invest in their energy efficiency .
Therefore , existing energy efficiency incentive projects must be expanded at once .
This leads us to the next seven-year Community budget , in which energy efficiency must be further emphasised , and tax breaks may also contribute towards genuine improvements .
Thirdly , there is a continued need for legislation in energy efficiency in the European Union .
I believe that the European Commission 's recommendations have set the right direction in this area .
Stricter legislation on the energy consumption of buildings could result in considerable savings , for instance .
Fourthly , national governments must take on a pioneering role in the development of energy efficient solutions .
These efforts should be mirrored in extensive education campaigns .
Consumers will only set out to invest in their energy efficiency if they are fully aware of its benefits to them .
Lastly , I would like to share one more thought .
It is my belief that energy efficiency cannot be treated as a second-rate cause even during a time of recession .
What is more , energy efficiency programmes can create hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe .
In a year of massive layoffs , this aspect is hardly beside the point .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to address this part-session of the European Parliament covering , inter alia , the subject of the Commission 's assessment of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plans ( NEEAPs ) , which was presented in the Second Strategic Energy Review package in November 2008 and the earlier Commission communication of January 2008 .
A more detailed technical synthesis of the Commission 's assessment of the NEEAPs will be presented in the Commission 's NEEAP document this spring .
I would , therefore , like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Gyürk , on his work , as well as the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) for its valuable discussions and comments .
In the past few years , the Commission has stated very clearly that energy efficiency is the first priority of the European Union energy policy and a very important cornerstone to meeting the 2020 by 2020 targets , and National Energy Efficiency Action Plans play a central role in this respect .
The Directive on energy end-use efficiency and energy services sets an obligation , as you know , for the Member States to present these , and to show how , in practice , they are going to achieve their national targets for energy efficiency .
The original deadline for their submission by the Member States was 30 June 2007 but , as you know , many Member States unfortunately were late .
The last NEEAPs arrived at the Commission in June 2008 .
At this stage , the Commission has completed all the individual assessments and sent letters with the results of those assessments to all Member States .
As a follow-up , a number of bilateral meetings took place , and a number of Member States declared they would themselves like to improve their NEEAPs in the coming few months .
As has been noted by the members of the ITRE Committee , the first National Energy Efficiency Action Plans have proved to be a really useful exercise .
Indeed , many Member States have , for the first time , prepared comprehensive plans of action on energy savings .
Many of them confirmed that they found the cross-sectoral effort needed to prepare them very useful .
Under the Energy Services Directive , NEEAPs have only a limited role .
However , the Commission , in its communication of November 2008 , and in other recent statements has always encouraged Member States to broaden their role .
The Commission will prepare a new European Union Energy Savings Action Plan that will strengthen and better focus European Union actions , helping EU Member States and EU businesses and EU citizens to save energy in a cost-effective way .
In your report , you urged the Commission to propose a binding target for energy savings .
The current energy savings objective of 20 % of primary energy saving in 2020 today represents a non-binding target , as you know .
However , the Commission believes that , with the climate and energy package , as well as the proposals in the Second Strategic Energy Review , we can reach 20 % .
Mr Gyürk 's report also rightly indicated that financial support must be increased .
Financial issues relating to energy savings were recognised by the Commission in the European Economic Recovery Plan of 26 November 2008 , and in other coordinated efforts which aim to help create jobs , which are often in small and medium-sized companies , since investments in energy efficiency , and especially in buildings , are mostly related to small-scale renovation projects .
In conclusion , I would like to recall that during the mandate of this Commission , EU leaders have given a real commitment to promoting energy efficiency .
Boosting investment in energy efficiency and related new technologies offers an essential contribution to sustainable development and also to security of supply .
Energy efficiency has a wider impact , far beyond energy policy .
It has a positive effect on the European Union economy in general : increasing efficiency helps create new jobs , stimulates economic growth and improves competitiveness .
As you rightly mentioned , that is exactly what we should be doing in these difficult and challenging times .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
It is clear that oil prices are falling , but once the current economic crisis has passed , prices will rise again .
Therefore , let me remind you that it is important to diversify EU energy sources and supply routes more with the aim of mitigating the negative effects which may arise due to a future oil crisis .
The dependency of EU Member States , in particular EU ' energy islands ' , on the import of energy supplies and existing infrastructure varies .
Can we talk of a single energy market , if , for example , the Baltic States , including Lithuania , are energy islands ?
Europe 's inability to speak to the main energy suppliers with one voice is also an acute problem .
On paper , we are creating an ambitious European energy policy but , in practice , the bilateral energy policy continues to dominate .
Fellow Members , the politicisation of the energy sector does not contribute to stability .
We could and should try to change the situation through diversification and solidarity .
We must complete the missing energy links and establish an EU coordinating mechanism , aimed at reacting to similar crises .
It is essential that Member States which are most dependent on energy supplies have sufficient reserves of these supplies .
We must not only look at short-term measures for security of energy supply , but we must also consider the long-term outlook .
Europe in turn must diversify energy sources and improve security of supply .
Energy efficiency is all the more important at the moment as we face real challenges concerning the provision of energy supplies to the EU and as we need to make more consistent efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
I support an approach to the energy efficiency problem which is consistent with the other EU policies , in particular , the package for combating climate change and the necessity to diversify energy sources .
I firmly believe that the R & D sector must be supported as this can make a significant contribution to boosting energy efficiency .
The Commission and Member State governments should give stronger support to projects intended to boost energy efficiency , whether we are talking about investments to make public transport as energy efficient as possible , insulating buildings , etc .
I think that government resources should be channelled more in this direction rather than towards subsidising the price of energy , as these projects provide , at the same time , support to vulnerable consumers faced with rising energy prices .
I therefore call on Member States to come up with effective and realistic action plans , to provide citizens with as much information as possible about energy efficiency , and to cooperate through the exchange of good practice .
I also urge the Commission to support national authorities , particularly in the form of technical assistance .
Energy efficiency in buildings is a particular concern relevant to countries which have inherited a large number of buildings constructed according to the poor-quality standards of the Communist era .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission to establish financing instruments and effective procedures for renovating the heating systems in these buildings , in keeping with the target of a 20 % increase in energy efficiency in the EU by 2020 .
Energy efficiency is one of the European Union 's major objectives , the achievement of which will mark an important step towards implementing sustainable development .
For this reason , apart from Member States ' efforts to become actively involved in promoting policies aimed at making energy consumption more efficient , there must also be coordination at Community level in order to achieve much better results .
One way to achieve energy efficiency is to provide buildings with thermal insulation .
According to a study , it is possible at Community level to reduce energy loss by roughly 27 % , which means , by implication , a reduction in the costs which citizens are obliged to pay .
One problem facing the local communities which are proposing to carry out a project involving the renovation of residential heating systems is the complex procedure which they need to follow .
As a result , the measures which will be taken in the future must consider simplifying these procedures .
This objective of greater energy efficiency through insulating buildings must also be targeted at the disadvantaged social groups , thereby reinforcing the principle of solidarity in Europe .
Experience from the first assessment of the national action plans demonstrates in practice that conditions in the EU have not yet matured to the point at which measures to promote energy efficiency can be supported .
One important weakness in the first energy efficiency national action plans , over and above the huge delay in submitting them on the part of certain Member States , including Greece , is the fact that the ambitious plans are not accompanied by clearly defined practical proposals with added value , despite the fact that , according to recent figures released by the European Commission , if the target of achieving energy savings of 20 % were achieved , the EU would use approximately 400 Mtoe less primary energy and CO2 emissions would fall by 860 Mt .
Consequently , the scope of the potential which promoting energy efficiency gives us , especially at a time of economic recession such as the one we are experiencing now , has not been fully understood .
The EU should therefore proceed without further delay to include energy efficiency in all its sectoral policies , with clear proposals and support measures , and to increase Community aid in this direction .
Energy efficiency is a key point following the adoption of the package on climate change and can guarantee energy security , a reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases and an invigorated European economy .
Applied research relating to the common fisheries policy ( short presentation )
The next item is a short presentation of the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , reconciling the correct preservation of ecosystems with sustainable exploitation of marine resources , preventing and controlling the impact of human activity on the environment , improving knowledge and technological development and innovation are tasks that cannot be tackled if we do not have the support of the European scientific community .
Fisheries research is also vital when drawing up recommendations and providing scientific advice to legislators .
Greater investment in research and development , and in the collection and processing of reliable data , would result in a more solid and sustainable Common Fisheries Policy .
However , although the phrase that I heard from the mouth of a scientist ( ' Not money , but human resources are the problem ' ) paints a good picture of the situation , I will not be the one to say that research in fisheries has plenty of financial resources .
Instead , I will say that we have a dual problem .
Firstly , Commissioner , the amounts laid down in the Seventh Framework Programme for marine research , which should have been a cross-cutting issue , seem to be insufficient for the integrated approach that is currently desired for this issue .
Moreover , Commissioner , scientists - and I assure you that I have talked to many of them in order to draw up this report , both before and during the process - have problems when submitting projects to the Seventh Framework Programme .
These problems can partly be attributed , on the one hand , to the different focus that is required for aquaculture , which is basically industrial in nature , and on the other hand , to research into fisheries and marine science , which is multidisciplinary in nature and more long term .
Up until the Seventh Framework Programme , both of these fields were covered by the same funds , and reported to the Fisheries Directorate-General , which enabled them to complement each other .
Currently it is the Research Directorate-General that is responsible , and the result is that it is becoming difficult for the scientific community to communicate the concerns and needs of the sector to those that draw up the guidelines for the calls for proposals .
In addition , within the scientific community there is a perception that the Directorate-General appears to have opted to prioritise basic research without making room for research focused on public policies .
I will give you an example : to enrich , from a scientific point of view , Community maritime strategy , or to investigate the relationship between fisheries and climate change .
To summarise , the objective of European Union maritime policy of achieving productive fisheries in a clean marine environment requires that the scientists that work in this field have access to horizontal funding mechanisms in the Seventh Framework Programme .
To conclude , I would like to mention the second problem : the worrying shortage of young scientists in fisheries research , which appears to be the result of professional courses that are not very attractive in comparison with other basic sciences .
It is vital that we establish interesting and rewarding university courses that offer good professional opportunities .
It also seems that we need to standardise the different research models applied in the various Member States in order to be able to better compare the results and facilitate the aggregation of data , and to increase cooperation between national research institutions .
Of course , I also think that better incorporation of the experience and expertise of fishers into the process of drawing up scientific opinions , on which political decisions as part of the CFP are to be based , is vital .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I appreciate being able to talk about my own area of responsibility .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's report on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy and would also like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Rosa Miguélez Ramos , and the Committee on Fisheries , for their excellent work .
The report comes at the right moment with the preparation of the joint call on marine and maritime research under way .
It also coincides with the work programme 2010 for FP7 and the launching of the Green Paper on the reform of the Common Fisheries Policy , which includes a chapter on research .
The Commission agrees in principle with the main elements of the report .
We welcome the support expressed for the European strategy for marine and maritime research , where priorities are given to increasing capacity building , new infrastructure , new skills and education initiatives , developing integration across established marine and maritime research disciplines , promoting synergy between Member States and the Commission and new research governance .
The Commission acknowledges the importance of ensuring that a sufficient budget is allocated to fisheries and aquaculture research in FP7 , while maintaining a good balance with the other research sectors , particularly in agriculture , forestry and biotechnology : Theme 2 - KBBE , and Theme 6 - environment .
The annual budget for FP7 will progressively increase during the last three years of the programme and both the fisheries and aquaculture sectors will certainly benefit from this increase .
The Commission will pursue its effort to support research in line with the report by giving more visibility to fisheries and aquaculture research in FP7 , securing a good balance between research in support of policy and more basic research , reinforcing social science in the work programmes , promoting dissemination of results and encouraging more coordination between national research programmes .
Finally , the Commission will facilitate the integration of fisheries and aquaculture research in the broader context of its strategic research agenda , the European Research Area and the new European Union strategy for marine and maritime research .
Bearing in mind the initiatives I have just described , I feel that there is now a solid base upon which we can improve our fisheries and aquaculture sectors through innovative research within the framework programme .
They , in turn , will also benefit from improved cooperation and coordination of national research , through the different European Research Area initiatives and within the direction of the common fisheries policy .
If I can add a sentence of my own , I can guarantee to you that it is not more complicated than it was before , simply because the same people are working on it and the cooperation which we have with my colleague , Mr Borg , is really excellent .
I think that is how research should be done in the future .
We are cooperating across sectors and this is really bringing better results , which could hardly have been the case if this were done in a more sectoral way .
I honestly thank you for the great work you have done .
The item is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
Alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Reduced rates of value added tax ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs van den Burg on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC as regards reduced rates of value added tax - C6-0299 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) This report on reduced VAT rates has been on quite a journey .
In actual fact , there is no report left , because the two other big groups , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , failed to show up to the vote on my report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and , without any warning , voted against beforehand because they did not like the rejection or adoption of one amendment or another .
By doing so , they have put the support for this important Commission proposal at serious risk .
I regret this deeply because it has created completely the wrong impression about the European Parliament 's position .
Fortunately , they have backtracked and have now indicated that the Commission 's proposal can count on their full support .
We agreed that we would no longer bicker about these amendments during the plenary , but would instead accept Commissioner Kovács ' proposal with a resounding ' yes ' .
Unfortunately , Mrs Lulling nevertheless laboured under the misapprehension that she had to retable her rejected amendments , even though this is not really consistent with the text of the legislative resolution or the procedure we are following .
There is apparently here in this Parliament a variation on the Latin saying Quod licet Iovi , non licet bovi , what is legitimate for Mrs Lulling , is not legitimate for an ordinary MEP .
Without taking anything away from her divine status , I would urge you not to be distracted by this and to vote emphatically in favour of the legislative resolution during the roll-call vote at the end .
This is what this is all about , after all .
Together with the Commissioner , I count on your support and I assume that Mrs Lulling will realise that if she withholds her support from this resolution because things have not gone her way , she will be much worse off and will create the wrong impression that she is opposed to a reduced VAT rate .
This Parliament , and I am very proud of this , has a long tradition of supporting proposals for applying a reduced VAT rate for labour-intensive services .
What is more , this Parliament has taken it upon itself , on the initiative of one of my predecessors , Mr van Velzen , during the employment summit in Luxembourg in 1997 , to launch the proposal to use this low VAT rate as an incentive for employment by making these services cheaper , increasing the volume , and also by bridging the gap between illegal and legal working .
This employment target is , to my mind , very important again at this point in time .
It is my firm belief that the experiment has proven its effect beyond any doubt .
The previous Commissioner , Mr Bolkestein , was less convinced and was , like a number of Member States , sceptical .
He did not want to use employment as a target for tax policy .
He took the view that tax policy was not intended for this purpose .
Fortunately , the present Commissioner realises that this should be seen in a wider context , and I am delighted that he is now giving this experiment a structural dimension .
I would like to add a brief comment about the current situation .
In all honesty , I cannot imagine the Council , in the current situation , not giving its unanimous support to this proposal .
After all , it is keen to do something about this tragic job situation and the recovery of the European economy .
Tax measures , including a reduction in VAT , for example , in the building and renovation industry , in making homes and our cultural heritage more energy-efficient , and all kinds of other things , could give an incentive to the housing market , which is now very much at a stalemate .
At the risk of labouring the obvious , it is not the amendment tabled by the PPE-DE Group within the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection that puts the stress on energy efficiency .
This was already in the Commission proposal .
It was deleted in Amendment 6 and re-introduced in Amendment 7 .
This can only create confusion .
It is , however , clear that Parliament is very much in favour of energy efficiency .
We therefore hope that the Council will embrace the proposal by Commissioner Kovács and that this important vote today does not degenerate into internal squabbling .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I want to thank the European Parliament for its quick handling of this proposal , in the light of the request by the European Council of last December in the context of the European Economic Recovery Plan to settle the issue of reduced VAT rates in certain sectors by March 2009 .
I am pleased that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) has adopted a draft resolution approving the Commission 's initiative , and I hope that the plenary will take the same supportive line .
I would like to thank the ECON Committee and the rapporteur , Ms van den Burg , for their support .
Indeed , the quick adoption of this proposal is necessary in order to give certainty about the application of reduced rates to certain locally supplied , labour-intensive services that would otherwise have to disappear at the end of 2010 .
Moreover , it is important to ensure equal possibilities for all Member States in sectors such as housing and restaurants , because in these sectors Member States are currently not on an equal footing .
The current economic and financial crisis adds to the urgency of adopting and implementing this proposal .
It is not the moment to destroy jobs , which would be the case if the reduced rates currently applied in 18 Member States for labour--intensive services were not made definitive .
Moreover , it is important to make these reduced rates rapidly available to all Member States .
By incentivising consumer spending in areas such as the housing sector , reduced rates can have positive effects on employment , in particular amongst the category of low-skilled workers , who are precisely those who risk being laid off first in the current crisis .
In this context , I have already recommended to the Council to modify the proposed date of entry into force of the directive , in order to allow its application as quickly as possible after a positive decision is taken by the Council .
In the Council , the Czech Presidency is currently concentrating all its efforts on achieving a compromise concentrating on a limited number of sectors - labour-intensive , locally supplied services - to which reduced rates should be made available , as required by the European Council .
However , I have some comments on the amendments that have been tabled to this specific and limited proposal .
On Amendment 3 : on the exclusion of alcoholic beverages from the restaurant services , the Commission respected the coherence of Community policies , in particular the need for coherence between VAT and excise duties , but also considering the global health policy of the EU .
Contrary to some concerns , differentiating between food and non-alcoholic beverages , on the one hand , and alcoholic beverages , on the other hand , does not create a serious administrative burden for businesses .
Indeed , currently , seven out of the 11 Member States applying reduced rates to restaurant services exclude alcoholic beverages without any difficulty .
On Amendment 2 : as for the proposed extension of the scope of reduced VAT rates to machinery used by farmers , I consider this to be unnecessary .
This is because the VAT charged on equipment serving as input for the agricultural sector is not a cost to farmers because they have the right to deduct this VAT , like any other taxable person .
On Amendments 1 and 4 : concerning the amendments related to the addition of children 's clothes and footwear , I would like to remind you that the proposal under consideration is a restricted one dealing principally with locally supplied , labour-intensive services .
Therefore , further extensions of the scope of the proposal should not be considered in this context .
Furthermore , bearing in mind the attitude and concrete positions of some Member States , this extension would surely jeopardise the unanimous support , which we very much need , in the Council .
On Amendment 5 : the amendment relating to the addition of monuments and gravestones is not necessary , as a reduced rate for these supplies is already allowed by the current provisions when provided by funeral undertakings .
Moreover , renovation , repair , maintenance of cultural heritage and historical monuments is also covered by the current Commission proposal which is under consideration .
On Amendment 7 : I can assure you that the Commission is very keen to specifically address the question of the use of reduced rates in order to promote energy efficiency .
This will be done in the framework of the ' Green Tax Package ' currently under preparation and will be coming to the Council and Parliament in April .
In conclusion , I want to declare that the proposal would support housing , support the SMEs and save jobs , which is fully in line with the European Economic Recovery Plan .
It is not an obligation but an option : Member States can decide whether or not to apply it , so it even extends their tax sovereignty .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( SV ) This report demonstrates that taxation is a sensitive issue , and I respect that .
At the same time , however , I think that we could have handled the matter better in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which was responsible for the report .
We are now tabling the text for a resolution , which is a good thing .
It is , of course , extremely important that the internal market is not disrupted by unreasonable and unfair competition .
There are grounds for reiterating this at a time when State aid seems to be flowing in abundance .
However , the EU needs a more sensible view of how reduced VAT rates can be used to promote jobs and growth , particularly on the local market and for labour-intensive services .
This is what the Commission 's proposal is all about .
In other words , it is about more jobs , but it is also about tackling the black economy .
Thus , we need reduced VAT on the likes of restaurant services , care services for young people , the sick , the disabled and the elderly , hairdressing services and new goods such as audio books , which are very important in my own country , CDs , child car seats and babies ' nappies , as well as domestic services such as renovation and repair work and cleaning .
In the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , we fully supported the Commission 's line and added Amendments 6 and 7 under Mr Harbour 's name .
As an aside , I would like to say that it is not easy to understand how these texts and the voting procedure are handled in this Parliament .
In the first of these amendments , we emphasise the importance of reducing the ' black ' or ' grey ' economy .
In our other amendment , we aim to make it possible to lower the VAT rate on renovation and repair work in order to save energy .
During these difficult economic times , different means need to be used to boost the economy and a reduced tax may be an important method of achieving this .
Finally , Mrs Lulling 's promotion of alcohol comes up once again .
As usual , I will politely , but firmly , reject her call .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , today 's discussion - and the previous speakers have confirmed this - is taking place in very unusual circumstances , since we do not have a report for the plenary as would normally be the case .
I want to make things quite clear : it was an ill-assorted majority that voted against the report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
My group voted against this report , although we fully support the principle of extending the application of a reduced rate of VAT even beyond what the European Commission is proposing .
That is because all of our amendments have been rejected by the socialists and the liberals .
We had made a great effort to compromise .
We accepted all the socialist rapporteur 's proposals .
She did not think it was worth making the slightest effort to accept any of our proposals .
The regrettable , but at the same time inevitable , result of the vote should not , therefore , be surprising , Mrs van den Burg .
I would like to offer you some friendly advice to change your attitude in future because as the Romans used to say , errare humanum est , perseverare diabolicum [ ' to err is human , but to persist is diabolical ] .
Let us , however , come back to the matter in hand .
For the plenary my group decided to retable some amendments that came from the Members of the committee that is knowledgeable on the subject .
These amendments are important , and it has been said very clearly , Mrs van den Burg , that no one can prevent a Member from proposing amendments to a document or to a resolution .
The most important of our amendments concerns applying reduced rates to alcoholic beverages in restaurants .
It is not , Mr Schmidt , a way of encouraging alcoholism .
That is ridiculous .
If the Commission 's proposal were accepted , restaurant owners would have to apply two different rates of VAT .
It is complicated and it is not justified .
Long live red tape .
Believe me , if you do not vote for Amendment 3 , I know how to inform the whole of Europe 's catering sector - and it is large - that your position has prevented the application of a reduced VAT rate on all its services .
I proposed that food and all drink should be taxed at the same reduced rate , if it is applied .
To me this is just common sense and I think that we could all support this proposal .
Why complicate matters ?
Why look for public health issues where there is no reason for there to be any ?
Madam President , my group supports the extension of reduced VAT rates and we urge our governments to take this issue forward .
Our fellow citizens already had high expectations in this matter at this time of economic crisis and the daily catalogue of bad news .
This measure supporting the food industry is becoming increasingly necessary , Madam President .
We want Europe to be recognised for its flexibility ; that would indeed be a positive sign .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , as you know , the European Parliament recognises that your job is difficult .
It is not easy here , but when you are in the Council , it is worse , because there you have to work with unanimity .
I hope , therefore , that everyone here will behave responsibly and vote in a coherent way .
If we think that the Commission 's proposal is good , then we must support it .
Quibbling in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs led to certain amendments being singled out .
The socialists , behaving responsibly , once again , decided not to table any amendments at all in plenary , because in these matters , if we want to move forward all we in the European Parliament have to do is to give our overwhelming support , as far as possible , to the Commission 's proposal , if we consider it a good one , as is the case here .
We have had many debates about VAT , about subsidiarity and about the need for tax harmonisation .
VAT is the classic example of us all being on common ground .
Let us make use of it .
Renewing , on a temporary basis , this experiment with a reduced rate of VAT , when it aims at and contributes towards strengthening labour-intensive services - not necessarily the case for alcoholic drinks in restaurants - has shown us that this system works , so let us build on it .
Let us put an end to legal uncertainty and harmonise the basis on which Member States can intervene .
We will then have consistent goals , tax harmonisation where possible and encouragement for labour-intensive services .
Who could say no to that today ?
Who could say no to using tax reductions as an incentive to consistently improving energy efficiency in our housing stock ?
Today , taking into account what happened in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , taking into account the debate that I see taking place in the Council , I believe that we must support the Commission 's proposal very strongly - and I hope with the largest possible majority .
At this stage of the debate , trying to do better could turn out worse and I think that our fellow citizens would not understand our remaining in a state of legal uncertainty .
We need to consolidate this system that has been shown to work .
That is what our rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , is proposing , and that , I hope , is what Parliament will vote for overwhelmingly later on .
In this way , the Commissioner can take this strong message to the Council and obtain a final decision which will make it possible to consolidate this system .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since this is one of the last chances we will have for doing so , I should like , first of all , to thank Mr Kovács for the efforts , often disappointing , that he has made over a number of years here , in a situation where taxation is subject to the rule of unanimity , and thus subject to veto by the various Member States .
His task has been very difficult and he may feel not much has been achieved .
I hope with all my heart that his crowning achievement , this directive , will go through with solid support from Parliament .
The proof of the excellence of his work is that , when we wanted to improve on it in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we were unable to do so .
Some people were pulling in one direction , others in another .
Each side was convinced we could do better .
We managed to put through some of the better amendments , or so we thought , and then when we voted on the whole text , we realised that it was not going to work .
In the end , the group 's coordinators reached the consensus that Mr Kovács had probably struck the right balance .
Therefore , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , like the other two groups that have just spoken , will not be tabling any amendments .
You have struck the right balance and it is an intelligent one .
Some countries , today , faced with the crisis , are reducing all their VAT rates .
I am convinced that this is a mistake .
Member States need financial resources and this is not the time to go deeper into deficit in that way , even if you are doing so to stimulate the economy by encouraging spending .
Another reason is that trying to reduce prices by playing around with VAT leads to very high real rates at a time when the Central Bank is trying to lower them .
You are proposing another strategy and you are right : using VAT to make targeted reductions or targeted changes in relative prices .
These are the right choices , according to two criteria .
Firstly , subsidiarity .
In other words , you are targeting immobile products : local services and construction .
Your second criterion for targeting is labour-intensive services .
As environmentalists , we would have liked you to target the green revolution specifically : the sectors that are necessary if we are to emerge from the current crisis , which is the result of the industrial , liberal and productivist model that has dominated the world for more than 30 years .
We would have liked you to extend the reduced VAT rates to all goods covered by the Kyoto Protocol .
In practical terms , if we combine locally supplied with labour-intensive services , then this would mean that all the construction , all the insulation , and all the development of energy efficient buildings could be covered in the directive , and that is good enough for us .
I should like to say straightaway that we shall obviously not be voting in favour of Mrs Lulling 's argument .
Of course , it is diabolical to persist in error , but I think this saying could equally apply to Mrs Lulling herself .
We could also talk about Mandeville and private vice for public virtue .
We shall not encourage private vice through public vice and we will defend those countries that try to limit alcohol consumption .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL-NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Kovács , ladies and gentlemen , and especially Mrs van den Burg , it is regrettable that here in Parliament we are only able to agree on the Commission 's proposal and not on the actual report produced by Mrs van den Burg .
We would have gladly given our support to this report in its original version and we congratulate the rapporteur .
However , it has been rejected by the majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The decisive factor was the ' no ' vote from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
After the defeat in the individual voting , the committee was not then prepared to adopt any report at all , and this we very much regret .
When it comes down to it , we have a lot to gain from the Commission 's proposal for a directive .
We particularly welcome the fact that the Commission gives a positive assessment of the results of the Copenhagen study that was commissioned by the Commission itself .
The study proposes the retention , and even the extension , of reduced VAT rates on services and other activities .
This will secure jobs , particularly in small- and micro-sized enterprises , and bring whole sectors out of the underground economy and transform them into a regulated economic activity .
In the present crisis , this stabilisation is very important .
It will secure , and hopefully create , jobs .
Of course , we on the Left welcome the reduction in VAT rates as a matter of principle .
It is well known that , being an indirect tax , VAT hits those dependent on their wages and low earners particularly hard .
High and very high earners must bear a greater tax burden .
In recent years , these high earners have had their burden reduced in an irresponsible manner in all European countries .
The Commission 's proposal is intended to be a regulation of unlimited duration .
This , too , is welcome .
This will avoid the less than ideal situation of us having to extend the reduced tax rates every couple of years .
It will create legal certainty for the service providers .
As a German Member , I am particularly pleased that the German Federal Government has finally ceased its blocking of a permanent regulation .
This is something positive for a change from the grand coalition in the Federal Republic of Germany .
Of the amendments tabled , we support those that are in favour of extending the reduced VAT rates .
As regards the supply of alcoholic beverages , however , the existing regulations should remain in place .
As we know , higher VAT rates in this area will primarily serve to protect public health .
Member States should , therefore , be given a free hand in this regard , too . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , it is hard to believe that we are sitting here today discussing minor changes to the rules on value added tax when EU countries are facing the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression .
We continue to pretend that EU economies are not as badly contaminated by bad debt and slump as elsewhere , yet even in Germany output is falling at the staggering annualised rate of 8 % and government finances everywhere are stretched to the limit as tax revenue falls and welfare spending rises , and as governments take over private debts and try vainly to stimulate growth .
The worst case is probably Greece with its downgraded government debt still 94 % of GDP and with an interest risk margin that is today creeping back to 3 % .
Greece is going to need bailing out - but by whom ?
Not by the Germans , they say .
Even ardent supporters of the great EU project are now having to accept that if Greek debt is not underwritten , Greece may be forced out of the euro zone .
Probably of even more serious concern is the huge exposure of several euro zone countries to defaulting debts of Eastern Europe .
I almost feel sorry for the Commission .
For years it has been trying to do as it was told , upholding the rules on state aid , competition and procurement : rules which are essential components of the project but are now being ignored all round .
The saddest spectacle is Commissioner Almunia 's statement this week that he intends to invoke an excessive deficit procedure against Spain , France and Ireland because they have broken the budget rules of the Stability Pact .
Mr Almunia - please - the Stability Pact is broken .
It never did have any teeth .
Never mind that prudent government finances are essential to the survival of the euro , there is nothing else that these countries can do about their budgets .
No doubt the gestures towards European Union will continue , but democratically-elected governments have a primary interest in looking after the populations that elected them .
France and Germany have made it clear that their fiscal stimuli are there to help their own industries and workers .
Obviously coordination is only for the good times .
Economies are in dire straits all over the world .
Some of them will pull through .
If some European Union economies return to prosperity , it will not be thanks to the European Union or to its rules on VAT .
- Madam President , I do not hold with the notion that our economic salvation lies in tiny value added tax cuts , which are something we have had in the United Kingdom with , frankly , only a marginal positive impact .
However , I do accept that reducing the taxation burden is an instrument of economic stimulation .
Thus , this proposal - very modest as it is - whereby cuts in VAT would be possible in some sectors , is welcome so far as it goes .
I would have much preferred it to have gone further , beyond the realms of tokenism .
Extending it to embrace house renovations and repairs would be its greatest asset , because stimulation of the hard-pressed construction sector is very much required , and , to achieve optimum effect , that concession should not be restricted to energy efficiency measures only .
Construction needs help right across the board , not just on a selective basis .
Making it possible for Member States to act in making these marginal cuts in VAT would only be half the battle because in many cases - my own country included - hard-pressed Chancellors of the Exchequer with diminishing revenue resources will perhaps be hesitant and will have to be persuaded to act .
Even I would have to concede , though , that on VAT issues such as those covered by this report , they would at least not have the excuse of blaming Brussels if they failed to follow through on what is permitted under these proposals .
- Madam President , I wish to join the Chair of our committee in sympathising with Commissioner Kovács over the difficult situation he faces in trying to get tax issues through the machinery of the Community .
He has to use maximum political tact in order to achieve unanimity .
While I wholly support the subsidiarity principle and the sovereign right of Member States to set their own tax rates , I would suggest to Member States which have not as yet taken advantage of the facility for lower tax rates on labour-intensive , localised industries , to seriously consider doing so .
In the country I know best , where we have waltzed into a 2.5 % reduction in VAT across the board - with , as Mr Allister says , little or no obvious response or result economically - I would suggest that it would have been much more effective to have concentrated action in the particular areas of labour-intensive , localised industries and to have reduced the rate substantially from 17.5 % down to the lower rate of 5 % , or below .
That would have been much more effective in getting people into work , and activity going again .
Areas such as house renovations and extensions , energy-saving improvements , and perhaps gardening and landscaping work and , as Olle Schmidt said , care for the elderly and care for children , are the ones which would get people into work and probably increase the tax-take , because those people would be paying tax on their incomes as well .
It is a win-win situation to concentrate in those areas , and I urge all those Member States which have not yet taken advantage of this , including and especially my own country , to do so .
( PT ) The interest in adopting this proposal for a directive essentially lies in how it can help to invigorate local economies and support social action .
The application of a reduced rate of VAT will be very important in the housing sector , both in construction and in renovation , as it will allow Member States which adopt it to reduce the cost to the end user .
The provision of local services , particularly by small enterprises , may also benefit from this reduction in the VAT rate , thus securing and generating more and better jobs by encouraging the consumption of goods and services , and thus stimulating the economy itself .
Restaurant services , which are fundamental to the smooth functioning of local economies , and increased tourism may in this way gain a great deal at the local level from this reduction in the VAT rate .
These services , ladies and gentlemen , should not circulate within the European internal market , which will help to reduce the reservations of certain Member States , already expressed within the Council .
As a result , I cannot agree with extending this reduced rate to equipment , whatever the pretext .
The prudent way in which this proposal must be dealt with in the European Parliament should not give governments which have reservations about the European Commission 's proposal any pretext to use , in practice , the right of veto afforded to them on tax matters by European legislation .
As a result , Parliament must prudently reject any amendments without any real purpose which will only hinder the adoption of the text .
As has already been said in this House , not only is the very best the enemy of the good , but the person who wants it all may lose it all .
This proposal for a directive is important not only for strengthening local economies , but also to meet the repeatedly expressed ambitions of various Member States .
Let us therefore support the Commission 's proposal , as presented .
This was in fact the outcome of the vote , with my agreement , in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I welcome the work of the rapporteurs and call for the adoption of this proposal in the exact terms in which it came from the Commission and in which it was adopted in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
- ( LT ) The regulation of VAT reductions has long been an area demanding a systemic approach .
If a VAT reduction is permitted , all countries should have the right to benefit from it , not just those which won that right , but this is an issue for the future .
Right now we need to make urgent decisions in order to overcome the economic crisis .
The Commission 's proposal covers labour-intensive services and locally-based services for private end consumers , including restaurant services , which would not impede the proper functioning of the internal market .
However , there are doubts as to whether the restaurant services mentioned are just of local significance , or whether they would encourage different conditions of competition in border regions and have an impact on tourism .
My country Lithuania , battling with the economic crisis , abolished VAT reductions .
The government based this decision on the National Audit Office 's assessment that manufacturers benefit most from a reduction in VAT , but who benefits from an increase in VAT ?
Price growth , which is disproportionate to an increase in VAT , clearly shows who benefits .
This same idea was mentioned in the European Parliament when debating the reduction of excise duty on fuel .
Representatives of the European Commission maintained that this will not reduce oil prices .
I am pleased that the Commission 's proposal being debated is using a different evaluation of Copenhagen economics .
Perhaps the Commission could explain to everyone the concept of VAT , its influence on business and the consumer and indicate what measures exist , and moreover , whether they exist at all , to protect the consumer from the producer , as such cases are characteristic of many countries .
I agree that VAT reductions must be applied with the economic and social considerations that every citizen should be able to acquire the goods and services they need most and with the aim of strengthening and supporting locally-based services .
( PL ) Madam President , the EU is confronting the most serious economic challenge in its history .
Firstly , the crisis demands a thorough analysis of the errors inherent in the economic strategy that has been applied to date .
Secondly , we need recommendations for effective solutions for the future .
In this regard , the efficiency and effectiveness of the tax and VAT system should be analysed .
There is no doubt , however , that the tax system and the VAT rate should be drawn up in accordance with the principles of the freedom , independence and sovereignty of the Member States .
Our answer to a unified tax system is a resounding ' No ' .
The newly admitted Member States , which are often less developed and have a specific demographic structure , with large numbers of young people , require completely different tax policies to the old EU Member States .
Wherever possible , therefore , the VAT rate in the newly accepted countries should be as low as possible .
Meanwhile , as I myself have put forward , we need to pursue a reduction in VAT across the EU as a whole in the case of cultural goods , such as CDs .
On the other hand , we also need to propose a tax on financial operations and speculation .
What is happening today , as regards the capital transferred from the newly admitted Member States , is impossible to control and contradicts the fundamental ideological precepts of the EU .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the rapporteur , Mrs van den Burg , and the whole Parliament if it adopts this proposal aimed at amending the provisions of the VAT directive .
At last we have a proposal that will guarantee equal opportunities for all Member States and improve the working of the internal market as regards reduced VAT rates .
The proposal also intelligently respects subsidiarity ; it allows States to apply reduced VAT rates for labour-intensive and locally-supplied services , as well as those of social importance such as the construction of housing , personal assistance , and so on , and to small- and medium-sized enterprises in general .
I therefore share the rapporteur 's hope that this instrument sets out a fiscal system that will promote employment , increase productivity and reduce the underground economy .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has always taken a close interest in changes to VAT , whether for the purpose of harmonising rates among Member States , adjusting VAT to the economic climate , or taking account of temporary exemptions granted to new members of the European Union .
Although we have taken an overall view , our approach has until now necessarily been characterised by a need for flexibility in applying reduced rates , either to take account of the specific nature of manufacturing sectors , or for economic and social reasons .
The proposal in question is , however , aimed at extending the application of reduced VAT rates to a variety of services , including labour-intensive services , restaurants , locally-supplied services , construction and transfer of housing , and services provided for the disadvantaged .
Far from seeking to harmonise VAT in all Member States , the directive in question , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , intends to ensure equal opportunities for all Member States , while allowing them to set their own reduced rates .
As a consequence , consumers will be led to transfer certain activities carried out within the local or underground economy to the formal economy , thereby encouraging economic growth without distorting the operation of the internal market .
It should , however , be remembered that the majority of the services in question can already benefit from a reduced rate , if only in a limited number of Member States and for a limited period .
The debate remains open , though , on the application of reduced rates for environmental protection and energy saving , on which the Commission is to provide specific assessments , given the importance of these sectors to the EU economy .
( PL ) Madam President , in adding my voice to the debate on the Commission 's proposal for reduced VAT rates , I would like to draw your attention to the implications of this proposal in terms of combating the impact of the current crisis .
The Member States currently need effective instruments in order to protect jobs and prevent a recession .
Reducing the VAT rate for labour-intensive services meets this objective .
It lessens the burden placed upon SMEs , facilitates access to basic services and protects jobs .
At the same time , it neither distorts competition on the internal market , as it supports businesses providing local services , nor does it pose a threat to state revenue , since the introduction of lower rates remains a voluntary step .
This Parliament should support the Commission 's proposal and I wish Commissioner Kovács every success in convincing the entire Council to adopt it .
- ( BG ) The European Commission 's proposal to permanently reduce VAT rates for locally provided services , including labour-intensive services is timely and aims to achieve rationalisation and simplification through necessary changes , fine-tuning , and creating the potential for the growth in jobs in sectors with low-skilled workforces while restricting activities in the grey economy , retaining jobs and ensuring equal treatment of the Member States including their economic operators .
One of the main arguments for reducing VAT is that it will provide more favourable distribution of income after consumption , by reducing the cost of the shopping basket of low-income households and increasing that of high-income households .
The changes in the consumer structure also involve changes in the gross domestic product and productivity in the official sector , and the reduction of activity in the grey economy , such as services in the housing sector and other local services which are the subject of the present proposal by the European Commission .
Of course , the potential net economic benefit of reducing VAT rates depends not just on the characteristics of the relevant sector , but also of the specific economic environment in the relevant Member States .
For example , increasing the scope for reduced VAT rates in sectors with unskilled workforces presupposes an inflexible labour market , while in the food sector it presupposes significant differences in consumption between high and low-income households .
We should also bear in mind implementing VAT reductions will also reduce treasury revenue .
As a proportion of the gross domestic product , this ranges from half to one-and-a-half percent of the GDP of the different Member States .
Stable public finances during the current period of economic upheaval will allow the relevant governments to deal with the structural deficits in the current period .
Even governments which do have room to manoeuvre will make use of options such as cutting VAT rates for labour-intensive services in order to achieve other aims of their economic policies .
In view of the above facts and arguments , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats in Europe will support the Commission 's proposal to ensure there is sound support in the European Parliament for this important stage of the decision-making process .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal to extend the application of reduced VAT to certain labour-intensive services , restaurants and the maintenance and construction of buildings represents a great opportunity to have a positive economic impact on the market and employment in the context of the current severe economic crisis .
Competition will not be affected , rather this will be a chance to give a slight boost to production and to stimulate consumption , create new jobs and support businesses and families .
In my opinion , it would be beneficial to extend the scope of reduced VAT rates still further , for example to cover ' green services ' in order to encourage environmental policies .
As far as the text we are to vote on is concerned , I particularly welcome the proposal to cut VAT on babies ' nappies and children 's services .
This Parliament has asked the Commission and the Member States on several occasions to improve coordination between macroeconomic and social policies in order to redress the rise in new forms of poverty .
Indeed , we must not forget that approximately 17 % of European families are now living below the poverty line and one child in five is poor .
So we await the Council 's response - I hope that it will be able to adopt this proposal as soon as possible and open a wider and more ambitious debate on promoting fiscal policies for families as well as businesses , and perhaps come to extend reduced VAT to all children 's goods .
- ( LV ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , within the context of Europe 's Economic Recovery Plan , it is being recommended that the Member States should make a temporary reduction in VAT in order to stimulate consumption .
In addition , the European Commission has prepared a proposal to extend Member States ' options for applying a reduced VAT rate .
Wider application of a reduced VAT rate will not only foster economic recovery , but will also contribute to the creation of new jobs and reduce the black economy .
The amendments to the directive provide for a significant extension of the opportunities for applying reduced VAT rates .
This will apply to catering services , renovation and repair work for housing and places of worship , labour-intensive and locally-supplied services , children 's car seats , children 's nappies and so on .
From the economic and environmental policy viewpoint , it is also important to apply a reduced VAT rate to energy-saving materials and services connected with energy saving and energy efficiency .
I call upon the European Commission to speed up the consideration of this issue and to prepare proposals on these points as swiftly as possible .
These are welcome changes and demonstrate the European Union 's readiness to react quickly to the economic crisis to the limits of its capabilities .
I hope that the Council will also support these changes .
It just remains to urge the Member States to use these new possibilities in the application of reduced VAT rates . Thank you for your attention .
( ES ) Madam President , I am in favour of allowing Member States to apply harmonised reduced VAT rates on a permanent basis for certain services of social interest and labour-intensive , locally supplied services .
Measures of this kind are noted for providing citizens with greater purchasing power , improving the environment for SMEs and increasing their productivity , and strengthening the formal economy .
At this time of recession this can stimulate recovery , growth and jobs .
It will be beneficial to extend the reduced rates to babies ' nappies and equipment for people with disabilities , electronic books , environmental sewerage and recycling works , as well as all housing , places of worship and cultural and artistic heritage , restaurants , gardening and personal care services .
For this reason , while awaiting the next energy efficiency package , I support Mrs van den Burg 's report and trust that next month political agreement will be reached that will enable it to be implemented as soon as possible .


- ( EL ) Madam President , allow me to start , before I address the topic of the debate , to comment on the indescribable and painful attack by the euro-sceptics behind me on the euro zone and the Greek economy ; I refer merely to the statements by Mr Almunia and Mr Trichet , who have assured the House that there is no risk of cohesion in the euro zone , that our collective defences are not working and , as far as the Greek economy is concerned , may I inform Mr Whittaker that he needs to get used to the idea that we are still one of the few countries with positive growth and low unemployment , even in these very difficult times .
The euro-sceptics are anti-Brussels , anti-Frankfurt , now they are starting to be anti-everything .
Now back to report we are discussing today .
I wish to say that we need to look at this issue from two perspectives : from the perspective of when the whole story started , when we were not yet in a time of crisis , and from the perspective of the situation we are in now , with the biggest economic crisis striking deep into the real economy of Europe .
During the first stage , before the crisis , the idea was to focus on the few labour-intensive sectors , such as catering , because we had an impact here , mainly on high prices and the cost of living .
Now , however , with the crisis affecting many - if not all - countries , there is also the idea that Parliament , as the mouthpiece of the political views of society , should also make an effort to look at issues which were not covered at the time , at the beginning , such as the issue of agricultural machinery , which my group has the facility to propose in Amendment 2 .
As far now as these contradictions which we see on the left wing of Parliament are concerned , where certain issues , such as the energy aspects of buildings , are a good idea , but others , such as agriculture or alcohol , are a bad idea , I think that the best judge is the citizen , not the politicians .
- Madam President , the European Parliament 's priority today has to be to get the largest majority possible for the Commission proposal to extend and make permanent the option to lower VAT rates on labour-intensive services .
This is not an issue for political grandstanding or , indeed , promoting pet projects .
Thousands of low-skilled jobs are being lost every day in every Member State .
Low VAT rates have been shown to encourage employment in services , assist SMEs , and , indeed , make the informal economy less attractive .
Our responsibility here today is to deliver a strong message to our Member State governments to get on with it .
The construction sector badly needs a boost - renovations , repairs , and installations will help achieve energy efficiency , as well as helping employment .
Restaurants , childcare and care of the elderly would also benefit .
I support the rapporteur 's approach and I hope that my own government , the Irish Government , will opt into this proposal , which unfortunately it has not done to date .
( RO ) Last year , the Commission proposed an economic recovery plan which is proving to be very difficult to implement .
Member States and their governments must be proactive , especially during this crisis .
Member States can apply reduced VAT rates to the provision of natural gas and electricity , heating or cooling systems , to children 's clothing and footwear , to books , newspapers and magazines , pharmaceutical products and medical equipment for the disabled , as well as to restaurant services .
It only requires vision and political will .
The building sector has the largest number of jobs .
I strongly support the need to allow Member States to apply reduced VAT rates to renovation and repair works aimed at boosting energy saving and energy efficiency .
As rapporteur for the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive , I even proposed reduced VAT rates for products in the energy efficiency and renewable energy sector as well .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal and I believe that this measure is particularly important , especially during the current crisis .
- Madam President , I also welcome the Commission 's proposal and believe it to be an intelligent response to the crisis that we are facing .
Like others who have spoken , and indeed the previous speaker , I strongly believe that this proposal must apply to energy conservation , and energy conservation measures must be a high priority of the Member States .
Reduced costs for home installation would achieve three of our cherished objectives .
It would reduce environmental damage by reducing CO2 emissions , it would assist in job creation , because energy conservation measures are very labour-intensive , and thirdly , in the long run , it would of course lower energy bills for the elderly and other vulnerable people in society .
I hope that the Commission will press ahead with this proposal , that it will persuade the Member States that so far remain unpersuaded and that it will emphasise that , as part of the proposal , you can interpret energy conservation measures as being included .
( PL ) Madam President , the phenomenon dubbed the shadow economy is a very grave problem , impinging on every economy to a greater or lesser extent .
It is primarily caused by excessive tax burdens imposed by the state , which encourage entrepreneurs to engage in undeclared business activities , bypassing the fiscal system .
This results in enormous budgetary losses and an increase in unregistered employment .
In this context , the initiative for introducing a long-term reduction in VAT rates for labour-intensive services and locally-supplied services deserves particular support , as it provides businesses with an incentive to operate within the formal economy .
Moreover , it will promote an increase in both productivity and employment .
At the same time , however , potential adverse effects , such as the introduction of lower rates to promote free competition within the internal market , or a decrease in budgetary revenue , should be taken into account .
Therefore , balanced and transparent measures are essential , since obtaining the trust of our entrepreneurs is a prerequisite for the project 's success .
- ( LT ) I would like to talk about value added tax from two points of view - social justice and competitiveness .
From the point of view of social justice , value added tax is regressive , that is , people on lower incomes face a greater burden and therefore we then have to increase social subsidies .
Perhaps we should do the opposite .
From the point of view of competitiveness , Europe is a service economy .
We can compete globally by using our services to attract tourists and , undoubtedly , it is important that those services are cheap .
Compared with the USA , our sales tax , or value added tax , is much higher .
Perhaps we should consider this perspective when talking about a more coordinated tax policy , although , clearly , all of this is a matter for Member States to decide .
( PL ) Madam President , the effects of the crisis are already clearly visible in the Polish housing construction industry , despite the country 's extremely pressing need for housing .
Poland has still not fully restored the housing stock which was destroyed during World War II .
I support a significant reduction in VAT rates , particularly with regard to the construction of housing , as well as thermo-insulation and renovation projects , primarily , though not solely , with the aim of protecting jobs and ensuring social cohesion .
An aging population in Europe means that we must pay particular attention to the provision of care and I would therefore draw your attention to the need to reduce the VAT rate in that sector as well .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am fully aware of the shortcomings of the Commission proposals : I know that they are modest and limited in scope .
However , I am also aware of the reluctance of certain Member States vis-à-vis reduced VAT rates in general and the extension of reduced VAT rates in particular .
This reluctance certainly sets limits on our ambitions , as we need unanimity in the Council .
For the Commission , there were two options .
The first was to table an ambitious proposal , which is fully justified , and to run the risk that it might not be approved by the Council .
In that case , 18 Member States that currently apply reduced VAT rates on locally supplied , labour-intensive services should return to the standard rate .
An increase in VAT rates from 5-6 % to 20-25 % would certainly result in the bankruptcy of thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises and in the loss of tens of thousands of jobs at a time of serious economic crisis .
Therefore , the Commission has chosen the other option , which hopefully will receive unanimous support in the Council : saving jobs , giving support to the SMEs and boosting the building sector .
As many speakers mentioned the issue of energy efficiency , I want to repeat what I already said in my introductory remarks : in April we will come forward with a proposal that will be focused on climate change and energy efficiency issues , a review of the Energy Taxation Directive , and the Green Tax Package proposing reduced VAT rates for green services that are aimed at increasing energy efficiency .
I have been encouraged by the understanding and support expressed in this plenary debate .
I thank Parliament for its support and understanding , and in particular the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Ms van den Burg for their work .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I am happy with this debate .
We have almost unanimous support for the Commission 's proposal and I hope that will encourage the Commissioner to have follow-up discussions with the Council on this issue .
I also noticed that many of my colleagues have indicated that they would like their governments to use this instrument nationally in the present crisis .
I would like to emphasise once again , particularly regarding energy efficiency and renovation of buildings , that this is a very good instrument .
I hope that even the Council will try to coordinate activities on this and decide that together they will take these measures , because then it would be an extra boost , an extra impulse , for the economy .
We have a task at national level to convince our national colleagues and our national governments that they should use these more targeted and more effective instruments in the present situation in order to create more employment - not only to save jobs but also to create new jobs - to legalise the shadow economy and to make these local services available to the many consumers and citizens who will be feeling the effects of the crisis .
I think it is an excellent instrument and I very much hope that the Council will accept this decision and maybe - even more - coordinate and decide to apply this instrument .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 19 February 2009 .
( The sitting was suspended at 10.10 a.m. pending voting time , and resumed at 10.35 a.m. )

Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) For our fellow citizens , tax harmonisation constitutes a basic safeguard in the fight against economic inequalities and social dumping in Europe .
I call on the Council to work towards this .
For all that , it seems clear that measures related to derogations on normal VAT rates may in some cases , taking into account the particular economic and social circumstances of each Member State , be able to act as a lever on locally-supplied services , including labour-intensive services .
I am also very pleased that this proposal for a directive allows the application of reduced VAT rates to some services linked to the construction sector as well as catering services .
I also wish to thank the Commission by emphasising the technical adaptations that we and the members of the Intergroup on Family and Protection of Childhood have always wanted , concerning the application of reduced VAT rates to essential products for children , in particular babies ' nappies which represent a very significant item in the budgets of young families .
The same goes for some equipment for people with disabilities ; these provisions are heading in the right direction .
in writing . - ( PL ) The issue of taxation falls within the remit of the Member States .
However , common frameworks should apply , guaranteeing that the law is both transparent and free from ambiguity , and that the market operates cohesively and smoothly .
The inhabitants of my country are unable to comprehend why a zero VAT rate is applied to children 's items in Ireland and Great Britain and a rate of 3 % applies in Luxembourg , while Poland is expected to increase its VAT rate from 7 to 22 % .
Now , when we are undergoing a painful economic crisis , it is essential to seek solutions which will promote increased productivity and a growth in employment .
Harmonising VAT exemptions is thus highly recommended , in order to avoid any discrimination that might result from the implementation of this tax .
Reducing VAT rates for labour-intensive services on local markets , including the catering sector , should be considered as a very positive step , particularly for SMEs and artisans .
Naturally , the lower costs will also benefit consumers .
Furthermore , the initiative should restrict the ' informal economy ' and undeclared labour .
I therefore support the simplified and clarified regulations of Directive 2006 / 112 / EC , the VAT Directive , since their objective is to place the Member States on an equal footing .
The current situation demonstrates that it would be worthwhile to conduct an objective debate on the rationale of applying the tax on goods and services in the form hitherto employed .
There are countries , the USA for example , where other forms of indirect taxation are applied and which , generally speaking , lead to a more dynamic , flexible and efficient economy .
I spoke of this some time ago .
in writing . - ( FR ) At a time when Europe is faced with a major economic crisis , adopting this report will make it possible to revitalise the services sector by asking Member States to accept a reduced rate of VAT of 5 % on labour-intensive services and locally supplied services .
This would affect the catering trade , home-care services and hairdressing salons .
Exemptions from VAT need to be harmonised because there are currently 11 Member States that are entitled to derogations and apply reduced rates for the catering trade for example .
A reduced VAT rate will benefit employment levels and will help in the struggle against the hidden economy as well as stimulating local demand .
In my opinion , we should go further still and also consider a reduced rate for cultural products such as CDs or videos , as well as environmentally-friendly products such as green cars or energy efficient buildings .
The reduced VAT rate for some sectors will help to boost SME activity , while encouraging the establishment of an economy that is more environmentally friendly .
In July 2008 , the European Commission adopted a proposal on applying reduced VAT rates after 2010 .
The sectors targeted in particular by this measure are labour-intensive services and locally provided services for local consumers such as services linked to the housing sector and the renovation of residential heating systems , as well as services linked to personal care and the catering industry .
The proposal is also part of the Small Business Act initiative which aims to stimulate activity in the more than 23 million small- and medium-sized enterprises in the EU with a view to developing the economy and creating new jobs .
I support this report because carefully targeted VAT rate reductions offer specific benefits such as a means of creating a tax system which promotes jobs , increases productivity and reduces the black economy , especially in the current financial crisis .
I call on the Commission to closely monitor the application of these reduced VAT rates in Member States in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Today 's debate and vote on reduced VAT rates will send a clear signal to the Council along the lines stressed by the Intergroup on Family and Protection of Childhood over the years .
Among the various amendments that I support , I would highlight those directly affecting children 's goods .
This is an important measure which supports families with children and allows them to reduce the unfair tax burdens to which they are subject .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to resolve , once and for all , the nonsense of the nappy debate and the issue of car seats for babies .
However , it is also important , as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has argued , for the reduced VAT rate to be applied to children 's footwear and clothing throughout the EU , and not just in the Member States which had this system in 1991 .
We call on the Council not to lag behind Parliament and to go as far as necessary in understanding the legitimate needs and aspirations of families .
I hope that we are finally at the successful end of a long struggle and demand by civil society and Members of this House to defend the tax rights of families who should not be penalised because of the children they rear , support and educate .
in writing . - ( PL ) Levelling the playing field for all the Member States , and increasing transparency and cohesion within the borders of the EU , are matters of crucial importance , as reduced VAT rates will enable the internal market to function smoothly
It should be possible for the Member States to apply a reduced VAT rate to locally-supplied services , for example .
The application of the reduced rate should most certainly be left in the hands of the Member States , while the tax system should promote employment , increase productivity and curb the ' informal economy ' .
It is equally essential to harmonise VAT exemptions , as this will help to ensure a balanced and uniform approach on the part of the Member States and avoid the adverse effects of applying those VAT rates .
A reduction in the VAT rates for locally supplied and labour-intensive services should have a positive impact , since it will reduce the level of undeclared labour , whilst also reducing its appeal and increasing demand within the formal economy .
However , if the reduced rates are to avoid damaging the smooth functioning of the internal market , they should be applied with care .
The political objective to reducing the VAT rate is to reduce undeclared labour and potential administrative burdens .
in writing . - We are in a global crisis , but a global crisis that is hitting locally .
The turmoil started across the Atlantic , but has affected our cities , towns and villages .
Measures introduced to combat the crisis and to rehabilitate our damaged economies must not concentrate solely on the national and international but on the regional and local also .
Extending reduced rates of VAT to locally supplied and labour-intensive services is a positive step in this direction .
It is a pragmatic decision that has the potential to stimulate local economy and encourage local enterprise and industry without interfering with the proper functioning of the internal market .
I hope that this measure can be part of a wider approach adopted by the EU and national authorities to make it attractive to buy local , to build up local economies and consumer confidence .
Such an approach would impact positively on small and medium enterprises .
This is crucial as SMEs make up 99 % of all European enterprises , but the sector is suffering in the current climate .
I believe that strengthening and supporting the SME sector is key in getting our economies back on their feet and building for a sustainable economic and social future .

in writing . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for years , the European Parliament has been arguing for the extension of the list of goods and services to which a reduced VAT rate may optionally be applied The call for a reduced VAT rate in the Member States for things including catering services , building renovations and small repairs , such as shoe repairs , has become ever more pronounced .
There are three reasons for this .
The European harmonisation of rules on VAT rates promotes transparency and the smooth functioning of the internal market , and works as an incentive in the fight against illegal work .
Moreover , at long last we can look forward to ending a time of consecutive experimental periods , and to legal certainty for a problem that has been around for a very long time .
In times of crisis , these measures can be an important incentive for a number of industries .
This is why I am endorsing the van den Burg report , and I look forward to a political agreement on 10 March in the ECOFIN Council .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Action plan on urban mobility ( vote )
2 .
The petitions process ( Amendment of Title VIII of the Rules of Procedure ) (
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , I apologise for interrupting the vote .
Under Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure , I am asking the Members of the House to postpone the vote on the Onesta report with regard to the petitions process , as this matter is at present being dealt with in the Conference of Presidents in the context of the reform of the procedures of the House .
The Conference of Presidents will discuss the very specific reform issues dealt with in the Onesta report at a meeting on 5 March 2009 , and I am asking that , if possible , the vote on this report be postponed until the Strasbourg part-session in the second week of March .
I am asking the House to approve this if possible .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , let us try to be precise .
This report amends our regulation , or rather clarifies it , in order to make it clear how petitions to the Committee on Petitions are received or not received , how information is given to petitioners , and so on .
It was approved unanimously , with one vote against I think , in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I do not think , therefore , that this report is very controversial .
There is , however , one article in which we had agreed to make it clear that if and when the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , petitioners would simply be informed if a petition that were submitted not to Parliament but to the European Commission - you know , those petitions with millions of signatures - were connected to their petition .
If I understand rightly , it is that article , because of the reference to a possible future treaty that causes a problem .
Personally , I can live with postponing it until 5 March ; I can even live with a ' speed vote ' withdrawing that amendment .
On the other hand , it would be very regrettable if we could not tidy up our regulation on this point when there have been so many problems in the past .
I am in your hands , ladies and gentlemen .
3 .
Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) (
4 .
Amendments to the Convention on future multilateral co-operation in the North-East Atlantic Fisheries (
5 .
A special place for children in EU external action (
6 .
Implementation of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC : informing and consulting employees in the European Community (
7 .
Social economy (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , I propose that in paragraph 12 the words ' the components of the ' be added before the words ' social economy ' , and the words ' as a third sector ' be deleted , as written in the list here .
8 .
Mental health (
9 .
Follow-up of the energy efficiency national action plans : a first assessment (
10 .
Applied research relating to the common fisheries policy (
11 .
European professional card for service providers (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( SV ) I have been here long enough to know how pleased the Members of this House will be if I give a two-minute speech .
I do not , therefore , intend to do this and will instead merely say that this is an example of how , once again , we are trying to make it easier for citizens to work and establish themselves across borders .
This can form a nice little example to use in the election campaigns and I am therefore pleased .
The committee was unanimous on this issue and so that is all I have to say .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes . )
Welcome
Colleagues , I am pleased to inform you that members of a delegation of MPs and other visitors from the State Great Hural ( Parliament ) of Mongolia and the Mission of Mongolia to the European Union have now taken their seats in the distinguished vistors ' gallery .
It is a great pleasure to welcome them here today .
( Applause )
The members of the delegation are in Brussels with their counterparts in the European Parliament on the occasion of the 7th European Union-Mongolia Interparliamentary meeting .
This meeting has strengthened the important and growing relationship between the European Parliament and the Mongolian Parliament .
The visitors have also had an opportunity to experience , at first hand , the workings of our Parliament .
I wish the delegation well for the remainder of their stay in the European Union .
1 .
Community action in relation to whaling (
2 .
Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory (
3 .
Sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals (
4 .
Crop statistics (
5 .
Rules on aromatised wines , aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product cocktails ( Recast version ) (
6 .
Reduced rates of value added tax (
7 .
Alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners ( vote )
8 .
Annual Report ( 2007 ) on the main aspects and basic choices of the CFSP (
Voting time ( continuation )
Formal sitting - Czech Republic
- Mr President of the Czech Republic , I would like to offer you a warm welcome to the European Parliament .
President of the Czech Republic . - ( CS ) I would like first of all to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak in the European Parliament , which is one of the key institutions of the European Union .
Although I have been here several times before I have never had the chance to address a plenary session .
I therefore appreciate the chance to do so today .
The elected representatives of 27 countries with their broad spectrum of political opinions and views constitute a unique audience , just as the European Union itself has been a unique and essentially revolutionary experiment for over half a century , attempting to improve decision making in Europe through transferring a significant part of the decision-making process from individual states to pan-European institutions .
I have travelled here to see you from Prague , the capital city of the Czech Republic , the historic heart of Czech statehood and an important place in the development of European ideas , European culture and European civilisation .
I have come here as the representative of the Czech state , which in its various forms has always been part of European history , a country which has often played a direct and significant role in the making of European history and which wishes to continue doing so .
The last time a Czech president addressed you from this place was nine years ago .
He was my predecessor in the role , Václav Havel , and it was four years before our accession to the EU .
Some weeks ago , the Czech premier , Mirek Topolánek , also spoke here , this time as the leader of the country holding the presidency of the Council of the EU .
In his speech he focused on specific topics arising from the priorities of the Czech presidency and the problems currently confronting the countries of the European Union .
This enables me to approach you with themes of a more general nature and to talk about things which , at first sight , are possibly not as dramatic as the solutions to today 's economic crisis , the Russia-Ukraine gas conflict or the situation in Gaza .
In my opinion , however , they are of absolutely fundamental importance for the development of the European integration project .
In just under three months , the Czech Republic will commemorate the fifth anniversary of its accession to the EU and it will do so in a dignified manner .
It will mark the anniversary as a country which , in contrast to some other new Member States , does not feel disappointed over the unfulfilled expectations of membership .
There is nothing surprising about this and there is a rational explanation for it .
Our expectations were realistic .
We were well aware that we were joining a community created by and composed of people and not some sort of ideal construct developed without authentic human interests , ambitions , opinions and ideas .
Interests and ideas are to be found at every step in the European Union and that is how it should be .
We saw our entry into the EU , on the one hand , as external confirmation of the fact that we had relatively quickly , over the course of almost fifteen years since the fall of communism , become a normal European country again .
On the other hand , we considered - and we still do consider - the chance to participate actively in the European integration process as an opportunity to benefit from the advantages of an already highly integrated Europe while at the same time contributing our own ideas to the process .
We assume our own share of responsibility for the development of the European Union and it is precisely with this in mind that we accede to our presidency of the Council of the European Union .
I firmly believe that the first six weeks of our presidency have convincingly demonstrated our responsible approach .
I would also like to repeat out loud and very clearly here in this forum , and for the benefit of those of you that either did not know or did not want to know , my conviction that for us there was not and is not any alternative to EU membership and that there is no relevant political movement in our country that would be able or willing to undermine this position .
We have therefore been taken aback recently by the repeated and growing attacks against the Czechs based on the completely unfounded assumption that we are looking for a different integration project than the one we joined six years ago .
This is not the case .
The citizens of the Czech Republic take it for granted that European integration has a necessary and important mission , which broadly speaking they understand in the following way .
It is firstly to remove barriers which are unnecessary and counterproductive to human freedom and prosperity , hindering the movement of persons , goods and services , ideas , political philosophies , world views , cultural plans and behavioural models , which , over the course of time , have formed between various European countries for many different reasons , and secondly to exercise joint care for public assets that are of significance to the entire continent or such projects as cannot be implemented effectively through just bilateral agreements between two or more neighbouring European countries .
The effort to implement these two aims - removing barriers and making rational choices over issues that should be resolved at European level - is not and never will be completed .
The various barriers and obstacles still remain and there is definitely more decision making at the Brussels level than there ideally should be .
There is certainly more of it than people in the various Member States want .
You are surely well aware of this too , ladies and gentlemen .
I would therefore like to ask in a rhetorical sense whether you are certain each time you vote that you are deciding on a matter that should be decided on in this house rather than closer to the citizens , in other words within the individual European states ?
Other potential impacts of European integration are also discussed in today 's politically correct rhetoric , but these tend to be of a secondary and irrelevant nature .
They have more to do with the ambitions of professional politicians and the people connected with them than with the interests of ordinary Member State citizens .
I said earlier that for the Czechs there was and there continues to be no alternative to EU membership - and I am delighted to emphasise and underline this - but that is only half of what I would like to say .
The other half comprises the completely logical assertion that a range of potential and legitimate alternatives exists in respect of the methods and forms of European integration , just as it has done throughout the past half century .
History has no end point .
To claim that the status quo , in other words the current institutional arrangements of the EU , is a dogma forever beyond criticism is an error which unfortunately continues to proliferate , even though it is in direct conflict both with rational thinking and with the entire historical development of over two thousand years of European civilisation .
The assumption that an ' ever closer Union ' , in other words an ever deeper political integration of the Member States , represents the only possible and correct course of development for the European Union is a similar error , which is postulated a priori and is therefore similarly beyond criticism .
Neither the status quo nor the postulate of deeper integration bringing indisputable benefits can or should be regarded as sacrosanct by any European democrat .
It is unacceptable for them to be enforced by persons regarding themselves as , to quote famous Czech writer Milan Kundera , the ' keepers of the keys ' to European integration .
Moreover , it is obvious that the institutional arrangement of the EU does not constitute an end in itself but is a means to achieving real ends .
These ends are nothing less than personal freedom and a set of economic arrangements that will bring prosperity .
In other words , market economics .
Citizens of all Member States surely want these things but , over the course of the 20 years since the fall of communism , it has repeatedly been confirmed that they are wanted more and cared about more by those people who have experienced tyranny for a large part of the twentieth century and who have suffered the effects of a dysfunctional , centrally planned , state-run economy .
Those people are quite legitimately more sensitive and more aware of manifestations or tendencies pointing to ends other than freedom and prosperity .
And those people include the citizens of the Czech Republic .
The current system for decision making in the EU differs from the historically tried and tested traditional form of parliamentary democracy .
In a normal parliamentary system there is a group supporting the government and another supporting the opposition .
However , unless I am mistaken , this is not the case in the European Parliament .
Here only one alternative exists and those who dare consider other alternatives are labelled enemies of European integration .
In my part of Europe , we lived until relatively recently under a political system where no alternatives were allowed and where no parliamentary opposition therefore existed .
We learned through bitter experience that where there is no opposition , there is no freedom .
This is why political alternatives must exist .
That is not all .
The relationship between the citizens of the various Member States and their EU representatives is not the normal relationship between voters and the politicians representing them .
There is more distance between EU citizens and their representatives than is the case within individual Member States , and not only in the geographical sense of the word .
This is often referred to in various ways : the democratic deficit , the loss of democratic accountability , decision making by the un-elected but selected officials , the bureaucratisation of decision making and so on .
The proposed changes to the status quo contained in the rejected European Constitution or the not-so-different Treaty of Lisbon would only exacerbate this defect .
Since there is no European demos , no European nation , this defect cannot be solved by strengthening the role of the European Parliament .
This would only make the problem worse and would lead to Member State citizens feeling ever more alienated from EU institutions .
The solution does not lie in trying to breathe new life into the current form of European integration , or in trying to suppress the role of Member States in the name of a new multi-cultural and multi-national European civil society .
These are attempts that have failed in the past because they were not natural historical developments .
I am afraid that attempts to speed up and deepen integration and to shift decision making affecting living standards of Member State citizens more and more to a European level may have repercussions endangering everything positive that has been achieved in Europe over the past half century .
Therefore let us not underestimate the concerns felt by many Member State citizens that decisions affecting their lives will be taken elsewhere and without their involvement and that their ability to influence the decision-making process is very limited .
The success of the EU to date is due among other things to the fact that the opinion and voice of every Member State had the same weight in voting and thus could not be ignored .
Let us not allow a situation to come about in which Member State citizens live their lives with a resigned feeling that the EU project is not their own , that it is not developing as they would like and that they are obliged merely to resign themselves to it .
We could very easily and very quickly find ourselves once again living under conditions we now habitually regard as a thing of the past .
This is also closely connected to the question of prosperity .
It must be said openly that the current economic system of the EU involves constraints on the market and a constant strengthening of a centrally-controlled economy .
Although history has given us ample evidence that this path leads nowhere , we are following it again .
The level of restrictions on the spontaneity of market processes and the level of political regulation over the economy are constantly increasing .
This development has recently been further reinforced by incorrect interpretations of the causes of the current financial and economic crisis , attributing it to the market rather than to the actual cause which was , on the contrary , political manipulation of the market .
It is again necessary to remember the historical experience of my part of Europe and the lessons we have learned .
Many of you will certainly be familiar with the name of the 19th-century French economist , Frederic Bastiat and his famous Petition from the Manufacturers of Candles , which is still a well-known standard text to this day , illustrating the absurdity of political interference in the economy .
On 14 November 2008 , the European Commission approved a real petition from manufacturers of candles , not just a Bastiat-style fiction , and imposed a 66 % tax on candles imported from China .
I could not believe that a 160-year-old literary essay had become a reality , but that is precisely what happened .
The inevitable consequence of introducing such measures on a broad scale is that Europe will fall behind economically and that economic growth will slow down or even grind to a halt .
The only solution lies in the liberalisation and deregulation of the European economy .
I say all this because I care about a democratic and prosperous future for Europe .
I am trying to remind you of the fundamental principles upon which European civilisation has been built for centuries or millennia .
Principles whose validity is timeless and universal and which should therefore still apply in today 's EU .
I firmly believe that the citizens of the various Member States want freedom , democracy and economic prosperity .
The most important thing at this point is clearly to make sure that we do not equate the open discussion of these matters with an attack on the very idea of European integration .
We have always believed that being allowed to discuss these serious questions , being heard , defending everyone 's right to put forward alternatives to the one correct opinion , no matter how much we may disagree with them , is precisely the kind of democracy that was denied us for four decades .
We , who have involuntarily spent the greater part of our lives witnessing how the free exchange of ideas is a basic precondition for a healthy democracy , believe that this precondition will be honoured and respected in the future as well .
This represents an opportunity and an irreplaceable way of making the EU freer , more democratic and more prosperous .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , it was your wish to address the European Parliament .
We have gladly granted this wish .
Mr President , in a Parliament of the past you would certainly not have been able to give that speech .
( Applause )
Thank goodness that we live in a European democracy in which we can all express our opinions .
( Applause and uproar )
Ladies and gentlemen , we are one European family and , as in any family , there are differences of opinion .
Mr President , I agree with you when you say - I only wish to make a few comments , but I feel obliged to do so - : we are a human community .
A human community is characterised by having advantages , strengths , disadvantages and weaknesses .
Together , we must strengthen the strengths and eradicate the weaknesses .
I also agree with you when you say that we need to ask whether each decision that we take could perhaps have been taken elsewhere .
Yes , but our national capitals must also ask themselves whether many decisions should not be taken in our towns and communities rather than at national level .
( Applause )
Allow me to make one final comment relating to our Parliament 's understanding of itself : we thank you for your acknowledgement that this European Parliament is an important institution .
If we were not so influential , we would not currently be the legislator in 75 % of cases and we would not be a co-legislator in almost 100 % of cases with regard to the Treaty of Lisbon , and then it would , in fact , be the case that decisions in Europe would be made by bureaucratic means .
However , it is now the European Parliament that decides .
( Sustained applause )
Thank you , Mr President , for your visit .
It was an expression of our diversity of opinion in Europe and of our European democracy , and in a democracy it is ultimately the majority that counts .
I would urge us all to continue , together , to stand up for this democracy , for Europe , for unity and for peace .
( Standing ovation )
1 .
European Security Strategy and ESDP (
2 .
The role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Madam President , I apologise for taking up everyone 's time and delaying lunch but I do it only once in 10 years so maybe you will not mind .
In fact I am like the Member of the Finnish Parliament who rose to speak only once in all his years in the Finnish Parliament and what he said was : ' could you close the window , please ' .
I would like to say a few words in relation to these three reports , which are all part of the same package , which includes the reports by Mr von Wogau and Mr Saryusz-Wolski .
At the moment we are looking for solutions to the financial crisis .
That was self-inflicted and we are saying this crisis must not be repeated , but what about the raison d 'être of the European Union to prevent wars and human crises ?
They must not be repeated either , and they do not fall on us like the roof in the Parliament building in Strasbourg .
They need not be repeated , but only on the condition that we work together .
I remind you that peace is not the monopoly of this side of the House .
Peace belongs to everybody .
Peace-building is our common duty .
It is a little bit like love .
It is unconditional .
We have to be idealistic in this life .
We have to look far away , like when we run in a forest .
You do not look at your feet when you run in a forest .
You look far away and then you know where you are going and you automatically put your feet in the right place .
That is what we have to do .
We have to be brutally honest and remember why the EU was formed : it was to build peace .
All I am saying now is that , if we are to respect the inheritance of Mr Monnet and our forefathers , we should belong to just one party and that party regarding peace-building is called the ' " Yes I Can ” Party ' .
Only then will history give us a standing ovation .
And the window is open .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I am sorry to take up Parliament 's time .
I simply wish to delete the following sentence regarding the EU Operational Headquarters from paragraph 29 : ' emphasises that the proposed EU Operational Headquarters provides the solution to this problem ; ' .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I have two oral amendments to this paragraph .
The first is that the words ' human rights and the rule of law ' be put in the first place in the points of concern and not the last .
Please support this more European position .
The second oral amendment concerns the second part of the paragraph , on Russia as a democracy in an undefined future .
As there are very sovereign concepts of what democracy means , it would be better to add something .
Therefore , my oral amendment is to insert the following after the word ' democracy ' : ' and refuses military threats as a means of political pressure on its neighbours ' .
As we cannot support such policies , please support this amendment .
3 .
The Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean (
4 .
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument (
5 .
Financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation ( EC ) 1905 / 2006 (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to refer this report back to committee under Rule 168 ( 2 ) .
Both this democratically elected Parliament and the European Commission see the necessity to cover some modest forms of cooperation between the EU and developing countries , actions that are not strictly speaking poverty alleviation , such as exchange programmes between universities here and there .
The budget for development is not meant for this kind of cooperation , but some Members insist on using a legal base that would lead us to finance these actions with the development budget while that is precisely what we seek to avoid with this report .
We did not reach an agreement .
If Amendment 1 is adopted , then this report would become incoherent and contrary to the interests of the world 's poorest people .
I consider , therefore , that we should refer this report back to the Committee on Development in order to agree on a legal base having the support of a clear majority of this House .
( DE ) Madam President , there are indeed differences of interpretation .
The legal interpretation by the Committee on Development is opposed to the interpretation by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and it is opposed to the legal interpretation by the legal services of our Parliament , to the case law of the European Court of Justice and to the view of the Council and the Commission , and therefore we , in the majority , insist on using the legal base as set out in this amendment .
I ask therefore for the application for referral back to committee to be withdrawn .
As regards the substance of the report there are no differences of opinion .
We agree on the substance , it is only with regard to the legal interpretation that there are differences and a referral back to committee will not change those differences .
Madam President , I would like to second the rapporteur .
Following the debate we had here yesterday , and in view of the Commission 's contribution , I very much agree that we need more discussion and that we need to find a proper legal basis for actions that are not pure ODA actions - but are still very important for development cooperation with developing countries - and therefore do not fall under the other instruments regarding cooperation with industrialised countries , nor under the current DCI .
It is also very important to freeze the money foreseen for the DCI for cooperation in accordance with ODA criteria , so I support our colleague Mr Berman in his request for more time for consideration .
6 .
Organisation and operation of the Publications Office of the European Union (
Voting time ( continuation )
- ( DE ) Madam President , the last time that there was such a demonstration of opinion during a visit by a Head of State or Government , the President of this House intervened very strongly .
On that occasion it related to a matter that was also of concern to him personally , namely the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today , when the President , the sovereign elected President of a country , is speaking and is interrupted and hassled to such an extent by the socialists , the President does nothing .
Do you know what this is ?
This is not democracy , this is despotism .
I demand that the appropriate measures be taken .
- Madam President , it is in my opinion seriously demeaning to the dignity of this House , and indeed to that of the Czech Presidency , that the formal visit of President Klaus should be undermined by allowing the occasion to be used to disseminate materials to influence the outcome of the Lisbon Treaty ratification process .
If this is permissible - and I would ask for your ruling on this - the logical conclusion will be a recipe for chaos in our corridors , with those on each side of the argument filling this House in increasing numbers and competitively and aggressively pursuing their points of view .
Please ensure that the Bureau does not allow it to happen again .
( Mixed reactions )
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much .
I suggest that you all listen to what I have to say before you start your shouting .
A fellow Member , who often recalls things differently , has just spoken .
I would like to remind you of the following : when Prime Minister Sócrates wanted to speak here in connection with the signing of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , he was unable to do so by virtue of being shouted down . President Klaus was able to speak here unhindered .
That is the difference between us and them .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
We now continue with the vote .
Explanations of vote
( Oral explanations of vote )
Madam President , I rise to explain the fact that I was one of only five Members of this House who voted against this resolution .
I did so , not because I do not want economic help to go to those who have suffered tragically in this crisis and assistance to be given to them for that reason - that is absolutely right - but simply because this resolution , like most resolutions on the Middle East , is defective .
It is defective because it does not establish the rights and wrongs of the situation and , without that , the resolution cannot and should not be allowed to pass .
The fact is that we are where we are in Gaza because of the actions of the Hamas group , who have rained bombs and rockets on a sovereign state , which has the right - as has every sovereign state - to react and defend its own people .
Until the responsibility for this crisis is made clear in resolutions of this Parliament , then the resolutions themselves cannot be effective .
The time has come for this Parliament to say to Hamas : ' Recognise the State of Israel , negotiate with it , end the anti-Semitic views of your charter and then we can start the peace process ' .
( PL ) Madam President , it is essential that adults take more responsibility for the conditions faced by children and the opportunities they have in life .
I am thinking , for example , of armed conflicts in which children are embroiled , where they are often forcibly conscripted against their will , face mortal danger and hunger , and lack access to medical care .
However , I voted against the report , owing to its pro-abortion stance .
It is particularly perverse to appear to act in the interests of children whilst , in fact , promoting initiatives that would deny their very right to life .
- Madam President , it was the great philosopher , Whitney Houston , who once said : ' I believe that children are our future .
Teach them well and let them lead the way .
Show them all the beauty they possess inside . '
What is interesting about this report is that for the first time we are , in many ways , looking at the key for future development .
We are notably looking for child development and child education , and not only female child education - if you teach the woman , you teach the family - but also primary education .
There is a simple flaw in our thinking on primary education : we always seem to think that the state has the solution .
I urge all my colleagues in this House to look at the solutions that have been highlighted by the E. G. West Centre at the University of Newcastle , which looks at private education for the poor .
Where the state has failed to provide education for poor children , parents themselves have come together , finance non-state education and , therefore , are also able to subsidise the non-working poor .
I would urge everyone to look beyond the state for solutions to help the very poorest in our society .
Madam President , I voted against the Kinnock report with a very heavy heart , because the problems the report identifies are very important .
Tragedies are happening all over the world , but the basis of her report is the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and we move on , we do more and more on the basis of a very flawed convention .
This convention was always a compromise ; it was always a mixed bag .
On the one hand , it has many good things , but , on the other hand , it has some absolutely inappropriate parts .
It was written in 1989 , in an age before we knew about predators .
For example , it has rights to full access to the mass media in all communication to children and vice versa .
So we have based this whole report on a very flawed convention , which also places the state as the only arbitrator of the best interests of the child , as opposed to the family , which in fact sets the parents as the nurturers and the guardians but not as the determiners of rights .
So I had to vote against it .
It also includes abortion , which has no place in children 's rights .
- Madam President , I think our constituents would be interested to see how far we have gone in these fields .
In the run-up to the Irish referendum , and then especially after it , we were told that the European Union was not really progressing towards a common foreign policy and that it certainly was not meddling in the field of abortion law , and yet here we have those two issues tied together in one report .
Despite all the promises we made about listening to the people and tailoring our policy to suit their demands , we have carried on regardless .
There was a very neat illustration of that earlier this morning when we listened to the President of the Czech Republic .
He made a speech that was in some ways almost platitudinous .
He made the very banal and unarguable point that governments are better when there is an opposition and that we should tolerate other points of view .
What was the reaction of this Chamber when he said that we should tolerate other points of view ?
People in the PSE and the PPE-DE Groups turned their backs and walked out .
Not only will they not respond to alternative points of view , they cannot even bear to listen to them .
What neater example could you have of this House 's attitude towards the electorates out there ?
If you think I am wrong , prove me wrong : hold the referendums you promised , put the Treaty of Lisbon to the people .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the transposition of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC on European works councils and consulting employees is particularly crucial in a time of crisis , when it is necessary to ensure that management goes hand in hand with social responsibility , and to ensure that , where jobs cannot be saved , the employees are guaranteed training and a smooth transition to their new workplace .
The framework Directive should be implemented in Member Countries by both sides .
I therefore voted in favour of Mr Cottigny 's report .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the social economy plays a vital role in local and regional development .
As set out in the Lisbon Strategy , it forms an integral part of a common employment policy .
Statistical data has shown it to be an influential sector of the economy , creating new jobs within the EU and providing jobs for 11 million people , which represents almost 7 % of the labour force .
It is also worth emphasising the role played by the social economy in rural areas , promoting economic development by regenerating declining industrial zones and creating and sustaining new jobs .
We can therefore see that the social economy has become an indispensable part of ensuring stable and sustainable economic growth , by virtue of the crucial role it plays in solving new social problems .
Its role has also been strengthened in traditional sectors , such as commerce , agriculture and industry .
It is therefore essential to incorporate the social economy into all strategies which aim to foster industrial and socio-economic development .
( PL ) Madam President , it is not only the crisis which has brought about the need to identify the market presence of associations , foundations , cooperatives and the entire social economy , which involves citizen stakeholders and has both a social , and also a measurable economic dimension , in terms of its contribution to GDP .
However , now , in particular , every job created , every new improvement in the quality of social services has a specific value .
I support the report and anticipate a new approach on the part of the European Commission , involving organisational and financial support for the social economy , such as the simplification of the administrative procedures for obtaining EU funding .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
- Madam President , in reading through this report , I came across the definition of a social economy and I was interested to see what the definition was .
It pointed out two things that struck me : one was social objectives over capital , and the other was the principles of solidarity and responsibility .
Furthermore , it talked about democratic control by members .
No mention was made of the willing and free exchange between buyer and seller in order to produce the profit which can then be reinvested to create jobs .
What could be more social than making a profit to re-invest to create jobs for your population ?
When we start to focus on so-called social needs , rather than the need to create profit and the need to make sure that we can create jobs and spread wealth throughout an economy , we end up in the trap that Hayek , the great Austrian economist , - and also Ayn Rand - warned about at the beginning of the last century where we forget about profit and start on the slippery slope to serfdom .
For that reason , I was against this report .
- Madam President , I am delighted that we continue to take mental health with some seriousness and some priority here in this House .
It must remain high on the EU health policy agenda , as one in four people will experience a depressive illness at least once in their lives , and by 2020 it will be the most common illness in the developing world .
However , I am afraid that in Member States , including my own country , we have the theory ; we talk the talk .
Our mental health policy is articulated in a document called A Vision for Change and many of the calls for action in the rapporteur 's report are stated in our national policy or , indeed , are enshrined in our legislation .
But I am afraid the coalface delivery of mental health services continues to be completely unfit for purposes .
There is a huge disconnection taking place between the theories and the reports , and we are always - particularly in my country - an action plan away from action .
I am afraid mental health services and delivery to those who require them continue to be the Cinderella area of most mental health policies in all our Member States .
This must change .
- Madam President , one in four people experience mental health problems at least once in their lives .
Eight of the ten leading causes of disability are mental health issues , and mental health problems have a huge effect on those not directly affected .
Therefore , we urgently need to update mental health legislation that can properly develop an awareness of the importance of good mental health .
The message I have been trying to get across in my constituency in the West Midlands is that the media , the internet , schools and workplaces all have a vital role to play in making the public aware .
However , we also need more research into the field of mental health and the interaction between mental and physical health problems , and an explanation of how mental health initiatives might be funded under the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund .
This needs to be undertaken urgently .
Employers also need to promote a healthy working climate , paying attention to work-related stress and the underlying causes of mental disorder at the workplace , and tackling those causes .
I was therefore very pleased to support this report .
( PL ) Madam President , 90 % of suicides are the result of mental health problems .
The number of people affected by depression and other civilisation-related diseases , caused by stress and the pace of life , is markedly increasing .
The ageing of Europe 's population is linked to an increase in the number of people who fall victim to age-related diseases .
Efforts to prevent and diagnose mental health problems , combat exclusion and stigmatisation , and provide support for sufferers and their families , are significant steps towards protecting the health of our society .
I have therefore given Mrs Tzampazi 's report my heartfelt support .
- Madam President , I did vote for this report but I felt that there was a missed opportunity here - missed in committee - to include electro-shock and to once and for all recommend a ban on this most torturous of treatments that we still use in many countries in Europe .
Another area where I have serious questions is the growing movement towards assessing all small children for mental health problems and medicating appropriately .
Although this report fortunately does not go that far , there is a casual reference to the assessment of children .
Many children , if you assess them as children , would not seem normal and yet they are developing well .
The key question we must ask ourselves , in the face of growing mental health problems , is : why is it getting worse , particularly in the face of suicide ?
Are we not allowing human society to exist in a way that enables people to develop and live in a normal , healthy way ?
If mental health is getting worse , we have to give a lot of thought to the society we are creating .
( PL ) Madam President , I am opposed to the resolution and I have voted against its adoption for the following reasons :
1 ) there is a crisis and the EU , and other institutions , face serious problems which require their attention ;
2 ) the cost of investigating the alleged flights , which was borne by the EU , amounted to millions of euros and exposed cases involving those who bestially murder , and have murdered , innocent people , including EU citizens , and it is our duty to protect our citizens and provide assistance to victims of terrorism .
The extremely emotional attitude towards the flights , the apparent creation of yet another , costly political scandal , had no added value and placed the burden of cost on European taxpayers .
They say that learning comes at a price and we have paid that price .
We should , therefore , bear this in mind this when addressing similar problems in the future .
- Madam President , I very much welcome , and indeed I supported , Mrs Miguélez Ramos ' report on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
This calls for improved and advance use of applied research .
The issue of conservation and maintenance of our fishery stocks is a vital one in which it is very difficult to get a balance and call it right .
Using the most up-to-date science as a tool can only help the task ahead of us .
However , much as I appreciate the report , I would like to caution that in these straitened economic times we must be aware of duplication of effort and avoid same .
It will be necessary to ensure that we are not , at Community level , doing what is best left to Member States .
- Madam President , when we look at applied research , I wonder whether we should be looking into the defects of the common fisheries policy .
Let us not forget that for over 40 years we have had a common fisheries policy that was designed to run European commercial fishing on a sustainable basis , but has failed to deliver either environmental sustainability or development of the fishing industry .
We should also contrast this with the property-rights-based approach of countries such as New Zealand , where the Government recognised that by giving people a vested interest in maintaining a resource they would fight to preserve it .
We can also look at Iceland , where we have a successful market-oriented approach with individual tradeable quotas .
Of course , we can apply new technology and new research with all the will in the world , but if we continue to have a system where , despite all the innovation , governments tell individual fishermen in detail how much they can fish , then all the applied research will be a complete waste of time .
It is time to scrap the common fisheries policy .
- Madam President , in the current difficult economic climate , this report brings the kind of joined-up thinking that is desperately needed .
VAT reductions will help most the people who need it most - the people who earn less than others .
I believe this report is also about job creation , and that is why I supported it .
It is about making sure that jobs do not disappear into the black economy .
I hope that it will be implemented quickly , especially in my region , in the West Midlands .
We also need to stress that we have to allow Member States to reduce VAT on certain items to battle against climate change .
Providing people with an incentive to ' buy green ' is exactly the kind of market-based instrument that will reap the greatest benefits .
VAT reductions across the world are used to encourage people to buy energy-efficient and environmentally-friendly fridges , freezers and other goods that use up large amounts of energy , and cheaper prices for these products will help the less well-off .
My Government in the UK has taken the lead on this issue by reducing VAT by 2.5 % until 2010 , and I hope other Member States will also follow suit .
- ( FR ) Madam President , the only battles we are sure to lose are those we do not join .
By retabling our amendments aimed at a fairer application of a reduced VAT rate - especially , for example , on children 's clothes in the new Member States , so as to put them on the same footing as the older ones - we wanted to send a strong message to the Commission and the Council .
We succeeded on all counts , with one exception .
Our amendment seeking to spare the catering trade from the bureaucratic burden of having to apply two different rates of VAT on one bill was narrowly defeated .
Our group wants to leave the choice of applying a single reduced rate for the catering trade to Member States which opt for a reduced rate .
This is not possible with the text of the Commission 's proposal because this text imposes the application of different rates depending on whether the service at your local restaurant does or does not include a glass of beer or wine .
How can anyone understand that ?
I recognise that some of my fellow Members had not properly understood the significance of our amendment , but the strong signal sent by Parliament on this issue remains .
It was worth the effort .
Madam President : I am very pleased that I and my group have persevered in fighting the left 's evil obsession with confiscatory taxation .
We have to put an end to this ' tax-mania ' .
- Madam President , this is perhaps the most difficult issue for a free society .
How does a free society combat those who wish to destroy it ?
That is the decision we have to make .
It has to be a balance .
Of course , we must protect human rights and of course the legal process should prevail , but sometimes in the world in which we live it is necessary to take extraordinary measures .
We cannot in Europe , and in the countries of Europe , rely solely on the United States to do it .
We are presently witnessing in my country a trial of eight people who have been accused of trying to blow up eight airliners .
They did not succeed .
I do not know whether they are guilty , but that plot did not succeed .
We have to ensure that a free society has the right tools and the right measures in order to fight and defeat those who would destroy it .
If we fail to do that , we fail the people whom we are sent here to represent .
- Madam President , I recommended to my delegates from Ireland to abstain in the votes on both the von Wogau and Vatanen reports , because Ireland has retained its neutrality .
Our position in relation to that and our involvement in the European Union have been written into protocol .
Ireland has a triple-lock system in relation to deploying troops to any other country : it must be under a UN mandate , and it must be approved by the government and by the Oireachtas , the Irish Parliament .
That will continue under the Lisbon Treaty .
That does not mean that Ireland is not prepared to play its part , especially in peacekeeping roles .
For instance , we have been very involved in Chad , with great success .
This is under a mandate from the UN : the UN could not provide the troops , and the European Union stepped into breach .
That mandate expires on 15 March 2009 .
It has been a very successful 12 months from a peacekeeping point of view , and long may that continue .
Ireland will continue to make its contribution in a peacekeeping role , whether this is through the UN or the European Union .
- Madam President , I voted in favour of paragraph 43 of the Vatanen report only because of our colleague Mr Landsbergis 's oral amendment to it that the House finally approved .
I still prefer , and declare my support for , the original version of paragraph 43 that ends , ' security proposals that the Russian Federation has recently advanced would seriously undermine the credibility of EU security structures and strike a wedge into the EU-US relationship ' .
Having attended this week 's session of the EU-Russia Cooperation Committee , I came to the conclusion that we cannot ignore what our colleague , Mr Vatanen , has called a ' brutal reality ' - namely that the strategic goal of the Russian Federation is still , alas , to split the EU partners into good and bad ones and to emasculate NATO .
- Madam President , I welcome the opportunity to speak briefly on this , because of the absolutely brilliant address that we heard from the President of the Czech Republic .
He reminded us of the history of his and many countries , particularly in Eastern Europe , which were occupied by the Nazis and then , effectively , by the Communists .
That really demonstrates the vital importance of NATO and its maintenance .
The European Union has a role in society , but the principal defence of the West is still NATO , and it is so because it is our alliance with the United States of America .
One of the disturbing features of this Parliament , which I find on so many issues , is an undercurrent and sometimes overcurrent of anti-American feeling .
It was the United States that ensured that we are speaking here as free peoples , and NATO guarantees that vital alliance for the years to come .
- Madam President , for most of the last century - and most of this century so far - NATO has helped to keep the peace .
Yet there are those in this House who seek to undermine the very institution that has allowed us to cooperate with our American and Canadian colleagues and a number of EU countries .
How are we seeking to undermine this ?
Not only by attacking NATO , but also by duplicating its structures .
We are now seeing a situation where US and Canadian personnel can sit with EU experts in one room , under the umbrella of NATO , and then there will be exactly the same meeting , excluding our US and Canadian colleagues , which is part of the EU structure on defence .
What a needless waste of resources and time .
We must remember the vital role that NATO has played , but we must also not forget that part of NATO is burden-sharing .
If we move towards a purely EU defence mechanism , then it will be mostly Britain and France who share that burden , while others hide behind it .
Let us not forget the vital role that NATO has played - long may it continue .
- Madam President , I should just like to add to what I have said already .
We are looking for the Lisbon Treaty to be approved in Ireland .
We will retain our neutrality under the Lisbon Treaty - the Treaty will not change our position on that .
We will continue to play our role in peacekeeping , once we have a United Nations mandate , and if the European Union steps into the breach , we are quite prepared for , and have in the past been involved in , that peacekeeping role .
- Madam President , I should like to explain that with regard to Amendment 17 , which should have come after Amendment 45 , both myself and my colleague next to me , Mr Grech , wanted to vote in favour of the demilitarisation of space , but unfortunately we were innocently distracted at that moment by a third party and we did not vote in this way .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 14 years on from the Barcelona conference and the launch of the EuroMediterranean partnership , the balance seems entirely unsatisfactory .
Shall we assess the results achieved thus far in relation to the financial commitments made ?
I believe it is Parliament 's legitimate right and the Commission 's duty to do so .
Shall we pretend not to know that civil rights are completely unprotected in that Euro-Afro-Asiatic region ?
That equal opportunities are still lacking ?
That respect for religious freedom is still a dream ?
That economic and social growth are still marking time , while people trafficking grows at an alarming rate , increasing the flow of illegal immigrants , above all on the coast in my local area , in southern Italy , and Sicily ?
Under these circumstances , rather than representing an opportunity , creating a free trade area will accentuate the divide between rich and poor regions .
To conclude , Madam President , although we have doubts about paragraphs 29 and 36 , my group voted in favour of the report on the Barcelona process as an act of hope in the face of so much scepticism .
( PL ) Madam President , the Eastern Partnership is a project of the utmost importance , which is why I am eager to see it become a priority in terms of European Union foreign policy .
I would like to mention four aspects on which we should , in my opinion , focus our activities .
Firstly , we need to promote democracy and human rights , as this will ensure greater political stability in those states and guarantee the protection of fundamental rights .
Secondly , we need to focus on economic integration and opening up the free trade zone .
This will afford all those concerned broader access to new markets , thus increasing the demand which is so vital during a crisis .
Thirdly , we need to focus on ensuring security and stability in Europe .
In this instance , I am referring solely to Europe 's energy security .
In order to prevent another blockade of gas supplies to the EU and ward off the temptation of using monopolistic exporters , our primary requirement is greater diversity in terms of energy sources and transit networks .
Fourthly , we need increased mobility and a cultural and educational exchange .
These two areas of activity are interconnected and complement each other .
They have an impact on the EU 's positive image in the East , and increase mutual tolerance and cooperation in the field of research and development .
We need a separate debate on the subject of the Eastern partnership in the European Parliament .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , it was with great pleasure that I voted for this report , and I wish Mrs Dahl well on her maternity leave .
Unfortunately , she could not be here today .
It was a telling point that as a member of her IND / DEM Group she was willing to be rapporteur to play a constructive role in the work of our Parliament , unlike her colleagues from the so-called UK Independence Party , who , I believe - if I am right - have never been rapporteurs for any report in this Parliament in the four-and-a-half years since a motley crew of 12 of them were elected at the last European elections .
All they do is snipe from the sidelines , usually on the basis of ignorance , because they are unwilling to get engaged in the real work that we are doing across the political spectrum in this House to ensure that the legislation and policies the Union produces are properly scrutinised and are a fair balance of interests of our different Member States and our different political viewpoints .
All they want to do is be negative and oppose everything .
What a contrast between them and their colleague .
( Written explanations of vote )
in writing . - One of the most important weapons in the arsenal of the rights of European citizens is that of petition .
We have adopted further measures of a procedural nature .
When a petition is signed by several persons , the signatories shall designate a representative and deputy representatives who shall be regarded as the petitioners for the purposes of implementation of the rules .
The withdrawal of support for the petition by the petitioner is being remedied .
It may be possible for petitions and correspondence with petitioners to be drafted in other languages used in Member State ( such as Basque and Galician ) .
The committee responsible must establish the admissibility or otherwise of the petition .
At the request of only quarter of the members of the committee the petition becomes admissible .
Alternative means of redress may be recommended .
Petitions , once registered , shall as general rule become public documents .
Ladies and gentlemen , I support Mr Onesta 's report , but appeal to you to consider two issues when considering petitions .
The first concerns the presentation of the facts and the second concerns the fact that only the petitioner can address the Commission , and not the respondent party .
In petition No. 0795 / 2007 , the facts are presented in a biased and tendentious way , and the party affected - the Bulgarian Orthodox Church - was not asked to present its position .
During its fact-finding mission in Bulgaria from 27-30 October 2008 , the Commission did not ask for the views of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church .
Thus attempts to vilify the Holy Orthodox Church in Bulgaria and to undermine its right to self-determination are promoted by the incorrect judgment on the petition submitted by the ' Alternative Synod ' , thereby creating conditions to mislead the members of the Commission .
The petitioners are seeking a way to decide the fate of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church not through church canon which has taken shape over centuries , but through the intervention of a secular institution - the ECJ in Strasbourg .
Following the schism within the Church which was resolved by canonical process in 1998 , the ECJ in Strasbourg has issued a judgment on the same internal ecclesiastical problem in a matter in which the Bulgarian Orthodox Church was not even a respondent .
The truth is that no secular court has the authority or the ability to rule on ecclesiastical disputes .
I voted in favour because I support the revision of the Rules of Procedure with regard to the petitions process as I feel that this will make improvements to the procedure in terms of evaluating and classifying petitions .
The new rules will facilitate the processing of petitions , thereby supporting citizens ' interests .
One of the important changes made to the petitioning process is the emphasis on the petition 's privacy or confidentiality .
Privacy relates to the petitioner 's name and personal details , while confidentiality relates to the subject of the petition .
The new rules leave the decision whether to waive privacy or confidentiality , or both , up to the petitioner .
Furthermore , I feel that the declaration of petitions ' admissibility by qualified majority is extremely important as the right to petition is a vital citizens ' right based on primary legislation , and this right must not be restricted by a politically motivated decision .
According to the revised rules , if the committee responsible fails to reach a consensus on the admissibility of the petition , it is declared admissible at the request of at least one quarter of the members of the committee .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Onesta 's report on revision of the Rules of Procedure with regard to the petitions process .
I agree with him that it is not necessary to make substantial changes to the existing rules ; rather we should improve their transparency and clarity .
I also believe that we need to emphasise the importance of the technological factor as enormous progress has been made in this area in recent years , but that it is equally important not to neglect respect for individuals and their fundamental right to privacy .
in writing . - ( EL ) The proposal for a regulation on a European Research Infrastructure aims to promote the application of the so-called fifth freedom , the freedom of movement within the Union of researchers of knowledge and science , and focuses on the criteria of competition , performance and the adaptation of scientific research to the choices and objectives of capital , as expressed in the EU anti-grassroots , anti-labour Lisbon Strategy .
' Free access ' to the research infrastructure of every Member State provides an opportunity for the direct exploitation by capital of every research activity funded by the Member States , for the control and programming of research to be restricted to the mechanisms of the EU and the monopolies , for the idea of excellence based on market rather than scientific criteria to be promoted and for research to be concentrated in fewer and fewer research centres / companies .
The application of intellectual property criteria , the direct link between research and production via company specialists , the operation of centres according to private-sector financial criteria and the need for them to be funded by companies and sponsors brings research within the maximum profit rationale .
Research should be carried out solely with state funding .
It should be fairly divided between scientific sectors and it should be oriented towards satisfying grassroots needs and improving the lives of the workers .
The report addresses the objectives of the 2007 Green Paper on the European Research Area : ' Developing world class research infrastructures ' .
On the mandate of the Council , the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures ( ESFRI ) started developing a coordinated approach for activities in the field of research infrastructures in April 2002 .
Although it is indicated that the objective of the legal framework proposed is to facilitate the establishment of these infrastructures , experience has shown that it is generally the more developed countries which benefit most .
In our opinion , there is no doubt about the importance of simplifying the establishment of world class research infrastructures in Europe with the added value that these may represent in terms of improved quality of research and education , the ties established between public and private researchers and , in general , their positive socioeconomic impact .
However , we do not agree that the establishment of large-scale infrastructure should only allow the creation of more opportunities to achieve research excellence in certain areas , meaning that certain countries will be the main beneficiaries of this process .
We want everyone to be able to benefit , even those who cannot set up centres of excellence , to ensure the democratisation of research in the most diverse areas .
That is why we decided to abstain .
in writing . - ( SV ) There are many good reasons for simplifying the opportunities for cooperation on research across national borders within the EU .
The proposal for a new common legal entity could be a step in this direction and the wordings of the proposal indicate that the Commission has a sound awareness of the importance of , and special working conditions involved in , research .
However , the June List is immovable in respect of the issue of tax policy .
Control of tax bases is an absolutely fundamental national matter .
I have therefore voted against the Commission 's proposal and the report .
Research infrastructures are playing an increasingly important role in the advancement of knowledge and technology by offering unique research services to users in different countries .
One aspect which can be regarded as extremely important is that these services , by unlocking the research potential of every region in the EU , will attract young people to science , thereby playing a key role in creating an effective environment for research and innovation .
In less developed countries , however , and I am thinking of Romania too when I say this , limited resources and the complexity of the technical and organisational aspects present a major difficulty in terms of creating a European Research Infrastructure .
As a result , given that these structures will only be able to evolve in developed countries , we must ensure that we are not going to witness a new brain-drain to these centres from inside the European Union .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the proposal for a Council regulation on the Community legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure ( ERI ) , because I believe the Member States need to adopt a coordinated approach to developing a united policy in the field of research , given that the current national and international legislative framework is inadequate for the Union 's ambitious targets for this sector .
I also think it is crucial to act to improve the interface between industry and academic research , which is still too weak in some EU countries , including Italy .
Finally , this research , in my opinion , should be characterised by better interconnections between public and private researchers , because it can only herald real and balanced technological progress if all those involved work together .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Morillon report amending the North-East Atlantic Convention .
Nevertheless , I do not consider that the EU should be a contracting party to this Convention ; rather I believe that the individual fishing nations of the North-East Atlantic should join Russia , Iceland and Norway as independent contracting parties .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Morillon 's report on amendments to the Convention on multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic Fisheries .
The North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission , created by the said Convention , plays a valuable role in the conservation and optimum utilisation of fisheries resources , and also seeks to encourage cooperation among the States party to the Convention .
I welcome the amendments made to the Convention as they establish procedures for settling disputes and will improve the management of fisheries resources .
It is therefore a useful tool for developing the fisheries industry .
in writing . - With regard to the motion for an EP Resolution on a special place for children in the EU external action , I am in favour of the report as it refers to the rights of the most vulnerable in the society , namely children , but in line with this I do not agree with particular clauses which may condone abortion .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I voted for the report .
The future of children is a topic requiring and deserving of our attention .
Children themselves are asking to be consulted and want their opinions and perspectives , their hopes and dreams to form part of efforts to build a world suited to them .
In pursuing the Millennium Development Goals we should pay greater attention , in all our strategies , initiatives and funding decisions , to the priorities set by children for children .
As an MEP , I have had the opportunity to travel to developing countries and work with major non-profit organisations such as UNICEF , and I am aware that there are many urgent issues to be addressed .
If we want to achieve sustainable improvements for children we must focus on the main causes for infringement of their rights , but above all we must collaborate with all of the voluntary organisations that over the years have become well rooted in these areas that are so different from Europe in terms of their culture , economy , structure and politics .
in writing . - With regard to the motion for a European Parliament resolution on a special place for children in EU External Action , our delegation is in favour of the report as it refers to the rights of the most vulnerable in society , namely children .
Although there was no direct reference to the promotion of abortion in the resolution , I want to make it clear that we do not support certain clauses which may condone abortion .
in writing . - ( SV ) I regard the EU as a union of values and am in favour of several of the wordings in the report which direct our attention to the vulnerable position of children around the world .
It is clear that society must take responsibility for safeguarding the rights of children , for reducing child mortality in poor countries and for combating all forms of child exploitation .
However , the report also contains wordings that I find difficult to support , including the proposal to appoint a special EU representative with the responsibility to ' ensure visibility and leadership on children 's rights ' .
The measures necessary to safeguard children 's rights are , and must remain , a matter for the national parliaments to decide .
If international cooperation is considered necessary , it should be sought within the framework of the United Nations , not the European Union .
In spite of these reservations , I have chosen to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - I abstained in the final vote on this report because of concerns about the wording of paragraph 44 .
Overall , the thrust of this report is very good , highlighting as it does the need for special consideration to be given to children in EU external actions .
Therefore I support the bulk of the paragraphs in this report , but have abstained because of concerns about paragraph 44 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Kinnock 's report on a special place for children in EU external action .
Protecting children , whether within or outside of the Community , is undoubtedly an extremely important goal for the European Union .
Over the years the Community institutions have attached increasing importance to the protection of children 's rights , which must be considered during policy making .
I therefore agree that children should be more involved when decisions are taken that affect them , starting at local level , where they have more opportunity to give their input on these issues .
Moreover , I would argue that in order to enable children to exercise their rights fully , action must be taken at global level on the following key areas : reducing poverty , combating discrimination and improving the level and quality of education .
In order to achieve such ambitious objectives it will be essential to channel more intellectual and financial resources in this direction .
I have voted against this motion for a resolution .
One reason for doing so is because the Commission does not have general authority in the field of fundamental rights including the rights of the child under international agreements or through the jurisdiction of the ECJ ( COM ( 2006 ) 367 , Paragraph 1.3. page 3 ) .
The other reason is that the European Union intends to use this resolution to assume powers which it does not have .
The resolution does not recognise the sovereignty of developing nations in the field of ethics .
It runs counter to paragraph 9 of the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995 , which states ' The implementation of this platform , including through national laws and the formulation of strategies , policies , programmes and development priorities , is the sovereign responsibility of each State , in conformity with all human rights and fundamental freedoms , and the significance of and full respect for various religious and ethical values , cultural backgrounds and philosophical convictions of individuals and their communities should contribute to the full enjoyment by women of their human rights in order to achieve equality , development and peace ' .
Finally , the report also spotlights support for sexual and reproductive health , a term which has never been defined by the EU .
The WHO and some non-governmental organisations use this term to support abortion .
The resolution openly supports sexual and reproductive health in Article 44 , without defining it or respecting the European Union 's remit in this area .
This is unacceptable .
in writing . - ( LT ) The universality of the current financial crisis means it will affect Member States regardless of their economic structure , therefore the rapporteur believes that we must re-evaluate the right of employees to be informed and consulted .
This right , contrary to what is usually thought , is not a procedure which prevents a company from reacting to changes .
The participating parties , employers , hired workers and government institutions must understand that this procedure is best able to help them forecast the economic and social consequences of changes in a company 's environment .
For this reason all European employers and hired workers must know and recognise this European Social Model procedure .
Any company operating within the territory of the European Union , which faces such a change in its economic environment , should use the same early warning and preparation measures as its competitors in the European Union , and this , incidentally , would encourage honest competition between companies in accordance with internal market rules .
in writing . - I support this Report which was initiated by the Socialist Group .
The report is about worker 's information and consultation rights .
It calls on the Member States to better implement the 2002 framework directive , in particular , by :
introducing effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions
making sure that information is sent in due time so that workers ' representatives can react before any decision by central management
extending workforce size thresholds regardless of age or type of employment contract to cover all workers
It also calls on the Commission to start infringement procedures against Member States that fail to implement this legislation and make sure that all information and consultation directives are coherent and where necessary propose a revision .
We must give a stronger voice to workers in the decision making process of their company .
This is even more important during the times of crisis , in order to mitigate or avoid job losses .
During the debate on this report we tried to improve its defence of the rights of employees in all sectors .
We therefore welcome the adoption of our proposal , which is now incorporated , as follows , into the European Parliament resolution :
' Guarantee that representatives of public administration employees and employees in the public and financial sector enjoy the same rights to information and consultation as are granted to other employees ' .
We hope that Member States will take this into account , thereby guaranteeing all employees the same rights to information and consultation .
The report 's vision is generally positive as it stresses the need to strengthen rights to information and consultation in the various Member States .
We also hope that the European Commission will submit an evaluation report on the results achieved through the application of Directive 2002 / 14 / EC as regards strengthening the social dialogue .
With regard to mergers and takeovers , the report could have gone further , along the lines of what has happened previously , particularly when our proposal was adopted .
This aims to ensure that , throughout the process of restructuring companies , particularly industrial companies , employees ' representatives have access to information and the possibility of intervening in the decision-making process , including the right of veto , in cases where companies do not comply with their contractual obligations .
in writing . - Conservatives are fully in support of the principles of consultation and the engagement of employees in the running of successful enterprises .
However , we do not believe that this is an appropriate area for intervention at EU level .
While we generally encourage the consistent and effective transposition of EU law , we nevertheless considered that it was appropriate to abstain on this vote .
in writing . - I support this report which calls for countries which have not done so to enforce a 2002 directive which seeks to strengthen the process of informing and consulting employees within the EU .
This report urges the Commission to take immediate measures to guarantee effective transposition of the directive and to initiate infringement proceedings against those Member States which have failed to transpose the directive or which have not done so correctly .
The report asks that workers representatives be allowed to scrutinise the information provided , that information be provided in good time before consultation , and that trade unions be involved in the process in order to consolidate social dialogue .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Cottigny 's report on informing and consulting employees in the European Community .
Directive 2002 / 14 / EC represented a big step forward in terms of the democratic involvement of employees in decisions concerning the businesses for which they work , particularly at a time like the present when economic difficulties drive many businesses to take critical decisions such as restructuring and relocating .
However , it has been rightly noted that the directive has not been transposed correctly in a number of countries , which have adopted more limited provisions .
In fact it is important to harmonise legislation among Member States of the Union , in order that European businesses might be equipped with the same tools to pre-empt and prepare for changes to the economic environment in which they operate .
For this same reason , it would be advisable to extend the scope of the directive to all European SMEs , including the smallest in terms of the number of people employed , so that no one may be left at a disadvantage .
I support this initiative which supports employees , as informing and consulting employees are fundamental elements of a social market economy .
This should not be regarded as a barrier to the development of business .
In the present situation , which has been disrupted by the financial crisis , we need to strengthen the democratic right of employees to be involved in decision making , all the more because of the restructuring , mergers and relocation of production that are expected .
I believe that consulting employees is particularly important and justified in two areas : the work-life balance , and the protection of Sunday as a day of rest , which are fundamental pillars of the European Social Model and part of the European cultural heritage .
I personally supported the requirement for Sunday to be a day off with no compulsion to work submitted in written declaration 0009 / 2009 , which is currently in the signing procedure in the European Parliament .
As for the work-life balance , this is something I recently addressed in my report on intergenerational solidarity .
I quote , ' it is necessary to find a policy and means of combining " good jobs ” with the domestic duties of women and men , and family planning , private life and career ambitions can only be balanced when the persons in question are able to freely make economic and social decisions and are supported by political and economic resolutions at a European and at a domestic level without this resulting in any disadvantage . '
Madam President , I agree with and wholeheartedly support Mrs Toia , who has highlighted the role of the social economy as a creator of quality jobs , as well as the strengthening of social , economic and regional cohesion , promoting active citizenship , solidarity and a vision of the economy based on democratic values that put people first and support sustainable development and technological innovation .
Being fully aware that the wealth and stability of a society depend on its diversity and that the social economy makes a significant contribution to this , thereby strengthening the European Social Model and providing its own business model that fosters stable and lasting growth in the social economy , I support the rapporteur 's assertion that the social economy will reach its full potential only if it can benefit from suitable political , legislative and operational conditions and prerequisites .
In view of the fact that the Commission has already recognised the concept of the social economy many times , I would echo Mrs Toia 's call for it to promote the social economy in its new policies and to defend the idea of a ' different approach to entrepreneurship ' that is inherent to this sector , which is not driven mainly by the profit motive but by social benefit .
in writing . - ( LT ) The social economy helps to implement the four main goals of EU employment policy : to improve opportunities for residents to find work ; to encourage enterprise , especially by creating local jobs ; to improve the ability of companies and employees to adapt , in particular by modernising work organisation ; and to strengthen equal opportunities policies , first of all by organising public policy measures , which help to reconcile work and family life .
Social economy enterprises may provide great additional benefits for society , that is , involve people in the economic development of European society , increase business democracy with the participation of members and employees , as well as apply the principles of corporate social responsibility and local service provision .
It is important to link the social economy with the goals of social cohesion and active citizenship , taking into account the character of the local social economy and its role in encouraging active participation .
The activities mentioned usually help to strengthen social relations , and these are particularly important in a world in which there is increasing social isolation and separation .
in writing . - I support this Report which calls on the Commission to promote the social economy in its new policies and to defend the social economy 's concept of ' a different approach to entrepreneurship ' , which is not driven mainly by the profit motive but by social benefit , to ensure that the particular features of the social economy are properly taken into account in the framing of legislation .
It also calls on the Commission and the Member States to develop a legal framework that recognise the social economy as a third sector as well as to set up clear rules for establishing which entities can legally operate as social economy enterprises .
Social economy enterprises are characterised by a form of enterprise that differs from the capital enterprise model .
These are private businesses , independent of the public authorities , which meet the needs and demands of their members and the general interest .
The social economy is comprised of cooperatives , mutual societies , associations , foundations and other enterprises and organisations that share the founding characteristics of the social economy .
Through our participation in the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we made several contributions and tabled various proposals aimed at improving the rapporteur 's initial position .
We did not in every instance manage to get our opinions accepted , and the final resolution is therefore not entirely satisfactory .
However , we recognise the important role of various forms of social economy , the wealth of diversity in its institutions and also its specific characteristics , with differing needs .
We are therefore arguing for support for them .
However , we believe that this must not undermine the quality of public services , particularly in areas where the social economy also plays a significant role .
We recognise that the social economy can help to strengthen economic and social development and increase democratic participation , particularly if conditions exist for support and it is not used to undermine universal public services that are accessible to the whole population .
It should be borne in mind that the social economy cannot replace the resources and public management of public services , but can be an important addition .
in writing . - My British Conservative colleagues and I are very supportive of the contribution made to the European economy by those organisations and enterprises which operate in the ' not-for-profit ' sector .
Conservatives have a strong belief , for example , in the benefits of communities working together , the work of charitable institutions and the voluntary sector in general , and have recently commissioned extensive research in this area .
There are , however , a number of recommendations for new European measures in this report which we are unable to accept .
We have therefore decided to abstain .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted against Mrs Toias 's own-initiative report on social economy .
We agree that the social economy plays an important role in today 's society , but we cannot support it being subject to different rules to other undertakings .
It is not possible to draw a clear distinction between different types of undertaking and we do not believe that cooperatives and mutual societies should be favoured over small companies , for example , in respect of the possibilities for funding and other forms of aid .
in writing . - ( HU ) I would like to congratulate Mrs Toia on her report on the social economy that points out the key role of social economy enterprises in labour market integration , as these enterprises can greatly contribute to development and toward the realisation of social cohesion through their close connection with local communities .
Furthermore , participants in the social economy can integrate manufacturing processes with the aims of social well-being in their activities , and they also promote self-management .
Thus , the efficient functioning of the social economy , or the third sector , is especially important when it comes to disadvantaged people .
This includes the question of the employment of the Roma population , who are facing unemployment to an unacceptable degree all across Europe .
For the efficient functioning of the social economy , an appropriate legal framework is needed , meaning the legal recognition of its components whether they be foundations , cooperatives or other associations .
It is important to provide easier access to credit , tax relief , as well as incentives for these organisations .
It would be advisable to consider the introduction of single Community financing for enterprises that are most effective for social cohesion .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Toia 's report on the social economy .
I share the rapporteur 's view that the social economy is becoming increasingly important in the current economic climate , since many needs are now arising that traditional economic operators are not able to meet .
The social economy certainly plays an important role in realising the EU 's aims such as improving employment and social cohesion and strengthening equal opportunities policies .
I also agree that the social economy should however engage with continually evolving market developments , in order to come up with effective strategies to meet its objectives .
This may be achieved by setting up networks between the interested parties , as well as through greater cooperation and exchange of experiences at all levels , whether local , national or transnational .
The social economy subscribes to the fundamental principles of the European Social Model .
Its basic features and values involve placing people and social objectives above capital , combining the interests of its members with the general good , and implementing a democratic control system , enforced by its members .
Overall , it constitutes 10 % of Europe 's enterprises and 6 % of the labour market .
The social economy , which is also referred to as the solidarity economy and the third sector , is a key instrument for attaining the Lisbon objectives .
It possesses a significant potential for creating jobs and can effectively be employed to achieve the objective of economic growth .
The third sector plays a leading role in the European economy , combining profitability and solidarity .
In view of the financial crisis , which we have recently been observing with alarm , and vainly attempting to overcome , it is vitally important for us to ensure financial stability .
Europeans dread losing their jobs and expect decent treatment .
The European Union and the Member States must respond to real needs , create real opportunities and build new hopes , for the good of all Europeans .
Fostering the solidarity economy is one way of improving the situation .
I support the rapporteur 's motion .
The European Commission should not only promote the social economy , but should also undertake real action to develop a legal framework , within which entities such as cooperatives , mutual societies , associations and foundations may operate , as well as drawing up a programme offering financial support , advice and training to existing enterprises and to those that are yet to be established .
in writing . - ( FR ) The social economy needs more than ever to have a specific legal framework and Mrs Toia 's report is a step in the right direction .
The European Commission has withdrawn two proposals intended to put in place statutes for European mutual societies and associations .
At a time when the cracks in the capitalist system are obvious , it is odd to withdraw proposals that promote alternative and effective types of economic organisation .
Founded on principles of mutualisation and interdependence , the social economy advocates a new concept of business practice that is more human and breaks with the capitalist approach of the simple pursuit of profit .
It has been expanding successfully in recent years and today represents 10 % of businesses and 6 % of jobs in the European Union .
The Commission 's attitude may be deplorable , but nonetheless we can feel pleased about Parliament 's vote .
The call for the characteristics of the social economy to be taken into account in the framing of European policies is to be welcomed , as is the demand for reactivation of the specific budget heading .
In the Resolution on Women and Poverty in the European Union , I mention and again emphasise the urgent need to support a new Europe based on the creative coexistence of cultures and mentalities and full respect for otherness .
A Europe in which the concept of responsible freedom does not cover solely the free movement of capital and in which citizens pool their abilities irrespective of their social status .
A Europe in which creativity is harnessed and the dignity of each citizen is protected for the common good .
I also mention the new forms of poverty and social exclusion which should encourage creativity among those exposed to it .
Mrs Toia 's report supports this approach .
I welcome this and have voted in favour of the report .
As the values of the social market economy are generally in harmony with the universal aims of the EU as regards social inclusion , they should include fitting employment , specialist training and re-integration into the labour market .
Social economies have shown that they can significantly improve the position of disadvantaged people .
For example , the micro-loan companies introduced by the Nobel prize winner Muhammad Junus which improved the position and increased the influence of women by enabling them to improve their financial and family situations .
Social innovation supports people with disabilities in finding their own solutions to their social problems , a work-life balance , equal opportunities for men and women , quality of family life and the ability to care for children , the elderly and the disabled .
in writing . - Mental ill health affects a staggering one in four people .
Stigmatisation of and discrimination against those who suffer from mental ill health still persists .
By the year 2020 , depression is expected to be the highest ranking cause of disease in the developed world .
Currently in the EU , some 58 000 citizens die from suicide each year , more than the annual deaths from road or homicides .
The need for information campaigns in schools and platforming from there into all areas of life is crucial .
We as legislators , social workers and with responsibilities within our communities need to focus on early diagnosis and early intervention in order to combat the stigma .
What we have learned from research which is crucial for our services , is that mental health is strongly determined during the first five years of life .
So promoting mental health in children is an investment for the future .
EU projects have already proved successful by addressing post-natal depression in mothers , improving parenting skills , organising home visits by nurses to assist future and new parents and providing resources for schools .
Research shows that providing resources for schools for our young students can improve child development and reduce bullying , anxiety and depressive symptoms .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Conservatives have today voted in favour of the own-initiative report on mental health by Mrs Tzampazi .
We respect the decision of the Member States to enter into the European Pact for Mental Health and Well-being referred to in the report .
We see it as only natural that Member States should cooperate and exchange experience within this area on their own terms .
However , we are opposed to the wording in the report that calls for European guidelines for coverage of mental health by the media .
We do not share the view that this should be carried out at European level , but would preserve a free and independent mass media .
in writing . - ( EL ) The restructuring of the mental health system being promoted serves the interests of capital , capitalist restructurings and the commercialisation of health , rather than the interests of patients .
Most mental health services , at least those which generate a profit for capital , are being privatised within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy .
The very large majority of mental health patients in psychiatric hospitals and other welfare institutions face miserable and absolutely humiliating living conditions and there are huge shortcomings at the level of primary and secondary care .
Intervention in the health care sector by NGOs , sponsors and other ' philanthropists ' other than private capital are the alibi for and , at the same time , the bridge to the full privatisation of services .
The victims , other than mental health patients , in the area of the private or so-called ' social ' infrastructure are the workers , whose labour rights are being violated and who are in temporary work schemes under the constant threat of dismissal .
We support the abolition of the inhumane asylum-type form of psychiatric care applied by the bourgeois governments , the creation of an integrated network of mental health services within the framework of a single , public , free health and welfare system and the abolition of any commercial activity which does not meet the real needs not only of patients , but also of their families and all the people .
This report seeks to draw attention to mental health , which , as indicated by the rapporteur , affects our daily lives and is a contributory factor to well-being and social justice .
Conversely , mental ill-health detracts from the quality of life of people and their families and has implications for the health , economic , educational , social security , penal and legal sectors .
There is now an ever-increasing awareness that there is no health without mental health .
We need to consider some of the figures given by the report , particularly :
one in four people will experience some form of mental disorder at least once in their lives ;
depression is one of the most common disorders - affecting one in six women in Europe - and it is estimated that , by 2020 , it will be the most common illness in the developed world and the second cause of disability ;
in the EU , some 59 000 suicides are committed every year , 90 % of which are attributable to mental disorder ;
vulnerable groups such as the unemployed , migrants , the disabled , people who suffer abuse , and users of psychoactive substances are more likely to suffer mental health problems .
A concerted approach to the challenges posed by mental health is very important and should be tackled with the same seriousness as physical health .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report on mental health , which seeks to ensure that this challenge remains one of the political priorities of the European Union with regard to health .
This report calls for measures to prevent depression and suicide , to encourage mental health among young people and within the education system , in the workplace and among older people .
It also stresses the need to combat stigmatisation and social exclusion .
The text also invites the Commission to propose common indicators to improve the comparability of data and to facilitate the exchange of good practices and cooperation between Member States to promote mental health .
Finally , I am pleased that the report makes a clear distinction between neurodegenerative disorders , such as Alzheimer 's disease , and mental illnesses .
Alzheimer 's disease is indeed a very particular type of illness which should not be treated in the same way as mental illnesses .
in writing . - The Tzampazi report deals with an important health issue .
With one in four people experiencing a serious mental health problem at some point in their lives , virtually all of us will either experience a mental health problem or be close to someone who does .
Mental illness still unfortunately carries a stigma , and it is imperative that Member States cooperate to eliminate that stigma and implement measures to ensure fair and equal treatment .
in writing . - WHO statistics indicate that there are currently 450 million people facing some kind of mental , behavioural or psychological problem , which represents 12 % of the world 's population .
Similarly , it is said that by 2010 depression will become the most common illness in modern society .
For example , in Romania , in just a single hospital , the ' Dr Alexandru Obregia ' Clinical Psychiatric Hospital , more than 22 000 admissions were registered in 2008 , with most cases involving depression and schizophrenia .
Those categories of people who are vulnerable and marginalised , such as the unemployed and immigrants , as well as the disabled or people who have suffered abuse , have a greater predisposition to depression in the current economic crisis .
Every country is facing the problem of a shortage of medical staff who are specialised in treating patients with mental disorders .
The average figure for poor countries is 0.05 psychiatrists per 100 000 inhabitants .
The problem is exacerbated in very many countries by the migration of specialist medical staff .
I think that we will need , first and foremost , to deal with the issue of people 's mental health in a much less superficial way and that all Member States will have to establish joint programmes to limit by every possible means the spread of this problem .
in writing . - I support this report which calls for Member States to develop awareness raising campaigns , to combat stigma and social exclusion and to improve mental health legislation .
One in four people experience mental health problems at least once in their lives , yet there is still stigma attached to mental illness .
This report codifies the basic principles , values and objectives of mental health policy which is necessary across Europe to promote better understanding .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report and am particularly concerned that the current economic crisis is putting pressure on individuals and families and could result in an increase in mental health problems .
One person in four will experience some form of mental health disorder at least once in their lives .
Depression is one of the most common disorders , affecting one in six women in Europe .
It is estimated that by 2020 depression will be the most common illness in the developed world .
In the EU , some 59 000 suicides are committed each year , 90 % of which are attributable to mental disorder .
We need to focus as much on mental health issues as we do on physical health .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome Mrs Tzampazi 's report on mental health .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is essential to recognise the equal importance of mental and physical health as factors affecting quality of life .
The pursuit of mental health must concern young people , adults and the elderly , with particular attention to the latter , who are at greater risk of degenerative diseases , and to women , who are more affected by depression .
In order to ensure that the targets in question are met , we must , in particular , put measures in place to combat social exclusion and marginalisation , which can contribute towards mental disorders , alongside measures to foster mental health in the workplace , where people are exposed to numerous pressures and stressful situations that can also trigger mental problems .
I welcome the result of this resolution .
In the intermediate group on carers , we have often discussed the potential of the EU to participate in this policy whilst respecting the principles of subsidiarity and the primacy of decisions by the Member States .
I support the call for cooperation among European Institutions at national , regional and local level , as well as among the social partners in the five priority areas of support for mental health .
People should be protected from stigmatisation and social exclusion regardless of age , gender , ethnic origin and socio-economic group .
Their human dignity is of primary importance , and for this reason more assistance and appropriate therapy should be made available to people with mental health problems , their families and their carers .
Mental health depends on several factors , and for this reason in my report on intergenerational solidarity I have emphasised the educational task of parents as regards future generations .
I have also included help for elderly or disabled family members and the irreplaceable role of women and men as carers , which is necessary to enhance the common good .
This should be recognised as such by sectoral policies .
Women and men who voluntarily make the decision to care for sick family members should receive financial compensation .
Breaking off a career to care for relatives with mental health problems should not have a negative impact on that career or on providing financially for one 's family .
I call upon the Member States to support systems for taking time off work which will also provide a solution in such cases .
in writing . - ( LT ) Efficient energy use should be one of the most important cornerstones of the EU energy policy being created .
By using energy more efficiently in Europe we would ensure greater security of supply .
As no essential measures are being taken , over the next 20 - 30 years Europe 's dependency on imported energy ( currently 50 % of our energy is imported ) may reach 70 % , and some Member States may become even more dependent .
Smarter use of energy would reduce environmental pollution .
More efficient energy use is one of the most effective ways of reducing the amount of gas emissions which cause the greenhouse effect and of ensuring that the great EU climate policy plans are implemented .
Moreover , measures in this area have a great influence on the competitiveness of European industry and the opportunity to achieve the goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
More efficient energy use may reduce the burden on the most vulnerable consumers and eradicate energy poverty .
Energy efficiency is vital if the EU is to reduce its energy bill .
It is a valuable tool for reducing our dependence on oil .
Every nation has a great deal to gain from sharing the experiences of each Member State in this field , by comparing methodologies and strategies , albeit duly framed within the context of each region .
As regards Portugal , I regret that the measures that have been implemented have not been framed within a coherent and comprehensive action plan submitted to the Commission within the statutory period .
This means that my country is one of the few not to have done so , and it thus prevents us from sharing solutions .
This first assessment of the national action plans is a point of reference for dialogue in the EU and a useful tool allowing the Member States to turn the spirit of energy efficiency into pragmatic measures that will produce the expected results by 2020 .
Several Member States are developing action plans , but there are problems with defining the energy efficiency objectives .
The proposal to put emphasis on effective implementation of measures focusing on energy efficiency , including the development of best practices and synergies , and better information and advice to end users , therefore seems appropriate .
However , the support that must be given to those with greater financial difficulties should not be forgotten .
It also seems timely that , as part of the 2009 review of the action plans , the extent to which these cover all the possibilities for economising in the area of energy efficiency should be examined in detail , without calling into question the sovereignty of each Member State .
This analysis should serve to monitor the difficulties and , if necessary , take appropriate support measures aimed at achieving the proposed objective for energy efficiency .
It also seems important to support the provisions which reinforce the exemplary role of the public sector and to recognise that increasing the energy efficiency of buildings has immense potential for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and the fight against climate change , in terms both of the adaptation and of tackling the causes of climate change .
in writing . - The European Union wastes more than 20 % of its energy due to inefficiency , representing about 400 Mtoe ( million tonnes of oil equivalent ) less energy , and would also represent a huge cut in emissions .
I support this report because it highlights the need to be more efficient with energy .
The report gives us a target of saving a 9 % loss of energy by 2016 .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Gyürk 's report on follow-up of the energy efficiency national action plans .
Europe 's energy supply problem is now common knowledge and is closely linked to the issue of energy efficiency .
The energy wasted within the EU is a luxury we cannot afford ; we must redress this as soon as possible so that we do not suffer even worse consequences in the future .
I agree that at present the national action plans have only been partially implemented , meaning that the results too have been mixed .
I therefore believe a stronger commitment is needed from both the public and private sectors , as well as from individual citizens .
Given the key position of SMEs in Europe , it is essential to involve them in the action plans ; since they are more affected by rising energy prices , they could also greatly benefit from improved energy efficiency and their contribution would go a long way towards reaching the overall targets .
in writing . - ( PL ) Rationalising energy consumption is an extremely important activity .
The public needs to know that this is the most economical way of combating climate change .
However , it is not only the environment that will benefit .
The better the use we make of available energy , the less energy we need and , as a result , the less we need to rely on imported energy .
In the current situation , where energy is used as a political tool , the importance of this fact cannot be underestimated .
We are employing energy ever more rationally .
The consequences of this policy can be measured .
Since 1990 , energy production in the EU has risen by 40 % , and revenue per capita by 1 / 3 , while energy demand has risen by only 11 % .
More rational energy management has thus contributed to economic growth in all the Member States .
Energy efficiency and action to save energy should play a key role in both curtailing rising demand and in reducing the amount of fuel burned .
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions , making more use of green energy , and more economical energy management , all provide opportunities to reduce the extent to which we rely on imported gas and oil .
The European economy must become less vulnerable to fluctuating energy prices and inflation , as well as to the risk inherent in the geopolitical location of these resources .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to abstain .
Of course , we have nothing against research and increased knowledge of fisheries and related sectors . However , we believe , above all , that the EU must put its words into action with regard to fisheries policy .
The EU must act quickly to put an end to the problems of overfishing and threatened stocks .
This has to be the starting point and focus of the common fisheries policy .
in writing . - One cannot underestimate the importance of paying special attention to the specific problems of fisheries and aquaculture .
This is obvious in view of this sector 's economic , social and political importance in the EU .
In my country , Malta , both fishing and aquaculture are given special attention .
I fully concur with the Committee on Fisheries to recommend that , in the field of scientific marine research , priority be given not only to research to gain knowledge about the state of fish stocks but also to the commercial , economic and social aspects that determine fisheries management , since all these aspects are of crucial importance .
We have to ensure that in the fields of fisheries and aquaculture , priority be given to applied research .
It is unfortunate that in the short term a clear conflict of interests exists between fishermen and scientists .
In the long-term , objectives will be more compatible .
Research has to be undertaken in view of dwindling stocks .
This will result in the disappearance of whole species .
That is why it is imperative to have full cooperation in this field between scientists , fishermen and aquacultural operators .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Conservatives have today voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
We share the basic premise of the report that fisheries policy should have a scientific basis and that a consensus between fishermen and researchers is the basis for a policy that is geared to sustainability .
However , we believe that the Seventh Framework Programme , with its priorities and restrictions , should remain in place .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have chosen to vote in favour of Mrs Miguelez Ramos 's report on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
It is important to support increased investment in research into the consequences of the fisheries policy for fish stocks , ecosystems and biodiversity .
I am therefore extremely critical of parts of the EU 's fisheries policy .
However , Mrs Miguelez Ramos emphasises the importance of political decisions being founded on science and long-term sustainability and not primarily on the fishing industry 's short-term interests , and this is something that I see as a good thing .
I am , however , critical of possible interpretations of the report that could lead to more money being used to provide financial support to the European fishing industry and to increase this industry 's status .
A definite environmental perspective should permeate all research in the fisheries sector .
In December 2006 the European Parliament and the Council adopted an important decision on the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( 2007-2013 ) .
I congratulate myself on having , at that time , referred to the huge importance of guaranteeing more and better technological development in the area of fisheries and aquaculture .
I therefore believe that this own-initiative report is timely and is extremely important in terms of pursuing the objectives of the new reform of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
The CFP is among the Community policies most dependent on scientific research , given that the credibility of the measures adopted under the CFP rests on high-quality scientific opinions .
Furthermore , the technological development of vessels , fishing gear and engines may guarantee the sector 's sustained development in the future , thus better protecting the environment and ensuring that fleets are more competitive .
I voted in favour of this report .
Scientific fisheries research is vital to ensure an appropriate fisheries management policy , which must take into account the social , environmental and economic aspects of this activity which is an essential source of food .
This research should not only assess the state of fish stocks and generate models allowing their development to be predicted , but should also help to improve fishing gear , vessels , working and safety conditions for fishermen , and the assessment of the impact of the various fisheries management systems / instruments on the employment and income of fishing communities .
However , in order for scientific fisheries research to meet the objectives set out and the needs indicated , it is vital that the necessary resources , including funding , are made available by the EU and by each Member State .
That is why we support the recommendations in this respect in the report .
However , we believe that the development of scientific research absolutely demands that the value of the human resources involved be recognised .
This means guaranteeing the rights of these professionals with regard to employment contracts - by combating the insecure employment relationships with which many of these researchers are faced - fair pay and access to social security schemes , among many other labour rights which workers enjoy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Mrs Miguélez ' report on fisheries research .
I am opposed to the common fisheries policy and believe that fisheries management should be a competence of Europe 's maritime nations working in cooperation with each other .
That cooperation would require common actions in the field of science and research and this is an area within which the EU can give added value .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
Wise and responsible utilisation of natural resources is increasingly important given the evident and unacceptable impoverishment of these resources over the years in terms of both quality and quantity .
In terms of the marine environment it is therefore essential to consider its protection and to adopt an approach based on a careful assessment of ecosystems , considering all activities that concern European seas in a holistic fashion .
It is clear that this kind of approach can positively influence the balanced development of both the economy and society , as well as the overall competitiveness of the system in the medium to long term .
I thus believe it is vital for applied research in the fisheries sector to receive more funding , including funding from the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , as stipulated in the past by previous framework programmes .
We should also facilitate the creation of a network of research centres that can share specialised infrastructure and exchange useful information and data .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote in favour of Mrs Miguelez Ramos 's report on applied research relating to the common fisheries policy .
It is important to support increased investment in research into the consequences of the fisheries policy for fish stocks , ecosystems and biodiversity .
We are extremely critical of parts of the EU 's fisheries policy on environmental grounds .
However , Mrs Miguelez Ramos emphasises the importance of political decisions being founded on science and long-term sustainability and not primarily on the fishing industry 's short-term interests , and this is something that we see as a good thing .
We are , however , critical of possible interpretations of the report that could lead to more money being used to provide financial support to the European fishing industry and to increase this industry 's status .
A definite environmental perspective should permeate all research in the fisheries sector to which extra resources are allocated .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Cederschiöld report because I believe that the ability for European citizens to work and live in another Member State is an important right .
I support the report 's intention to facilitate the mobility of professionals and to guarantee the safety of consumers .
However , there are aspects of the Cederschiöld report that I do not fully support , such as the formulations regarding abolition of obstacles to the free movement of persons and services , which could be interpreted as a statement against collective agreements in the labour market .
As regards the inclusion of health care professionals in the agreement , I see a risk of deregulation of the health care sector .
One of the fundamental freedoms of the EU 's internal market is the freedom of movement , which allows us not only to travel freely within its borders , but also to undertake employment .
The number of people availing themselves of this opportunity is continually growing , and the best example of this trend has been the mobility of workers from the new Member States , including Poland , in recent years .
At present , around 2 % of the EU 's inhabitants live and work in a Member State other than their own .
Despite the fact that further barriers to a common , internal market have been removed , one of the principal obstacles faced by many people looking to work in a different Member State is the fear that qualifications obtained in other Member States will not be recognised .
This concern has prompted today 's report , which calls for the creation of a European professional card for service providers .
Introducing such a card might facilitate mobility among the representatives of a number of professions , whilst simultaneously offering employers certainty as to the qualifications held by an employee in possession of such a card , and increasing not only the transparency of qualifications , but also their recognition and comparability .
I am therefore delighted that the European Parliament has adopted the report , which will most certainly have an impact on future debates on the creation of a European professional card .
in writing . - The ability for European citizens to work and live in another Member State is an important right and I support the intentions to facilitate the mobility of professionals and to guarantee the safety of consumers .
However , there are aspects of the Cederschiöld report that I do not fully support , such as the formulations regarding abolition of obstacles to the free movement of persons and services , which could be interpreted as a statement against collective agreements in the labour market .
Regarding the inclusion of health-care professionals in the agreement , I see a risk of deregulation of the healthcare sector .
Therefore I abstained in the final vote on the report .
in writing . - The ability for European citizens to work and live in another Member State is an important right and I support the intentions to facilitate the mobility of professionals and to guarantee the safety of consumers .
However , there are aspects of the Cederschiöld report that I do not fully support , such as the formulations regarding abolition of obstacles to the free movement of persons and services , which could be interpreted as a statement against collective agreements in the labour market .
Regarding the inclusion of healthcare professionals in the agreement , I see a risk of deregulation of the healthcare sector .
Therefore I abstained on final vote on the report .
I supported this initiative on the creation of a European professional card for service providers by voting for it as it represents a new way of ensuring the free movement of persons and services .
We must encourage labour force migration and facilitate professional mobility as much as possible by speeding up the exchange of information between the original Member State and the host Member State .
According to the statistics on the complaints received by SOLVIT in 2007 , 20 % of them concerned the recognition of professional qualifications required to pursue a regulated profession .
Creating a professional European card for service providers will remove some of the obstacles which are still obstructing European citizens who want to carry out gainful employment in a country other than their country of origin .
Furthermore , the information contained in this professional card will provide support to both employers and consumers , while also being beneficial to unregulated and non-harmonised professions .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Cederschiöld 's report on the creation of a European professional card for service providers .
I did so because , in my opinion , despite the existence of Directive 2005 / 36 / EC aimed at encouraging professional mobility , this market is still in essence a national one .
More generally , workers ' mobility in the European Union remains very low , constituting a barrier to the proper functioning of the internal market as well as the pursuit of the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs .
In light of this , I think it is crucial to establish European professional cards , which already exist in some cases , to cover all professions , including those that are not regulated .
This will promote their recognition in Member States and thus increase opportunities for consumers to access foreign service providers more easily , thereby helping to increase integration in the European internal market .
in writing . - ( LT ) I believe that considering the painful past of commercial whaling and the recent increase in threats to whale populations - such as accidental whaling during fishing , collisions with boats , global climate change and acoustic pollution in oceans - in international forums the EU must consistently and harmoniously ensure the greatest protection of whales at global level .
I would urge you to oppose any proposal which might be used to legalise any whaling for scientific purposes and commercial whaling on the coast and elsewhere or equally to allow international trade in whale products .
Despite efforts made and initiatives carried out by the IWC ( International Whaling Commission ) , the situation with regard to numerous species of cetaceans is still worrying , as a large number are threatened with extinction .
The whole issue of capturing whales for scientific purposes is still a ' cover ' for the capture of these mammals , which is why the EU must intervene in terms of revising this international position .
Supporting the maintenance of the moratorium , opposing all proposals regarding new types of whaling , accepting that all whaling operations by IWC members should be brought under IWC control and supporting proposals aimed at ending ' scientific whaling ' outside IWC control are some of the premises of this report that I consider to be essential .
Ensuring that the EU defines its political position on this subject and taking the lead in pursuing objectives relating to respect for biodiversity and the sustainable development of our planet are fundamental objectives which the EU must embrace .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) Like the rapporteur , I support the global moratorium for commercial whaling and the prohibition on international trade in whale products .
There are also good reasons to seek an end to what is referred to as ' scientific whaling ' .
When these issues are dealt with at international level , cooperation should be sought within the framework of the International Whaling Commission , not the EU .
In spite of this objection on grounds of principle , I have chosen to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Attwooll 's report on Community action in relation to whaling .
I recognise the need to ban hunting of these endangered mammals , and that tough action is needed to ensure their survival .
The existing moratorium on whaling has already produced good results in terms of increasing cetacean populations , although many key countries have not ratified it , meaning that whaling still goes on .
I therefore welcome the call for the Commission to put forward new proposals to encourage an improvement in these results .
I also think the distinction made between commercial whaling and sustenance whaling still practiced by some indigenous peoples is important .
The latter is rightly excluded from the moratorium , as is scientific research on whales , provided it takes account of the need to safeguard the species .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I voted for the report .
One of the main reasons for the EC 's participation in the Observatory is the consideration that the Observatory 's activities are helping to strengthen the competitiveness of the Community 's audiovisual industry .
For instance , the distribution of audiovisual goods is too often hampered by a lack of knowledge of the differences in national legislation .
The Observatory helps to surmount these obstacles by providing expertise and systematic information to the operators concerned .
Unfortunately , however , often the legislation adopted by the European Community is not sufficiently publicised in Italy .
For this reason , greater legislative transparency is needed , particularly on copyright and consumer protection law and fiscal and labour law .
Lastly , it is vital to boost the Observatory 's capacity for monitoring new developments such as new consumption models for audiovisual products , in particular videogames and the Internet .
in writing . - ( LT ) One of the main reasons for the European Community 's participation in the activities of the Observatory is the precondition that by carrying out its work , the Observatory will help to strengthen the competitiveness of the Community 's audiovisual industry .
When distributing audiovisual goods there is often a problem of insufficient knowledge of differences in national legislation .
By supplying related operators with technical expertise and specialist information , the Observatory helps to overcome this obstacle , and therefore the Community 's participation should be viewed favourably .
By specially purchasing information and advertising its publications , the Observatory has become the main source of economic and legal information covering various segments of the audiovisual industry , which is used by members in both the public and private sectors .
Moreover , the Commission indicates that one of the Observatory 's most valuable assets is its ability to set up and oversee scientific partner networks .
These networks help to improve the quality of the Observatory 's economic and legal analysis .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report because the European Audiovisual Observatory is the only pan-European public service organisation dedicated to gathering and distributing information on the European audiovisual industry .
It plays a vital role by providing detailed information on the sector to both public and private bodies in the field .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have voted against this report on Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory .
It is for the Member States to become involved in and fund the European Audiovisual Observatory .
I voted in favour of the draft report on Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory , a project supported by the PPE-DE Group , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , I believe that it is vital for us to have maximum transparency on the audiovisual market and to ensure that as many institutions as possible have access to relevant information in this field .
This is the only way that we can have real competition and meet the economic growth targets set by the Lisbon Strategy .
Secondly , it seems important to me that the Observatory brings together both EU Member States and European states outside the Community , offering an important cohesion factor at the level of all European countries .
This will enable us not only to interconnect the whole continent , but also facilitate the free movement of goods and services from the audiovisual sector , thereby considerably expanding this market .
However , we must take into account the advent and development of new technologies in order to boost the Observatory 's effectiveness .
I personally support the application of the provisions which expand the Observatory 's scope of activity in order to provide better coverage in this area and supply even more valuable information which is useful from an economic perspective , but also for understanding the European social and cultural context .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Belet 's report on Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory .
In my view , the Observatory 's work is very important ; it is the only organisation dedicated to gathering and distributing information on the European audiovisual industry and therefore has the task of fostering new developments in the audiovisual field , which have become increasingly significant in recent years as digital technology is used more and more .
In addition , through its studies and market analysis it provides valuable help for both policymakers and the audiovisual industry itself .
I also agree that the Observatory 's activities should be further extended to include the study of fiscal and labour law regarding the audiovisual sector , thereby strengthening its cooperation with the Member States .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament are in favour of a generous immigration policy centred on people 's needs .
This meant that we ultimately chose to support Mr Fava 's report because it sends a clear message to the effect that it is unacceptable for employers to exploit the vulnerable position of migrants with no documents and because it gives certain rights to those migrants with no documents that they currently lack in several of the EU 's Member States .
A prerequisite for our being able to vote in favour of the report was the Council 's approval of Parliament 's statement that Article 9 should not be precedential in any way in future , because this could make it more difficult to adopt common rules regarding the liability of contractors for their subcontractors .
It is clear to us that contractors need to be responsible for ensuring that their subcontractors observe any collective agreements that have been entered into .
Employers must not be able to avoid applying labour law rules by utilising a complex chain of subcontractors .
In this directive , however , liability is limited to the first subcontractor level , which is something that we do not consider acceptable .
However , it is important to bear in mind that there is nothing to prevent individual Member States introducing more comprehensive legislation .
We are also opposed , on principle , to the exemption of private individuals who employ people without documents to work in their home from sanctions .
We believe that people without documents are just as vulnerable , even if they are working for private individuals .
The directive which has just been voted on marks another step towards drafting and applying common regulations and measures required to regulate the situation of immigrants , especially employees from third countries staying illegally in the European Union .
The prospect of a better standard of living created by the possibility of finding a job is one of the key factors encouraging illegal immigration .
At the same time , the consequences of the benefits gained by employers include the waste of public finances and distorted competition in the economic sector , depriving illegal workers of any social insurance or right to a pension .
This is the reason why the current directive relates to immigration policy and the sanctions are targeted at employers and not the workers coming from third countries .
Particular attention must also be focused on nationals from the new Member States who , in spite of their status as European citizens , are still subject to transnational employment rules , thereby limiting free access for them to the old Member States ' labour market .
Measures such as forcing employers to check third-country workers ' residence permits and the financial and criminal penalties provided for employers highlight the efforts of the Community and Member States to coordinate their immigration and illegal labour policies .
In fact , at a time when the European Union is facing an increased population decline , we must bear in mind that the solution is not to expel but regulate the situation of these workers .
It was with this hope that I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted in favour of the report on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
The proposal aims to prevent the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals by employers and to strengthen the rights of workers .
The person who is to be punished in the event of illegal employment is the employer who breaks the law , not the worker .
There is an absence of this type of legislation in certain countries within the EU .
Other countries have legislation , but it is not implemented or observed .
Common EU rules to prevent exploitation and the employment of illegally staying workers are therefore one way of raising the bar for many EU countries .
The proposal that we are voting on today has many shortcomings .
If the decision had been mine , many parts of it would have been different .
I would have liked to see greater protection for women involved in domestic work , for example .
However , the alternative is to have no directive at all and therefore less protection for the four to eight million illegally staying third-country nationals who are currently working illegally within the EU and who , in their very vulnerable situation , are repeatedly exploited by employers .
While it is important to prevent illegal immigration and the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals , we must also ensure that we increase the opportunities for people to settle and seek work within the EU on a legal basis .
This is regulated in other directives that we , in the European Parliament , have been involved in negotiating over the last year .
in writing . - I support the Fava report on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country workers .
Some unscrupulous employers are prepared to exploit these illegal workers with wage rates below the legal minimum , appalling conditions and long working hours .
Where they do get caught they must face severe sanctions .
Yet the problem is that there is a vicious conspiracy to keep the exploitation hidden .
The employers made the profits which they clearly do not wish to surrender while the workers , if they expose the exploitation , face deportation .
If we are serious we must have a policy that gives amnesty to those who expose the exploiters .
This would change the balance of power between employees and employers in a way that would virtually eliminate the problem .
in writing . - ( FR ) The general prohibition of employing unauthorised workers to deter illegal immigration can only be viewed favourably , just as sanctions against employers who resort to such workers - often to exploit them - can only be viewed favourably ; such employers are nothing more than modern-day slave-traders .
I have , however , some reservations .
Once again the European Union is making use of an issue relying on a Community legal basis , the first pillar , to extend its competences with regard to harmonisation of the criminal law of Member States .
Ireland and the United Kingdom , who have asserted their right to opt out as recognised in the treaties , constitute a notable exception .
Also , events following strike action at a fashionable restaurant in Neuilly , a favourite of Mr Sarkozy , come to mind .
Its management claims to be the victim of a labour market that is too rigid or protective of a workforce to whom they pay the legal minimum wage , and the greater opportunities for regularisation through working have been opened up .
The directive will further strengthen these by making it possible for an illegal worker to regularise his status simply by reporting his employer .
I fear that in practice , in countries as lax as France in this respect , all this will do nothing to limit the influx of illegal immigration .
Regardless of the need to strengthen procedures aimed at combating the use of illegal workers , it is unacceptable that this directive punishes both the transgressor and the victims .
The aim of this directive is to complement the shameful ' Return ' Directive - which the Socialist Government in Portugal has adopted - by applying sanctions to employers of illegally staying workers and laying down , as a general and automatic rule , the procedure for expelling these workers , with rare exceptions .
Expulsion should not be the alternative to over-exploitation of illegally staying migrant workers .
This directive does not adopt the principle of protecting migrant workers and safeguarding those who , being forced to work in unacceptable conditions , report them .
In addition , the directive does not fully protect the rights of these workers as it states that ' when back payments are not made by the employer , Member States should not be obliged to fulfil this obligation ' .
By not protecting the rights of illegally staying migrant workers , given that it does not provide in general for their regularisation and instead exposes them to the threat of expulsion , this directive will make these workers more vulnerable and encourage illegal work situations which are even more hidden .
This is yet another directive which lays bare the inhuman immigration policy of the EU , which is why we can only reject it .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although this report is interesting on a number of points and sketches out a battle plan against illegal immigration , it contains some enormous stumbling-blocks .
There are no specific measures to protect the internal and external borders of the Union .
There are no measures in relation to the policy of expelling illegal immigrants back to their country of origin .
It simply defines a person who has entered the territory of the Union illegally as an illegal immigrant who has rights .
In reality , European institutions are embarrassed by this issue .
On the one hand , in the name of security and justice , they are demanding a minimum of European rules to curb illegal immigration and , on the other , in the name of their rules that have become dogma - those of ultraliberalism and of freedom of movement - they want the territory of the Union to become a place for receiving and attracting millions of prospective immigrants .
We reject this philosophy that is dangerous for the people and nations of Europe .
We reassert their right to defend themselves and to remain themselves .
It is a known fact that policies on granting visas and strict immigration regulations have only ever been successful to a small degree in curbing illegal immigration .
If anything , they have only helped the development of illegal immigrant trafficking networks .
The proposal to punish employers who use illegal citizens is timely .
However , we must take care that it does not lose its effectiveness as the reasons why people migrate remain the same , regardless of whether penalties are introduced against the employers or not .
Indeed , the controls being proposed will force immigrants without papers to choose even worse jobs , paying even lower salaries , especially in the current economic crisis .
It is obvious that these measures only offer a partial , incomplete solution to illegal immigration and black labour .
EU Member States must start from now to follow a common , consistent policy on the issue of illegal immigration .
in writing . - I support this report which will crackdown on employers of illegal immigrants within Europe .
One of the factors encouraging illegal immigrants to enter the EU is the prospect of finding work .
I support this legislation because it will create a fairer system for legitimate European workers .
in writing . - ( DE ) The prospect of finding work in Europe is attractive for third-country nationals for very understandable reasons .
In times of crisis , however , we need to pay particular attention to who gets the ever scarcer jobs in order to prevent social discrepancies from arising as well .
In my opinion , therefore , it is important to impose sanctions on employers who do not follow the rules .
In these unsettled times , illegal labour cannot be tolerated , and we must start with those that are within reach locally and where sanctions will also have an effect .
This report is thus an attempt to tackle this problem more forcefully , because the in-flow of migrant workers is not going to decrease , particularly during the crisis .
Based on a simple view of this issue , there are two reasons why there are illegal immigrants : the precarious situation in the country of origin and labour market demand in other countries .
Whereas , in regard to the first problem , we have funds for development and cooperation programmes supported by the EU and which are obviously still not sufficient , in the case of the second matter , the problem has to date been dealt with in different ways at Member State level .
However , standard provisions are needed at Community level for punishing employers as , in many cases , this is a transnational issue , involving human trafficking networks which exploit the vulnerability of illegal immigrants .
I am pleased that the issue of employers who benefit at the expense of illegal immigrants has been raised for discussion by the European Parliament .
I am convinced that applying this directive will improve practical employment conditions within the Community .
Whereas until now , countries ' policies have focused more on how to prevent illegal immigrants gaining access to the labour market , from now on , we are tackling the problem at its root .
At the same time , however , we must not interpret this report as meaning that the EU 's borders are going to be closed .
Far from it , we need to keep the labour market borders open , with the proviso that the flow of workers is legal and suited to the relevant state 's needs .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , combating illegal immigration should , in my view , be a priority for the European Union .
I believe that it is necessary to re-establish legal conditions in the labour market as a matter of principle , whether in relation to European citizens or citizens from third countries who sometimes work without any minimum safety conditions at their workplace .
For this reason I voted in favour of Mr Fava 's report providing for sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
I feel that these types of measures are in line with the desire to build a more transparent , fair and homogenous single European labour market .
I agree with the rapporteur that employers who exploit immigrants should be punished with financial , administrative and , in some cases , criminal penalties commensurate with the extent and the severity of the exploitation , and that Member States must monitor at-risk workplaces and introduce mechanisms to facilitate the reporting of cases of exploitation in the underground economy .
We must remember that growth targets for unemployment and the economy in general can only be reached by encouraging total compliance with labour laws .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote in favour of the report on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
The proposal aims to prevent the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals by employers and to strengthen the rights of workers .
The person who is to be punished in the event of illegal employment is the employer who breaks the law , not the worker .
There is an absence of this type of legislation in certain countries within the EU .
Other countries have legislation , but it is not implemented or observed .
Common EU rules to prevent exploitation and the employment of illegally staying workers are therefore one way of raising the bar for many EU countries .
The proposal that we are voting on today has many shortcomings .
If the decision had been ours , many parts of it would have been different .
We would have liked to see greater protection for women involved in domestic work , for example .
However , the alternative is to have no directive at all and therefore less protection for the four to eight million illegally staying third-country nationals who are currently working illegally within the EU and who , in their very vulnerable situation , are repeatedly exploited by employers .
While it is important to prevent illegal immigration and the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals , we must also ensure that we increase the opportunities for people to settle and seek work within the EU on a legal basis .
This is regulated in other directives that we , in the European Parliament , have been involved in negotiating over the last year .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote in favour of the report on sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals .
The proposal aims to prevent the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals by employers and to strengthen the rights of workers .
The person who is to be punished in the event of illegal employment is the employer who breaks the law , not the worker .
There is an absence of this type of legislation in certain countries within the EU .
Other countries have legislation , but it is not implemented or observed .
Common EU rules to prevent exploitation and the employment of illegally staying workers are therefore one way of raising the bar for many EU countries .
The proposal that we are voting on today has many shortcomings .
If the decision had been ours , many parts of it would have been different .
We would have liked to see greater protection for women involved in domestic work , for example .
However , the alternative is to have no directive at all and therefore less protection for the four to eight million illegally staying third-country nationals that are currently working illegally within the EU and who , in their very vulnerable situation , are repeatedly exploited by employers .
While it is important to prevent illegal immigration and the exploitation of illegally staying third-country nationals , we must also ensure that we increase the opportunities for people to settle and seek work within the EU on a legal basis .
This is regulated in other directives that the European Parliament has been involved in negotiating over the last year .
The report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning crop statistics comes with a number of supplementary elements required to improve the application of the new provisions .
Statistics play a vital role in drafting Community policies because they provide a precise picture of market supply and demand , and this information helps achieve an economic balance .
At the same time , standard regulations at European level must not become a bureaucratic burden but ensure that there is a constant exchange of information between Member States in a simple , effective manner .
For this reason , I welcome the Commission 's proposal and the additions proposed by the rapporteur as they provide a new phase in the creation of a simple , flexible legal framework which complies with EU principles .
The impact of these regulations on European agriculture will establish a greater capacity to respond to the problems which can crop up in the market , such as overproduction , which can lead to falling prices .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have voted in favour of this report , partly because the Commission 's proposal aims to simplify the current legislation and partly because agricultural statistics are nevertheless necessary in the present circumstances , with the common agricultural policy .
I would like to stress that my ' yes ' vote for this report is not an expression of support for the common agricultural policy itself .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome Mrs Jeggle 's work and I voted in favour of her report on the need to compile crop statistics .
I share the opinion of the rapporteur and the Commission that statistics on crops are essential for the evaluation of the common agricultural policy and the management of EU markets in these goods .
I am pleased that Mrs Jeggle has emphasised that additional costs and burdens should remain within reasonable limits , so that the benefits of simplified bureaucracy and better quality legislation are not offset by overly high costs associated with the proposed measures .
I believe that the report fits perfectly with the action programme for reducing administrative burdens in the European Union set out in the Communication of 24 January 2007 and , as I said , it therefore has my support .
As I have already stated when I expressed my support for the report on promoting agricultural products on the Community market and in third countries , wine is one of the Community 's products which enjoys a dominant position on the global market and must assume a key role in Europe 's commercial strategy .
In order to provide better support for the different types of wines , not only traditional types but also those referred to in the present report , we need however simple , flexible regulations which comply with European principles for promoting quality .
At the same time , we need better cooperation between Member States , European institutions , producers , as well as producer and distributor organisations .
I welcome the European Commission 's proposal and the report presented by our fellow Member , József Szájer , as we will therefore have standard , simplified rules on the definition , description and presentation of aromatised wines , aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product cocktails .
These products are renowned worldwide and , thanks to the new provisions , we will successfully achieve a better position on the market for them , while supporting Community producers and distributors .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mr Szájer 's report on aromatised wines , aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product cocktails .
I believe that the wine industry is very important for the EU economy , since a number of countries , including Italy , France and Spain , rank among the world 's leading wine producers and export their celebrated products all over the world .
I therefore welcome the proposal to lay down clear rules for the definition of the aforesaid categories of wine-based products , so that the high quality of European produce may always be recognised and identified .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Social Democrats in the European Parliament have chosen to vote in favour of the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006 / 112 / EC as regards reduced rates of value added tax .
However , we would like to stress that we do not consider reduced rates of value added tax to be a solution to the problem of a ' black ' economy .
in writing . - Today we voted on the report on reduced rates of VAT .
These amendments highlight that reduced VAT rates would have a positive impact in reshaping many service sectors as they would reduce the level of undeclared work .
With regard to the housing sector , it is possible to apply reduced VAT rates to renovation and repair work aimed at increased energy savings and efficiency .
The proposal goes back to the summer of 2008 and proposes the addition of certain other locally supplied services , including restaurant services .
In addition to housing and restaurant catering services , labour-intensive services will be permanently included in the list of services eligible for reduced rates .
The category is broadened to include other locally supplied services of similar nature such as : minor repairs of tangible movable goods , including bikes , shoes , clothes , computers , watches ; cleaning and maintenance services for all these goods ; domestic care services ; all personal care services , including hairdressing , beauty services , gardening services ; renovation and maintenance services provided for places of worship and cultural heritage and historical monuments .
Also , the category of pharmaceutical products is widened to cover all absorbent hygiene products , particularly children 's nappies and medical equipment for the disabled .
Printed books , including audio-books , under current legislation may also be subject to reduced rates .
The fostering of small- and medium-sized enterprises - which comprise 99 % of Europe 's companies , which are responsible for more than 100 million jobs and which , in the last eight years alone , have created 8 million jobs - is central to the Small Business Act .
The current proposal exemplifies the measures taken .
It allows certain companies to benefit from a reduced rate of VAT , while at the same time trying to tackle the underground labour market and call for the creation of legitimate companies .
While keen to facilitate the operation of SMEs , we must not jeopardise the fundamental principles of the EU .
In this case , the single market is protected as the rules in this document will apply to companies which operate only locally , thus avoiding market distortions .
For all these reasons I voted in favour of this report , which I regard as a perfect example of the policies to be adopted by the European Parliament in the economic field .
in writing . - ( FR ) For the first time I am happy to vote for a European directive on taxation .
For a while , until there is a more general revision which could call everything into question , the most glaring aberrations in this directive will disappear .
Locally supplied services , such as restaurants , which in any case do not have anything to do with the problems of the internal market and distortion of competition , and labour-intensive services will be able to benefit from a reduced rate .
The ball is now in the governments ' court .
First of all in the Council , which has not yet made its decision .
Then at national level , where we are watching carefully the manner and speed with which our people in power will keep their electoral promises .
I am afraid , however , that this good news may have its roots in the crisis ; the fall in the spending power of Europeans and especially the imminence of the European elections .
The proper solution would have been to bring an end once and for all to tax harmonisation , for which there is still no justification .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which will allow Britain to reduce VAT rates for a new category of goods and services including restaurant services and other local services .
I support the report because it gives smaller companies the opportunity to attract better custom .
The report represents positive action in combating the recession by making smaller , local companies more attractive to customers .
in writing . - Conservatives have always argued that taxation is a fundamental issue of sovereignty and therefore any move to transfer powers in this area from the European Union to the Member States is to be welcomed .
This measure , which allows Member States to apply a lower rate of VAT to a number of locally provided and labour intensive services , is a positive example of the application of the principle of subsidiarity , and we encourage the Commission to move further in this direction .
In particular , we would have liked the reduced rate to have been extended to locally produced beers and ciders , as this would help pubs to survive when they are suffering from high levels of duty .
We stress that it is for Member States to decide when it is appropriate to apply these measures .
The recent reduction of the general rate of VAT in the United Kingdom has been an expensive exercise which has produced little effect , when other measures such as much bigger but targeted reductions in VAT , as permitted by this proposal , or increased personal income tax allowances , would have been more beneficial both to individuals and to the economy as a whole .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament , Poul Nyrup Rasmussen , Britta Thomsen , Christel Schaldemose , Dan Jørgensen and Ole Christensen , have abstained from the vote on Mrs van den Burg 's report on reduced rates of value added tax .
It is the view of our delegation that a reduction in VAT in Denmark would have an extremely modest effect on employment combined with a problematic loss of revenue for the state .
In view of the current economic crisis , there may , however , be more of a need in other EU Member States to utilise the instrument of VAT as one element of their national crisis packages and thus strengthen employment in sectors that have been badly affected .
We already have very different rates of VAT , and therefore we do not want to prevent other EU Member States from taking this path .
It could also have a positive effect on demand in the Danish economy .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party voted in favour of this report .
We consider that VAT reduction can make a contribution to the maintenance of certain jobs and allow for the creation of others .
Each country has submitted experiences which have allowed for some belief in the fact that local conditions need local reactions ; this is true of a tax such as VAT .
In the UK a general reduction in VAT has led to a fall in inflation of 1 % and an injection into the economy of GBP 12 billion .
in writing . - Since 11 September 2001 , America has led a global war on terror .
Sadly , the absolutist culture of human rights in the EU and the political cowardice of many of its senior politicians have obliged the United States to assume a grossly disproportionate responsibility for tackling a threat that knows no boundaries .
Islamist jihadi extremists pose a threat to our very way of life .
Politicians have a responsibility to protect the public against this unprecedented and existentialist danger .
I am glad that some countries in the EU saw fit to cooperate with the CIA , our American allies .
I cannot understand why some countries put the human rights of terrorists over the protection of their own citizens and refused to cooperate with the CIA .
Once again the anti-Americanism so prevalent in the EU put its citizens ' safety in jeopardy .
This whole issue shows the importance of each Member State retaining the right to act independently in matters of foreign policy and intelligence .
I voted against this report .
In 2007 , as a result of the investigation conducted by the Committee which presided over this issue , the European Parliament adopted a resolution which contained dozens of recommendations aimed at preventing a repetition of these illegal activities .
It is now engaged in a process of assessing the application of those recommendations , using a methodology which I proposed .
The President of the European Parliament recently sent a formal request for cooperation to the presidents of the national parliaments and a hearing will be held shortly .
Adopting a new resolution before this process is completed would be rash and would lead to mistakes : the mistake of speaking too soon when there is nothing new to say ; the mistake of yielding to the desire to adopt a resolution in order to affect people or make domestic policy ; and the mistake of starting off by criticising President Obama when we should be working to boost transatlantic cooperation by taking advantage of the change in the US administration .
I therefore cannot vote in favour of this motion for a resolution .
I also cannot vote against a text which reiterates basic values of respect for human rights , the rule of law and the search for truth .
That is why I will abstain .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , my decision to vote against the motion for a resolution was based on the fact that it reiterates the same ideas that my group opposed in the final vote of the temporary committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners ( TDIP ) .
I give this opinion as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for the former TDIP temporary committee and for the subsequent working group within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The aforesaid committee decided to send a questionnaire to each Member State in order to clarify what developments had taken place following the European Parliament 's investigation .
To date however , as you are well aware , no response has been received to these questionnaires , even after written reminders were sent .
I do not therefore think it wise to adopt a new text claiming to make new conclusions when in reality we have nothing new to make public .
I have the feeling this is yet another electoral stunt by the Left , rather than an attempt to see justice .
in writing . - I did vote for keeping the reference to Portugal , including the reference to the responsibilities of the Barroso Government , despite the fact that I think that the text of that paragraph could be more accurate and mention ' new factual information ' and not just ' press information ' .
Without playing down important aspects with which we clearly disagree , not to mention its flagrant omissions and contradictions , this resolution :
' denounces the lack of action taken so far ... to shed light on the extraordinary renditions programme ' ;
' calls on the Member States , the Commission and the Council ... to assist in ascertaining the truth by opening inquiries or collaborating with the competent bodies , ... and by ensuring effective parliamentary scrutiny of the action of secret services ' ;
' calls on the European Union , the Member States and the US authorities to investigate and fully clarify the abuses and violations of international and national law on human rights , fundamental freedoms , the prohibition of torture and ill-treatment , enforced disappearance and the right to a fair trial committed in connection with the " war against terror ” , so as to establish responsibility ... and to ensure that such violations will not recur in the future ' .
However , the resolution does not demystify or denounce the fundamental element , namely the so-called ' fight against terror ' , nor does it condemn what it terms the ' limited maintenance of rendition schemes and of secret detention facilities ' by the US .
We need clear condemnation and a search for the truth , as in fact the Portuguese Communist Party proposed in the Portuguese Parliament and as the Portuguese Socialist , Social Democrat and Popular Parties rejected .
in writing . - Even though there are contentious elements in the CIA resolution , like welcoming the EU-US agreements on judicial cooperation and extradition , I still voted in favour of the resolution to support human rights and the attempt to shed light on the extraordinary renditions programme .
in writing . - The resolution adopted by this House reaffirms that , according to Article 14 of the UN Convention against Torture , any victim of an act of torture has an enforceable right to redress and to fair and adequate compensation .
It is telling that the UK Conservative Members of this House voted against the resolution .
It is equally telling that the UK Labour Members abstained .
The morally bankrupt Labour Government has led the UK into an illegal war and has allowed its airports to be used for extraordinary rendition flights .
The votes of the Unionist MEPs today adds further to this shame .
in writing . - Even though there are elements in the CIA resolution such as welcoming the EU-US agreements on judicial cooperation and extradition which I am very critical of , I still voted in favour of the resolution , to support human rights and the attempt to shed light on the extraordinary renditions programme .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have previously expressed my disgust with regard to the information that has come to light in respect of the treatment of people who are suspected , but not convicted , of crimes and who have been extradited and in some cases kidnapped by the authorities of various states .
This is totally unacceptable and contravenes the principles of modern democracy .
This matter has still not been cleared up and therefore it is good that these incidents are being brought to light .
Parliament 's resolution contains many positive elements , but I believe that the inclusion of irrelevant wordings makes its foreign policy ambitions far too high .
This shifts the focus from the main issue , which is that of the suspected violations of human rights .
That is very unfortunate .
I have therefore voted against this motion for a resolution .
I voted against the motion for a resolution on the alleged CIA activities involving the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners in some European countries as the purpose of this resolution is unfounded .
Firstly , I would like to emphasise that , from a procedural perspective , the political groups which signed this resolution ought to have waited for the replies from the national parliaments to the letter from President Pöttering dated 9 February 2009 , which requested details of the measures taken by Member States following the February 2007 resolution on this matter .
Secondly , it is completely unproductive getting ourselves bogged down again in suspicions and accusations against certain Member States , brought about by the executive order passed by President Obama in January 2009 , requesting the closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention centre within one year .
As regards Romania , Commissioner Barrot mentioned in his speech during the last part-session that he closely monitored the measures which the Romanian authorities took during this investigation .
I believe that Romania has entirely demonstrated good will in its cooperation and has supplied the Commission and European Parliament with all the necessary information , as well as with all the results of the investigations carried out on this matter .
I would also like this time , as on the occasion of the Strasbourg part-session held from 2 to 5 February , to reaffirm my opposition to the resolution on the alleged CIA activities involving the transportation and illegal detention of alleged terrorists on the territory of certain European countries .
The accusations levelled against Romania , according to which it had been involved in the terrorist suspect transfer programme , are unfounded .
It is therefore unacceptable for Romania 's name to be freely bandied about as part of the discussion on alleged CIA prisons .
So far , only accusations have been levelled at us without any credible proof to back them up .
Indeed , the Martin report is the best example of this approach as the accusations it makes against Romania are both controversial and unfounded .
I think that the reasoning behind a number of such serious accusations is part of the same commitment assumed by European governments to respect and promote the fundamental freedoms , rights and values of the European Union on behalf of which the draft resolution has been initiated .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I intend to use my vote to support the motion for a resolution on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners .
I believe it is extremely important to implement in full the recommendations made by this Parliament in the report by the temporary committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners because the existence of secret detention centres , enforced disappearances and the torture of detainees are not only a flagrant violation of international human rights law , the UN Convention on Torture , the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights but also cannot be tolerated in an international system governed by democracy and the rule of law .
For this reason I welcome the resolution , which urges all Member States to bring to light the abuse committed in this context in the name of the war on terror , since a genuine and effective war on terror cannot be fought by breaching the very same human rights and fundamental freedoms it is supposed to defend .
in writing . - EPLP MEPs believe that this resolution contains a number of points of merit .
We have consistently supported the drafting of this resolution and approved the joint resolution as tabled on behalf of four European Parliamentary groups .
However , we cannot support this Resolution if it includes unproven accusations which have not yet been judged by the relevant authorities .
Unfortunately , as amended , this resolution is no longer based on proven facts and the EPLP regretfully has no option but to abstain .
I refrained from voting , owing to the fact that I am unfamiliar with the details of the amendments to the said motion for a resolution .
in writing . - Even though there are contentious elements in the CIA resolution , like welcoming the EU-US agreements on judicial cooperation and extradition , I still voted in favour of the resolution to support human rights and the attempt to shed light on the extraordinary renditions programme .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I supported Mr Saryusz-Wolski 's report .
I am pleased that the report focuses primarily of the events of 2008 , which put the effectiveness of the EU 's foreign policy to the test .
Once again , we have ascertained that Europe 's strength lies in concerted action .
The same applies to European institutions .
They must work together , in the same way as the Member States do , in order for Europe to speak with one voice on the international stage .
in writing . - I support the retention of the national veto in matters of foreign affairs and I am increasingly concerned about the growing role of the EU on the world stage despite the fact that the Lisbon treaty has not been ratified .
Nevertheless , I accept that there are some areas in which the Union can act together to express its will , and one such area is Taiwan .
The council recently voiced its support for Taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organisations .
I support this policy because I think it is unacceptable to deny the 23 million people of Taiwan a voice on the international stage .
Taiwan is a prosperous democracy with a top-quality public health system .
I question the morality of excluding Taiwan from the benefits that would undoubtedly accrue from being granted observer status at the World Health Assembly .
Furthermore , I hope the EU institutions can together make progress on this issue before the next WHA meeting in May .
I welcome the report 's positive comments about the improvement in cross-straits relations .
I therefore voted to abstain on this report .
I would like to congratulate the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Saryusz-Wolski , for the excellent report he presented .
I feel that we must focus particular attention on the Eastern Partnership .
In my view , the Eastern Partnership must have a clear institutional structure , with parliamentary and intergovernmental dimensions , as well as adequate technical and financial bodies .
As regards the intergovernmental dimension , I feel that we need to establish a clear timetable of meetings at ministerial level involving the 27 Member States with their counterparts from the Eastern Partnership countries .
Obviously , in the case of Belarus , the EU Council 's decision to resume negotiations with both the government in Minsk and with all the democratic forces in this country must be supported .
Belarus 's authoritarian regime must understand that the EU stipulates as a firm condition of any cooperation the need to respect democratic principles and human rights .
I feel that the Eastern Partnership 's parliamentary dimension is important because it ensures this project 's democratic legitimacy .
The meetings of the future parliamentary assembly must contribute to the adoption of this project , both by the parties in power and the opposition forces which may offer an alternative government , based on democratic logic .
in writing . - ( EL ) The group of the Communist Party of Greece in the European Parliament voted against the annual report on the application of the EU common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2007 .
The report insultingly calls for the international political and military presence of the EU - in other words its imperialist interventions throughout the world - to be strengthened .
It uses problems generated by capitalist development , such as climate change and energy questions , as new pretexts for its imperialist interventionism and to improve its position over its global imperialist competitors .
At the same time , it seeks closer and deeper cooperation with the USA , with a view to taking a joint approach to grassroots reactions and resistance to their imperialist rule .
The report defends the EU 's imperialist action in various areas of the world , such as the Western Balkans , where it has already established the EULEX police / judicial force in Kosovo , the Middle East as a whole , Georgia , Africa and elsewhere , and is looking to become even stronger .
Year on year , the EU is becoming more aggressive to and dangerous for the people , who must fight a more decisive and coordinated fight to overturn this policy , together with the US and NATO policy and the imperialist order of things overall .
in writing . - This report criticises the human rights situation in China , but it might also have mentioned the human rights situation in Taiwan , which is exemplary .
Taiwan 's prosperous democracy , strengthened by constitutional protections and the rule of law , stands in stark contrast to the totalitarian communist dictatorship in China
I echo the report 's words about the improvement in cross-straits relations .
President Ma Ying-jeou is to be congratulated for bringing this about .
The CFSP is inevitably limited in scope while it remains subject to national veto .
Nevertheless , I welcome the Council 's recent expression of support for Taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organisations .
I hope the Council and the other institutions will endorse Taiwan 's ambition to be admitted as an observer to the World Health Assembly .
It is morally wrong for Taiwan to be excluded from a public health forum simply as a result of pressure from China .
I therefore voted to approve this report .
Just like two others debated and adopted in this sitting , this report is also very ambitious .
Leaving aside the rhetoric , the report believes that ' the coming months will provide a unique opportunity for the EU to work out a new transatlantic agenda with the new US administration , covering strategic issues of common concern , such as new ... global governance ' , particularly bearing in mind the forthcoming NATO summit and G20 meeting , both planned for April .
As a matter of fact , the report and the resolution constitute an outline of the objectives , priorities and interests of the EU 's major powers , whether in the Balkans ( Kosovo , Bosnia-Herzegovina ) , Eastern Europe ( Caucasus , Black Sea , Belarus , Georgia , Russia ) , Middle East ( Gaza Strip , Iraq ) , Mediterranean , Central Asia ( Afghanistan , Iran ) , Africa ( Chad , Sudan , Somalia , Democratic Republic of the Congo ) , Asia ( China ) or Latin America .
Its content ranges from the most blatant violations of international law , interference and interventionism to poorly concealed ambitions of political and economic control by the EU 's major powers .
That is the real content and meaning of the ' EU 's role in the world ' that has been announced : in other words , its ambition to share control of areas of influence , markets and natural resources with the US and Japan .
in writing . - ( PL ) I gave Mr Jacek Sarysz-Wolski 's report , on the main features of the common foreign and security policy , my unequivocal support .
The Council 's report for 2007 provides a fitting description of these issues .
It would be difficult not to agree that the financial resources earmarked for implementing the CFSP are far from sufficient , particularly in circumstances involving aggressive terrorist activity .
The right to live in peace and with a sense of security is an EU priority .
That security has multiple dimensions : political , military , energy , food , and so on .
Cooperation with other countries plays an enormous role in this field .
The particular importance of transatlantic relations with the USA and Canada should be acknowledged , as should the closer cooperation between the EU and NATO .
The Eastern Partnership may be acknowledged as very promising .
In this regard , relations with Russia , Ukraine , Georgia and Belarus are worthy of note .
The EU can also exert a positive influence on the situation in the Middle East .
The recent conflict in the Gaza Strip has demonstrated the dramatic circumstances in which the people of that region live , be they Palestinian or Jewish .
In the field of security , the EU 's actions will only be effective if we speak and act as one .
Focusing on individual interests can only bring temporary benefits .
Moreover , universal solidarity requires particular respect for fundamental values and human rights , as well as the dignity and freedom to which every individual is entitled .
The role that suitable diplomatic efforts , including the use of so-called preventive diplomacy , can play in this field is by no means a minor one .
As apparent from the debate and the report on the common foreign and security policy , the European Union 's ambition in terms of foreign policy is huge .
It is clearly apparent from the facts that the EU 's role in the world does not match up to this ambition .
However , not only is its role growing , but in the vast majority of cases the Member States are in agreement and act in cooperation .
The sharing of values , principles and priorities between the 27 Member States of the European Union is much more widespread than may be suggested by the times of disagreement .
This is exactly as to be expected .
That is why I support strengthening the agreement on which our priorities and criteria for action are based .
The recognition , however , that there are disagreements which basically stem from the existence of different interests and priorities does not lead me to conclude that the EU is irrelevant in the world or that a single foreign policy needs to be imposed on all the Member States , contrary to their own interests or even their own history .
A community is being built and this process , albeit slow , has more chance of succeeding than the desire to impose a single approach , which is not essential .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the ' Annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) in 2007 , presented to the European Parliament in application of point G , paragraph 43 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 ' in order to support peace , human dignity , human rights , democracy , multilateralism and the rule of law .
in writing . - The Saryusz-Wolski report contains some welcome references to Taiwan , and in particular the recent thaw in cross-straits relations .
I congratulate Taiwanese President Ma for his courageous and determined initiative to improve relations with the People 's Republic of China .
Nevertheless , I fear we in the EU do not fully appreciate the importance of supporting democratic Taiwan and giving its 23 million people a voice on the international stage .
The Council supports Taiwan 's meaningful participation in international organisations .
It is time Parliament reiterated this support , especially with regard to Taiwan 's ambition to become an observer in the World Health Assembly .
Taiwan 's exclusion from this body at the behest of China is reprehensible .
As a medical doctor , I deprecate the interference of politics in matters of public health .
We stand up to China over Tibet ; we stand up to China over human rights ; it is time we stood up to China over Taiwan .
I voted to abstain on this report .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues welcome the need for effective inter-governmental co-operation within the CFSP , provided the United Kingdom retains its veto and ability to act alone in its national interest when required .
The report has good things to say on the need for more co-operation internationally by the 27 EU Member States in areas such as transatlantic relations , Georgia , the Eastern Partnership and the broader Middle East .
However , we oppose the minor references to the Treaty of Lisbon .
We have long expressed our opposition to the Treaty and do not believe that it would be in the interests of the UK and the EU to have the new foreign policy tools provided for in the Treaty .
For these reasons , we abstained overall .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I supported Mr von Wogau 's report .
I am firmly in favour of strengthening the ESDP .
Expanding the scope of cooperation between the European armed forces is , as the report emphasises , an essential step towards establishing a common foreign and defence policy .
I also concur with the notion that the European Union should assure not only its own security , but also that of its neighbours .
Our neighbours ' seemingly bilateral conflicts have a direct impact on the EU .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report on updating the European Security Strategy openly supports even greater militarisation of the EU in order to strengthen its military capabilities for its imperialist interventions .
It welcomes the Council 's objective of the EU 's acquiring a permanent military force of 60 000 men built up around the Franco-German Eurocorps armed forces which already exist , equipped with common weapons systems and ready to fight in ' rapid response actions ' in various areas of the world simultaneously .
The pretexts for EU intervention , the so-called ' threats ' against its security , are constantly expanding , including sectors , in addition to ' terrorism ' , such as climate change , energy security , cyberspace , regional clashes , maritime transport and even space .
In fact , the EU is reserving the ' right ' of military intervention where and when it deems necessary for its imperialist interests and , more to the point , not only against third countries and peoples , but also against the peoples of its Member States , in order to defend the power of the monopolies as and when necessary .
That is why the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
Only grassroots disobedience and a break with the imperialist and anti-grassroots policy of the EU and its overall construct can pave the way for a Europe of peace and grassroots prosperity .
in writing . - Mr von Wogau has my congratulations on his work both here and more generally for his chairmanship of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
I support the idea of an EU Operational Military Headquarters being established .
Of course NATO should be and is our first port of call when security is threatened .
Yet during the Bush-Gore debates just over a decade ago , George Bush said that had he been President he would not have intervened in Kosovo .
Now despite my antipathy to the Bush Administration 's foreign policy it seems to me that it is a perfectly reasonable position for Bush to take on the basis of US self-interest .
Yet it is not a position that Europe could or should have followed .
Apart from the strong moral argument that we had a responsibility to protect those facing the genocide of the Serbs , we also had the consequences of tens / hundreds of thousands of refugees .
We , in our own and their interests , must have the capacity to engage without the Americans .
To do this , it is a small price we pay to have a permanent EU Operational Military HQ ready for such a future eventuality .
Like the report on ' the role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU ' , this report ( and resolution ) reasserts the objective of affirming and consolidating the EU as a political and military bloc with an offensive nature , in partnership with the US and within the framework of NATO .
Among other important and enlightening aspects , this report and resolution reasserts the offensive and global concept of NATO , considering that ' the updated ESS [ European Security Strategy ] and the future NATO Strategic Concept should be mutually coherent and that this should be reflected in the Declaration which will be adopted by the NATO summit in Strasbourg / Kehl in April 2009 ' .
It actually goes even further as it ' calls for the setting-up of an ... EU Operational Headquarters ' .
In the end , the report and resolution constitute a real denunciation , not that this was its intention , of the militarisation of the EU and of the so-called ' Treaty of Lisbon ' which institutionalises this militarisation .
Those in Ireland who denounced and therefore rejected the militaristic nature of this proposed Treaty , the ratification of which would mean further militarisation of international relations , a continued arms race , and more interference and war , are right .
Those in Portugal , like the Portuguese Communist Party , who , in rejecting this Treaty , have demanded that a referendum and wide national debate should be held on its extremely serious consequences for Portugal , Europe and the world , and for peace , are right .
in writing . - British Labour MEPs joined with the Socialist Group in voting in favour of this report .
Labour MEPs voted against the section of text devoted to the creation of a permanent EU Military Operational Headquarters .
Labour MEPs have consistently questioned the need for this type of new institutional structure .
We believe that Europe needs to focus on ensuring it has the right capabilities to deploy at the right time , and making sure existing institutions function effectively rather than building additional institutions as an expensive and unnecessary luxury .
in writing . - This report calls for the setting-up of an autonomous and permanent EU Operational Headquarters with the capacity to undertake strategic planning and to conduct European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) operations and missions .
The report is right to recommend the reform of the United Nations Organization in order to make it capable of fully meeting its responsibilities and acting effectively in providing solutions to global challenges and responding to key threats .
I welcome the report on the ESS and ESDP which contains some relevant , useful points for defining the European Union 's future policies as a global player .
I would like to mention at this point the need to coordinate the European Union 's security dimension with NATO 's to prevent any duplication of effort and waste of resources .
In this context , I welcome the Council 's initiative to set up an informal EU-NATO high-level group .
Furthermore , relations with Russia must be reassessed in light of the recent events in this area .
In order to promote stability among its eastern neighbours and minimise the impact on Member States , the EU must adopt a tough policy towards Russia , which should be drafted in close cooperation with transatlantic partners and include the relevant multilateral organisations , as well as the OSCE .
This objective is also closely linked to the absolute necessity to make the provision of energy secure in Europe , which can only be achieved if we join forces through specific projects involving diversification of energy resources .
Looking around Europe it is clear that , in terms of security , the European Union has , and must have , its own strategic concerns and priorities .
This is dictated by the geography , and also by the geopolitics .
Saying this does not in any way correspond to an idea of security or a concern for defence conceived as an alternative to our alliances , not least our alliance with the United States .
Saying this does , however , correspond to an idea of European responsibility .
If we want security , then we must be ready to bear the burdens that this brings , whether physical or human .
It also necessitates an agreement on what is common and what can be shared in this concern for security and among these burdens .
Security has a price , and the demand for greater multilateralism on our allies ' part imposes an added cost .
The next period will be demanding in this respect .
Europeans cannot demand more security without paying for it .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the ' European Security Strategy and ESDP ' as I feel that the European Union needs to develop strategic autonomy by means of a powerful and effective security and defence policy .
I also think that the European Union must be able to guarantee its own security , as well as that of neighbouring countries .
in writing . - The Conservative Delegation fundamentally opposes the EU involvement in defence which this report aims significantly to extend .
ESDP is a political project that contributes no additional military capability while at the same time duplicating and undermining NATO .
The report envisions further unacceptable transfer of national competence in defence and security to the EU .
It proposes ' integrated European Armed Forces ' and ' Synchronised Armed Forces Europe ' as an EU army in embryo .
It is also replete with positive references to the Treaty of Lisbon , which we have strenuously opposed .
We therefore voted against the Report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against this own-initiative report in its entirety , as we believe it to be superfluous .
Some parts of the report are poor and do not contribute to furthering the European security policy debate .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this report , presented by the French Christian Democrat , Mr Vatanen .
The text of this report relates to the role of NATO in the security architecture of the European Union .
It is an important issue that needs to be considered .
In my opinion , however , the answers given in this report were not good ones and they left the root of the problem unresolved .
By my vote , I certainly did not wish to deny the role that Europe has to play internationally .
As an economic and demographic power , it is expected to act according to its values and must do so in order to maintain peace and intercultural dialogue .
Strengthening the European Union 's military credibility is , however , indispensable .
That is why I am emphasising my commitment to creating a European security and defence policy that has real autonomy .
In my opinion , this is not what Mr Vatanen 's report promises .
Some stumbling blocks remain , in particular concerning denuclearisation and relations with Russia .
The number of amendments tabled proves it ( 265 ) : the text of the report was far from achieving unanimous approval .
It does not address the main concern which is to ensure that Europe has a strong defence and cooperates with NATO , but is not subservient to it .
In the area of security and defence , the actions carried out by the European Union as a global player have taken the form of intervention to prevent conflict , thereby giving it the status of the main promoter of peace in the world .
While , at the end of the Cold War , there were questions raised about NATO 's role , the new threats to security and progress noted by Europeans in the area of defence and the implementation of civil-military operations in different parts of the world highlight the need for a new arrangement for EU-NATO cooperation .
In the present context , the lack of any common European foreign policy and discrepancies between Member States in the area of funding and military technological capacity make NATO a vital partner for managing military crises .
Adopting a division of labour whereby ESDP supports civil operations and NATO ensures the rapid deployment of numerous military forces should guarantee that both organisations complement and not compete with each other .
Consequently , the rapporteur 's suggestion to create an EU operational headquarters could serve precisely this objective by complementing the current NATO command structures in the area of joint civil and military operations .
In addition , we must also take into account in future EU-NATO relations the situation of states in Eastern Europe .
With this in mind , it is important to promote an open-door policy and support a constructive dialogue with Russia aimed at establishing collective security in this part of Europe .
in writing . - One of the EU 's more spurious claims of self-justification is that it has maintained peace in Europe since 1945 .
In fact , NATO is largely responsible for keeping the peace in Europe since the Second World War .
There is a strong anti-American lobby in the European Parliament .
That is to be greatly regretted , because America 's selfless contribution to rescuing Europe in the 1940s and keeping peace in Europe ever since is often obscured by anti-US propaganda .
America 's part in our collective security is , and will remain , vital .
Of course , there are crossovers regarding the work of NATO and the EU , but they are two fundamentally different organisations .
Any effort by the EU to usurp NATO 's primacy and responsibility for transatlantic security is to be strongly resisted .
I therefore elected to abstain .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report literally paints what is black white and insultingly extols the so-called ' peaceful ' and ' democratic ' nature and role both of NATO and the EU , which are guilty of so many crimes against humanity , and presents them as common guardians of peace and human rights in Europe .
It insultingly and with no trace of seriousness goes as far as maintaining that the citizens allegedly decide and the ΝΑΤΟ army executes .
It calls on the EU to claim an enhanced role in its transatlantic cooperation with the USA and NATO , in order to promote the particular interests of European capital .
In this direction , it urges greater cooperation in ' crisis management ' , such as in Afghanistan and Kosovo , better exchange of information between the two imperialist organisations and so on .
It welcomes the French initiative of a return to the military structures of NATO , at the same time calling for NATO and the EU to expand , and inadmissibly demands that Cyprus join the NATO ' Partnership for Peace ' .
The Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
It condemns the imperialist , criminal nature of ΝΑΤΟ and the EU and emphasises the urgent need for the grassroots fight to be stepped up , in order to get our country out of the imperialist organisations and unions , and the need to fight to break them up and overturn the barbaric imperialist order of things .
in writing . - I declare that I voted in favour in the final vote on the Vatanen report on the role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU .
Here we have a European Parliament report and resolution which , despite containing certain mystifying elements , are essential reading .
It is a text which makes explicit - if any doubt existed - one of the objectives and central themes of the EU and its proposed Treaty of Lisbon : the militarisation of the EU and its consolidation as a political and military bloc , within the framework of NATO ; that is , in partnership ( coordination and rivalry ) with the US .
As it is impossible to comment , in this short explanation of vote , on the whole content of this report and resolution , I would stress that these consider that the time has come for the major capitalist powers of the EU to assert themselves .
As a result , they look ' forward to the opportunities afforded by NATO 's forthcoming 60th anniversary summit in Strasbourg and Kehl for the rejuvenation of the Alliance and the strengthening of its relations with the European Union ' , to which the recent Munich Security Conference was the prologue .
In this context they strongly welcome ' the French initiative of a formal return to the military structures of NATO , and the efforts by the French Presidency within the EU Council to bring the EU and NATO further together in response to the new security challenges ' .
Here is a report and resolution in step with the imperialist ambitions of the EU 's major powers .
in writing . - British Labour MEPs are supportive of positive cooperation between NATO and the EU , and welcome sharing of experience and expertise as a key method for strengthening basic capabilities , improving interoperability and coordinating planning , equipment and training .
We voted in favour of the original text in paragraph 22 as we welcome French participation as part of strengthening EU-NATO cooperation .
On the final vote , British Labour MEPs joined with the Socialist Group in voting against this report , particularly due to the inclusion of an entire section devoted to the creation of a permanent EU Military Operational Headquarters .
Labour MEPs have consistently questioned the need for this type of new institutional structure .
We believe that Europe needs to focus on ensuring it has the right capabilities to deploy at the right time , and making sure existing institutions function effectively rather than building additional institutions as an expensive and unnecessary luxury .
in writing . - I could not support the Vatanen report on the role of NATO in the security of the EU .
The report states that NATO forms the core of European security .
I take a contrary view .
I believe that Europe 's security is enhanced by the EU 's common foreign and security policy .
NATO , however , remains a nuclear weapons-based alliance .
I am totally opposed to nuclear weapons and my party is committed to removing nuclear weapons from Scottish soil when we achieve independence .
An independent Scotland will not remain in NATO whilst it remains a nuclear alliance .
in writing . - ( NL ) NATO played an important role during the Cold War between 1949 and 1989 .
Its official task was to defend the Member States ' common territory against foreign invasions , without taking action outside of that territory .
The justification was the defence of a pluriform democracy against dictatorships , but in practice it was mainly about protecting a capitalist economy from a socialist economy .
The right-wing dictatorships in Portugal and Greece were allowed to join in , there were bilateral agreements with a similar dictatorship in Spain , and the French colony of Algeria was forced to belong to NATO territory until 1962 .
When the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact disappeared , this NATO lost its raison d 'être .
Its continued existence is a problem for the EU , because six Member States have opted for military neutrality .
The current NATO is still more of a ' coalition of the willing ' around the USA than an extension of the EU .
This year , just as NATO is turning 60 , it will have to be apparent what future role NATO will claim .
If it is that of the world 's policeman , carrying out its own projects independently of the United Nations with a view to benefiting the economically most powerful states , this organisation will prove harmful and superfluous .
That is why I will be voting ' no ' .
I welcome the Vatanen report as a realistic appraisal of European security .
Although we would like to draw up a European security policy capable of meeting the security needs of all EU members , we must accept that a security structure already exists which acts as the centre of gravity of the majority of EU Member States ' defence .
I am talking about NATO .
However , I would like to emphasise the importance of using the comparative benefits of the two organisations in order to draw up a solid humanitarian intervention policy .
No matter what terms are used to formulate the European Security Strategy , the EU ' mosaic ' will allow us to intervene in complex areas where diplomacy or limited intervention are only possible thanks to the EU 's unrivalled capacity for subtlety .
By the same token , we have in NATO a solid alliance , with tried-and-tested mechanisms , which we Europeans must not stop resorting to in order to reduce the suffering which some conflicting forces are causing with impunity .
A first step towards this consolidation may be an operational headquarters for the European Union .
Irrespective of the specific policies which will guide our external actions , we welcome close transatlantic cooperation as the most practical solution to these challenges and as an embodiment of our community of values .
The location of Europe dictates its security priorities and concerns .
However , the integration of Europe and the 27 Member States within a set of values and a model of society which , in a broad sense , we call the western world also defines the threats and our security context .
For that reason , the alliance that most EU Member States share with the United States , among others , is and must continue to be a central element in our security .
In the year in which we are celebrating the 60th anniversary of the Atlantic Alliance , it is time to rethink its strategic concept and bring it into line with the new reality .
Following the end of the Cold War , it is time to move beyond the end of the end of the Cold War and bring these concepts into line with the new reality that is forming : the emergence of the Pacific , the greater relevance of Asia , the role that Russia is seeking to redefine for itself , and the threats posed by failed states and global terrorist groups , among others .
We are therefore seeking to play an active part in this strategic redefinition , as full partners in the Atlantic Alliance .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the ' Role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU ' as I feel that a strong , dynamic transatlantic relationship guarantees stability and security in Europe .
In my opinion , strong ties between the EU and NATO make a significant contribution to the European Union 's raison d 'être , which is based on establishing peace both within its whole territory and beyond its borders .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Ari Vatanen 's report on the role of NATO in the security architecture of the EU .
The rapporteur has pointed out the most important deficiencies of the current EU ' security architecture ' and offers clear and effective solutions for improving the security of the European Union .
I agree with the rapporteur that it is crucial for Europe 's security as well as for the world in general , to maintain and to deepen the co-operation between NATO and the EU .
Even though there have been several improvements that have made the NATO-EU relations more effective , there is room for improvement in many aspects .
In order to develop a more efficient co-operation , all EU Member States should be present at the EU-NATO joint meetings .
The recent years , bearing in mind the unresolved issues between Cyprus and Turkey , have showed clearly that the current EU-NATO meetings are not nearly as successful and productive as they could be .
The USA and NATO must be regarded as partners not as rivals .
The EU and NATO amend each other and together , our common goals can be attained the fastest and most effectively .
in writing . - I voted against this report .
The strength and security of Europe has depended for some time on the allies willing to play an active role in our defence .
On Europe 's borders and across the world today it is clear that NATO continues to provide the nexus of cooperation which provides for our safety and the safety of others .
Clearly from time to time changes in global strategic interests mean adjusting priorities and approaches .
The need for NATO to maintain continued vigilance and be supported , especially in Afghanistan at this present time , is essential .
That is why calls for more troop commitments and logistical support need to be heeded by other European nations .
I also welcome the French commitment now recently announced .
in writing . - The Conservative Delegation welcomes some aspects of this report , including the endorsement of NATO as the core of European security , and the call for Member States to invest more in defence .
However , it is in essence a paean to ESDP , which we have opposed both in principle and in practice for more than ten years .
It refers to the Treaty of Lisbon , which we have strenuously opposed , and also voices support for a permanent EU operational headquarters , backing for an EU ' White Book ' on European defence , and unequivocal praise of the European Defence Agency .
For these reasons we abstained on the report .
in writing . - The Barcelona Process was adopted by the Heads of State and Government at the Summit for the Mediterranean held in Paris on July 13 , 2008 .
It contributes towards peace and prosperity , and it will constitute a step towards economic and regional integration as well as ecological and climate cooperation between the Mediterranean countries .
Since my country is a Mediterranean State , such a process is viewed with great attention .
I agree that opening up the process to countries not involved in the partnership increases the likelihood of establishing parity in relations between the European Union and the Mediterranean partner countries and of tackling the problems of the region in a comprehensive way .
Coming from the Mediterranean archipelago of Malta and Gozo , I fully appreciate the contributions which the process can make .
It is essential that the strategic value of Euro-Mediterranean relations and the Barcelona Process acquis be reaffirmed in the shape of regional and sub-regional programmes and common guidelines for bilateral cooperation .
This has taken on an added importance in view of the recent issues in Gaza and the declarations in Cyprus .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the objective of the Barcelona Process is to support the countries of the Southern Mediterranean as they develop and attain independence .
It is important , within the framework of various programmes , for these countries to be able to exchange experiences with EU Member States which themselves have recently undergone political and economic transformations .
To this end , it is necessary to establish appropriate cooperation frameworks .
I also supported the report , as EU support for the Mediterranean Region has no adverse effect on other regional cooperation initiatives , such as the Eastern Partnership .
Despite its careful language , the report goes astray in terms of what it objectively and consciously omits or tries to hide : for example , its failure to denounce and condemn the systematic and brutal violation of international law and human rights by Israel - which is settling the occupied territories of Palestine and which is oppressing the Palestinian people - and by Morocco , which is settling the Western Sahara and oppressing the Sahrawi people .
The report conceals the EU 's unacceptable immigration policy and its inhuman , criminalising , security-focused and exploitative nature .
In that respect , it accepts the provision in the agreements between the EU and the Mediterranean countries for ' funding of immigration centres ' .
On the other hand , the report does not hide the fact that the model advocated for the so-called ' Union for the Mediterranean ' is ultimately the same as that of the EU itself , guided by liberalisation of the markets , including energy , and by capitalist competition , thus trying to ensure political and economic control by the major powers .
It sets out the objective of the ' creation of a ... Euro-Mediterranean free trade area ' and not a ' Euro-Mediterranean partnership ... based on equality of treatment , solidarity , dialogue and respect for the specific asymmetries and characteristics of each country ' , as we proposed in an amendment that we tabled .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support increased cooperation with countries in the Mediterranean region , but we cannot lend our support to increased EU power within integration policy , formulated in paragraph 29 .
We also regret the fact that the report does not impose any requirements on occupying powers such as Israel and Morocco .
In a report that talks of strengthening human rights in the Mediterranean region , this should be a minimum requirement .
We therefore voted against this report in the vote .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Mediterranean is the EU 's southern border .
For many years , the EU has pursued close cooperation with coastal states that do not belong to the EU and some of which will never be able to join the EU .
This cooperation is deemed important in the south of Europe but is of far less significance to the rest of Europe .
Despite this , there are no major differences of opinion about this , because nobody objects to good relations at the EU 's external borders .
Mainly on France 's initiative , this cooperation has been further intensified lately .
In this connection , separate , permanent structures have been put in place .
The question is what the purpose of these permanent structures is .
Is it an attempt to move closer towards the Syrian and Libyan dictatorships , which are constantly violating human rights ?
Is it an attempt to find an alternative to full EU membership that has been promised in the long term to the coastal states of Croatia , Montenegro , Albania and Turkey ?
Is it a means of further tightening the ties with Israel despite the fact that , as a result of the election result on 10 February , no Israeli cooperation can be expected for the next four years in establishing a neighbouring Palestinian state with equal rights ?
I cannot endorse this proposal for the time being .
in writing . - ( DE ) The projects proposed by the newly-formed Union for the Mediterranean all sound well and good : the Solar Plan , collaboration in civil protection , joint initiatives for the depollution of the Mediterranean and new port and motorway projects .
However , as we all know , you can say what you like on paper .
Whether anything will actually be done is doubtful .
After all , the organisation 's predecessor , Euromed , did not actually achieve anything .
Moreover , as long as the participating states do not see any actual possibility of these projects coming to fruition , they will surely not sacrifice existing good bilateral relations for the sake of a vague project .
As I do not believe that the new Union for the Mediterranean will be any more successful than its predecessor organisation , I have voted against this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for this report .
I believe that the concept of a Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which first took shape in the Barcelona Declaration in 1995 , is ready to be taken forward in a more practical and effective manner than has been the case hitherto .
I am pleased that the rapporteur supports the decision to reinforce the democratic legitimacy of the Union for the Mediterranean by enhancing the role of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
This is because I firmly believe that establishing a serious , lasting partnership ought to go beyond the scope of mere economic cooperation and financial support - although these are undoubtedly important - and should enable the objectives of peace and institutional stability , as well as prosperity and economic growth , to be achieved .
I share the rapporteur 's hopes that the strengthening of Euro-Mediterranean relations will provide a boost to the development of an area of collective and individual security , going beyond the area covered by the agreement , and that the European Union can contribute to the promotion of the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and mutual understanding between different peoples and cultures ; these , unfortunately , are still often seriously infringed even in countries with which the EU maintains regular economic relations .
To this end , I hope that the instruments to be made available will be adequate in terms of achieving the ambitious goals that this partnership is setting itself .
in writing . - ( PL ) What is of significance to me is that the agreement , within the framework of the Barcelona Process , facilitates the regulation of many regional strategic issues such as energy security , environmental protection and water management .
I would also like to draw your attention to the substantial progress that has been made in terms of creating a Euro-Mediterranean free trade zone , which is to be definitively established in 2010 .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise the need for considerably broader cooperation in the following sectors : services ( medical and educational ) , agriculture , as this provides the basis for the region 's economy , and , in conjunction with the latter , the monitoring of food security .
Finally , I would like to raise the issue of supporting democratic change in the Mediterranean region .
In my opinion , this issue goes hand in hand with the need to promote social integration and support the activities of the inhabitants in the countries of that region .
Dialogue , the promotion of multicultural and religious tolerance , as well as educational projects , may pave the way for a peaceful solution to the conflicts in which those countries are currently involved .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues support stronger multilateral EU-Mediterranean relations as promoted by the Barcelona Process and its successor , the Union for the Mediterranean .
This will allow for closer economic and political co-operation in terms of enhanced aid and trade facilities , as well as security issues , in exchange for the promotion of common values in the sphere of democracy and human rights and the rule of law .
We wish to make clear our opposition to the Treaty of Lisbon in accordance with our long-held policy and we cannot therefore accept the references to it in Paragraph 10 of this report .
However , overall we support the Report and therefore have voted in favour .
in writing . - We have voted on the report of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Policy Instrument and the following points have been made :
the Mediterranean component of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument should complement the Barcelona Process , and the ENP 's objectives need to be more clearly defined in order to strengthen the Barcelona Process by favouring a multilateral regional approach ;
there should be enhanced EU involvement in the Black Sea region and an ambitious Eastern Partnership .
There is also a need to accelerate the establishment of a free-trade zone in relation to Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Ukraine and Moldova in particular , as soon as partner countries are ready ;
an Eastern Neighbourhood assembly ( ' Euroeast ' ) , with the participation of the European Parliament , should be created on the same lines as the Euromed and EuroLat assemblies with a view to implementing the ENPI in the countries of eastern Europe , namely Armenia , Azerbaijan , Georgia , Moldova , Ukraine and Belarus .
I believe that we have to tread carefully to take into consideration Russia 's sensitivities on the immediate neighbours once we are seeing a new approach between the United States and Russia .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I voted for the report .
At a time as delicate as the present , I would argue that we need enhanced cooperation in neighbourhood and partnership relations in order to establish a friendly environment in the closest environs of the European Union , as the ENP 's main objective sets out .
I hope to see greater integration and a resulting rapprochement in the economic and political spheres between the European Union and neighbouring countries , and am therefore in full agreement with the report by Mr Konrad Szymański .
It calls on the Commission , together with the partner governments , to further develop mechanisms for consultation with civil society and local authorities , in order to better involve them in the design and monitoring of the ENPI 's implementation .
It also urges the Commission and national , regional and local authorities to promote twinning programmes between towns and regions and , in addition , calls for the annual action programmes in the fields of democracy , the rule of law and human rights to be pursued more ambitiously , in line with the objectives set up in the ENP action plans , asking for more to be done to persuade the partner governments to commit themselves to action in those fields .
in writing . - ( PL ) I gave my support to the report on the Neighbourhood and Partnership Policy Instrument today .
I believe that the countries lying beyond the Eastern borders of the EU are our strategic partners .
Even if we are unable to offer them the prospect of membership in the near future , we should develop economic and political cooperation for the sake of the common European good .
in writing . - ( PL ) I supported Mr Konrad Szymanowski 's report on the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
It is a worthwhile EU initiative , aimed at fostering cooperation between the EU and partner states .
This cooperation includes , amongst others , efforts to promote dialogue and reform , environmental protection and action in the field of energy security .
It also includes efforts to reduce poverty , promote equality between women and men , promote employment and social protection , foster cross-border cooperation , promote health , education and human rights , combat terrorism and organised crime , and promote cooperation in the scientific , educational , innovation and cultural spheres .
It is therefore essential to conduct a substantive and financial review of all ENPI Operational Programmes , taking into account the countries , the regions and the issues involved .
These activities should expand the free trade zone .
It is important to note that the Eastern Partnership should not hinder neighbouring countries wishing to apply for membership of the EU .
The section which mentions the EUR 500 billion allocated to Georgia between 2008-2010 for reconstruction work and aid to refugees , following the depredations of war , is also worthy of support .
I also accept that it is advisable to review our cooperation with Belarus , along with the level of funding allocated to that country , in order to ascertain whether the policy of re-engagement with that country , initiated in September 2008 , should be continued .
Furthermore , I agree that we need to guarantee that any financial assistance granted to Russia contributes to strengthening democratic standards in that country .
The European Neighbourhood Policy is a vital instrument for ensuring stability in the area to the east of the EU .
Indeed , recent events in the region such as the crisis in Georgia and the gas crisis have demonstrated once again the need for the EU to have a strategy capable of ensuring that it plays an active role in this area .
I support this report because it highlights the importance of initiatives such as the Black Sea Synergy and the Eastern Partnership .
They are particularly worthwhile in consolidating cooperation with the countries in the region , especially Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova , but also the states from the Caucasus and the Caspian Region .
I would also point out that effective implementation of the ENP cannot be achieved without increasing the level of financial support to the programmes funded via the ENPI and ensuring a higher level of transparency in the allocation of funds .
Furthermore , the majority of these resources must be allocated with a view to involving civil society in the partner countries in common projects and to supporting the mobility of their citizens .
The ENPI can become more effective through greater rapprochement by the citizens from the partner countries and by encouraging the process of Europeanisation at every level .
For this reason , I support the removal of the obstacles blocking the free movement of persons coming from these countries , especially through easing the visa requirements applied to these states .
in writing . - ( SK ) Trans-border cooperation is an important stimulus for the sustainable development of neighbouring border regions .
More intensive contacts between people and personal experience of democracy and rule of law are important preconditions for the optimum implementation of projects under the European Neighbourhood Policy , which it is why we need to create specific instruments to ensure appropriate monitoring of how common operational programmes are managed and implemented on both sides of the EU 's borders .
I welcome the fact that in his report on reviewing the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Policy Instrument the rapporteur Konrad Szymański included trans-border cooperation within the remit of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) .
I have voted for the report , which will facilitate the negotiating process for countries applying for membership to the EU .
Countries such as Ukraine , Georgia and Moldova will be able to get closer to the EU by benefiting from the ENP .
My views are to some extent based on my experience during the implementation of the Community INTERREG IIIA initiative involving a joint Slovak-Polish drainage project for the community of Chmeľnica on the Slovak and the Polish town of Piwniczna either side of our common border .
I firmly believe that we need to support any initiative aimed at specialist training , including learning the languages of neighbouring countries and partnership initiatives for government employees .
I believe that proper analysis in respect of increasing capacity and building institutions on both sides of the EU 's borders , as proposed by the rapporteur , will contribute towards the implementation of this instrument .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the report by Mr Szymański on the review of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
I believe we must admit that in some of the countries covered by the instrument , no progress at all has been made towards the initial objectives of promoting democracy , stability and good governance , integration and economic convergence with the policies of the European Union .
While , on the one hand , assistance and a neighbourhood approach by the EU may act as a stimulus for the dissemination and implementation of good practice , it is , however , true that it is vital for this assistance and the financial aid granted by the EU to be conditional .
On this point , I agree with my fellow Member in believing that sectoral and general budget support under the ENPI should be made available only to governments which are able to implement it in a transparent , effective and accountable manner and where it constitutes a real incentive ; for this very reason , however , I cannot agree to a review of the ENPI as set out in his report .
Much work still remains to be done before we can talk of the development of a genuine free trade area , otherwise there is a risk of a worsening of the already weak socio-institutional conditions in the countries involved and the squandering of huge resources by the European Union .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the report by Mr Berman on financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 .
I agree with the rapporteur that the legislative proposal put forward by Parliament ought to ensure that countries which do not fulfil the criteria for classification as eligible for Official Development Assistance , but which are open to the promotion of political , economic and governance values similar to those of the Community and with which the Community has strategic relations , should be supported on projects deserving attention .
Examples are the creation of partnerships between economic , academic and scientific operators , particularly in sectors of great importance such as scientific and technological research , transport , energy and the environment .
I believe that this can only be of benefit , not only to the countries involved and the European Union , but also to the entire international community , subject to proper assessment of eligibility for funding and the validity of the project in question at any particular time .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I support the report by Mrs Dahl and I am in favour , quoting Article 1 of the Publications Office of the European Union , of it being ' an interinstitutional office with the task of publishing the publications of the institutions of the European Communities and the European Union under optimum conditions ' .
I agree with the call by Mrs Dahl to European institutions to alter the legal bases for interinstitutional bodies in such a way as to permit a clear allocation of administrative and political responsibilities , since at the moment it is difficult to identify these .
I believe that the use of information is the main way to bring the European Union closer to its citizens and , in this context , multilingualism must be the key instrument in putting into practice the aims of the Publications Office through the simultaneous publication of the Official Journal in all the European Union official languages , so as to ensure that it is clearly understood by everyone .
This principle ought to extend to all the activities carried out by the Publications Office .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this draft decision since it takes into account the EP 's demands and clearly allocates administrative and political responsibilities to the Office and the Commission , unlike the previous decision dating from 2000 .
in writing . - ( DE ) Even after all the years since its formation , the EU is still not actually close to its citizens .
It simply assumes that all citizens use the Internet and can find their way around the EU website without difficulty .
However , this is not the case , as the web pages are often only understandable to insiders and are also not always intelligible in all languages .
Many states also have a strong tradition of printed media , which are an important means of providing non-partisan information to citizens .
The EU is always emphasising the importance of information policy , but in this regard is allowing an information gap to develop .
Firstly , the broadsheets will suffer huge losses if the Official Journal entries that are required to be published are dropped and , secondly , all those who are not familiar with modern technology will be at a disadvantage .
For this reason , I have voted against the Dahl report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted for the report by Mrs Dahl on the organisation and operation of the Publications Office of the European Union .
I agree with the rapporteur that the previous decision , dating from 20 July 2000 , ought to be replaced , in particular in order to take proper account of the observation made by the European Parliament during the discharge procedure for the 2001 financial year .
I believe that the report is also useful in clarifying the allocation of political and administrative responsibilities within the Publications Office of the European Union and that such clarification is necessary in order to ensure that the office carries out its tasks in a correct , streamlined and efficient manner .
- That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Do