Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 12 October 2006 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to inform you that we have a visit by a Delegation from the Japanese Parliament this afternoon and that that Delegation is in the official gallery , headed by Mr Tsushima Tuji , a great friend of Europe .
( Applause )
The Delegation of our Japanese colleagues is taking part in the 27th interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and Japan .
We have a long tradition of dialogue between the European Parliament and the Japanese Parliament .
Initially it dealt with strictly commercial issues , but now it has branched out into many issues of concern to our respective people .
We are delighted that our dialogue with Japan is being enhanced , within a context in which it is increasingly necessary for us to work together towards international security and stability .
We welcome you , ladies and gentlemen .
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
Relations between the European Union and Russia following the assassination of journalist Anna Politkovskaya ( motions for resolution tabled )
Documents received : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Written declarations ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda for the current part-session , as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 19 October 2006 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Wednesday :
In view of the large number of debates scheduled for Wednesday afternoon , and having sought the opinion of the political groups , I propose that we extend the debates until 6 p.m. , rather than 5.30 , and Questions to the Council will therefore take place between 6 and 7 p.m.



Are there are any comments ?
Mr President , this is not the first time I have pointed out that whenever somebody suddenly wants to find some extra time from somewhere on the agenda , it always seems to be Question Time that is the victim .
That is not fair .
I believe that if Question Time starts half an hour later , it should continue for an extra half an hour at the end .
That is my proposal .
( Applause )
Good , I personally have no objection ; we shall propose to the Council that it take part in Questions to the Council for an extra half an hour ; that seems very appropriate .
( Parliament accepted the proposal )

( NL ) Mr President , according to the agenda , an oral question was going to be put on the subjects of gambling policy and infringement procedures ; on Thursday , for obscure reasons , the Conference of Presidents removed it from the agenda even though we had included it in the compromise and therefore had to delete the reference to the infringement procedures .
The question is now off the table .
I should like to propose making the Conference of Presidents ' meetings public in future , for then we could be given some insight into the reasons and arguments adduced by one side or the other in them .
After all , we have also demanded that the Council 's meetings be made public too .
I would therefore express the wish that the Conference of Presidents ' meetings be made public in future , so that we can avoid the underhand scheming that we are witnessing at the moment .
Let us see whether your argument is justified .
Are you saying that a question to the Council appeared on the agenda and that the Conference of Presidents decided to remove it ?
I shall ask the secretariat to look into what you have told us , and then we will see what we can do about it .
Mr President , the remarks by my colleague , Mr Manders , did not come over very clearly via the interpretation .
What we are talking about is a question to the Commission on gambling and relevant infringement procedures .
I am a coordinator on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , as is Mr Manders .
As the joint authors of this question , we understood that it was going to be on the agenda tonight when Mr McCreevy was here , and that was approved through the system .
I am astonished to find that it has apparently been withdrawn at the request of the Conference of Presidents and I cannot understand why .
Nobody has talked to me or Mr Manders as the authors of the question , or to any of my colleagues .
Mr McCreevy from the Commission is ready to answer the question and yet for some inexplicable reason the Conference of Presidents has totally removed it from the agenda .
Perhaps you can explain why ?
( Applause )
Yes , the Conference of Presidents decided to remove this question from the agenda .
( FR ) Mr President , I may be able to clarify things .
I replaced Mr Schulz at the Conference of Presidents and I asked for this question , which is on this evening 's agenda , to be postponed until a later sitting so as to allow Parliament to take account of the new developments in this whole affair .
The Conference of President granted this request .
All right , the Conference of Presidents will therefore once again look into including this question in a later plenary sitting .
Mr President , could I request , as a matter of courtesy , that the committee responsible for preparing this question - which was voted on in committee - should be informed of concerns before they come to you , so that we have a chance to talk about it .
After all , we are the ones who have asked for it .
We spent a long time carefully drafting the question and the Commissioner is ready to answer it .
So why was it taken off the agenda without any consultation ?
We are responsible in the committee for the questions and we do not expect the Conference of Presidents to overrule us unilaterally on a very technical matter .
( Applause )
Excuse me , but the political groups , represented in the Conference of Presidents , are supposed to inform their members of the decisions taken by the Conference .
You may not agree with it , but it is the decision that the Conference of Presidents has taken , and I cannot change it now ; you must appreciate that I cannot rectify that decision .
It is the responsibility of the political groups to inform their members of the decisions taken in the Conference of Presidents .

Let us return to the business for Wednesday : the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has asked for the addition of a Commission statement on nuclear safety , relating to the ongoing problems of the Forsmark reactors , a statement that would be followed by a debate which would conclude with a motion for a resolution .
Mr Turmes has the floor to explain this proposal .
Mr President , we should like to add an item to Wednesday 's agenda .
In the light of the incident that took place at the Forsmark reactor in July , we should like to have a discussion with the Commission on nuclear safety .
This House is divided over the issue of nuclear power , but , when it comes to safety , we all want to see a transparent debate on these issues .

( IT ) Mr President , without compromising - as Mr Turmes would have us do - the positions of those who are in favour or against nuclear power stations , I think that we should discuss these incidents , and whether or not they are serious .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Goebbels , we made it quite plain at the Conference of Presidents that we are very definitely in favour of this issue being discussed , but not during this part-session , since we have already had to move Question Time around within the agenda for lack of sufficient time with the Council .
We will certainly back the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - or whoever it is who ends up asking for a debate - in getting this problem put on the agenda at a proper time .
We are well aware of the problem , but our position is that it does not need to be debated this week .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Mr President , I hope that other groups will support us if we put it back on the next agenda .
I cannot guarantee it ; in any event , you will have to discuss it with them .


Mr President , perhaps I could urge Mr Turmes to raise the matter in committee first , which might be the more appropriate route to take , rather than seeking to turn this matter into an urgency , when I suspect it is not .
I would welcome the opportunity to have the matter discussed in committee first , before we burden the House with it .
I am not going to give you the floor to reply , Mr Turmes .
Please keep the communications required to ascertain when and how this issue should be dealt with outside of plenary .
( The order of business was thus established )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
- ( LT ) At the end of the 19th century , the future of European fascism was born in Russia .
The slogan was concise and clear : ' Beat the Jews !
Save Russia ! '
More than a hundred years later , Russian political culture can be characterised by a similar slogan of hatred : ' Beat the Georgians !
Save Russia ! '
The words have become a weapon for the Russian President , Foreign and Defence Ministers and the Russian Duma .
Officers of lower rank and fascist gangs of bullies favour the persecution .
It is not new , since the murder of people with darker faces in the streets of Russian cities has become routine .
The European Union should employ its own slogan : ' Save Russia !
Stop Russian Nazism ! '
Therefore , representatives of the Russian Government and democratic forces should be invited to discuss how the European Union can help today 's Russia to avoid a pervasive plague of xenophobia at our goodwill common legal environment conference .
( HU ) The 2006 Nobel Peace Prize was given to Muhammad Yunus , a Bangladeshi economist , and to his Grameen Bank .
The decision of the Nobel Committee has not only given cause for rejoicing , but has also shown the way and given hope to those who are striving for a humane and peaceful world .
Many of us believe that poverty and social exclusion are among the root causes of war and destructive impulses .
There are people who are strangers in their own land , who have lost all human contact and the chance to feel at home in the world .
Muhammad Yunus ' microcredit system is not simply charity , which often helps to alleviate the guilty conscience of the well-to-do .
Rather , it lends money and makes cooperation possible , as well as restoring people 's faith in future opportunities .
We , as MEPs , should look upon this year 's Peace Prize as a challenge and a task .
Poverty such as exists in Bangladesh may also be found in Europe .
Let us consider again and again the potential for small steps , be they in credit , entrepreneurship or increasing knowledge , since small steps can take us a long way down the path towards human dignity .


Mr President , this is more in the form of a question to you .
I am aware that Mr Borrell Fontelles wrote to Mr Barroso and Mr Vanhanen , requesting that they communicate the names and portfolios of the two new Commissioners from Bulgaria and Romania to this House by 23 October .
I would like to know whether we have heard anything about that and whether we expect the names and portfolios to be communicated to us this week .
I do not personally have the information you requested . I shall try to find out from the President 's office .
( FR ) Mr President , two weeks ago , there was a train crash on the line between Luxembourg and France .
That crash left six people dead and a dozen injured .
I should therefore like to offer my condolences to the victims ' families .
After an accident such as that , we must move forward .
One of the problems on the cross-border railways is that their safety systems vary greatly from one country to the next .
Luxembourg has a different system to Belgium , which itself has a different system to France , which has a different system to Germany .
Luxembourg 's railways are therefore confronted with three different systems , in addition to their own .
The best solution , after this crash , is to increase the investment in the European safety system , ERTMS .
I hope that the European Commission will make Luxembourg and the wider Luxembourg region a pilot region for the introduction of new systems and arrangements .
I also believe that the flagship train , namely the TGV that will link Paris to Luxembourg as from next year , which absolutely must be ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , the trial started in Turkey last week of three people responsible for translating a book by the American writer Noam Chomsky into Turkish .
On the basis of section 301 of the Turkish Penal Code , the publisher , translator and publishing house are accused of causing public outcry and inciting hatred against Turks and of degrading democracy and the Turkish parliament .
I remember that in plenary in September we discussed section 301 and the fact that Turkey should , at long last , comply with some of the values which the European Union stands for if it wishes to acquire the European profile it yearns for .
One month later , we can see that nothing has changed and that Turkish intransigence continues unabated .
I ask you therefore , Mr President , if we shall continue to watch this theatre of the absurd or if we shall strengthen democratic speech by condemning this new trial which infringes freedom of speech and human rights .
( PL ) Mr President , yesterday in Italy demonstrations took place in protest against the forced labour camps in that country .
I fully support the demonstrators , but I would also like to point out that in early September my group , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , requested a debate on the situation of foreign workers in European Union Member States .
This is not just an Italian problem ; it also affects other countries , some more than others .
This House cannot remain silent on the matter .
We need to send out an unequivocal message .
In particular , we should appeal to the Member States not to allow serious infringements of human rights to occur .
That is what the citizens expect , which is all the more reason for Parliament not to remain silent .
I am therefore asking once again that the debate called for by the UEN Group take place .

( EL ) Mr President , President Borrell is due to visit Athens next week as part of an official programme .
I should like to ask the President to find a little time , even just half an hour , to cross over from Parliament to the Parthenon , where he will see that some of the most beautiful creations of Phidias , the greatest artist of all times , are missing .
The British have taken them . They are in the British Museum .
It is unthinkable that these works from the Parthenon , which is one of the Seven Wonders of the World , should be outside the Parthenon .
I therefore wish to ask President Borrell to visit it , to see this repellent site and to lobby with us for the return of the sculptures which the English derisorily refer to as ' the Marbles ' .
They are the sculptures of the Parthenon .
I repeat : one of the Seven Wonders of the World , which has been ' butchered ' , from which pieces have been removed which today adorn the British Museum .
I appeal to all cultured people for the sculptures to be returned to the place in which they were created , to the Acropolis , to a place which all cultured people should visit .
( PL ) Mr President , over the last two years there have been occasions when serious differences of opinion have emerged between Mr Borrell , the President of the European Parliament , and many Polish MEPs , with the majority of Polish MEPs being critical of the President 's opinion of our country .
Today , however , I have to thank the President for his stance at the recent Lahti Summit , and I know I speak on behalf of many other Polish MEPs .
According to the French daily Libération , Mr Borrell was one of five European leaders who dared to voice criticism of Russia .
In this he was joined by the President of Poland and the Prime Ministers of Sweden , Denmark and Latvia .
I would like to thank Mr Borrell for stating that the Union will not trade human rights for energy .
I would also like to thank him for questioning whether Russia is still democratic .
Europe will remember these pronouncements by President Borrell , and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will remember his courage .
I would therefore like to thank the President in his own language : gracias , Señor Presidente .
( DE ) Mr President , I wish to inform the House that the Ethiopian authorities , last Thursday , expelled two diplomats belonging to the EU delegation .
This is in connection with the arrest of Yalemzewd Bekele , an Ethiopian member of the delegation 's staff , who is accused by the authorities of active opposition to the Ethiopian Government , and who had therefore attempted to flee to Kenya .
A fortnight ago , in Addis Ababa , Glenys Kinnock and I met the two diplomats and Mrs Bekele , who is currently held in the Moyale prison , and we entertain the gravest concerns about the treatment she is receiving there .
This case has also been brought to the attention of the UN 's special rapporteur on torture .
I urge the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to take seriously its duty of care as an employer and provide Mrs Bekele with legal counsel .
The troika should also travel from Addis Ababa to Moyale , assure themselves that Mrs Bekele is physically unharmed , and demand of the Ethiopian authorities that they clarify the accusations they are levelling against her .
Our President should also write a letter to his Ethiopian counterpart .
( HU ) Today , we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 .
This is not solely a Hungarian celebration , but an international one : 56 Heads of State or Government have travelled to Hungary to celebrate this day with us .
The significance of this event can be compared to the Prague Spring of 1968 and to the Polish Solidarity movement , for without these three historic events , the downfall of Soviet-style communism and the changes of regime in Central Europe in 1989 and 1990 would not have been possible .
The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 is unique , however , for none of the other opposition movements involved armed battle against the Soviet army , and in no other instance did a country withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and declare its neutrality .
The heroes of 1956 were united in the belief that a small nation could defeat a totalitarian superpower .
In 1956 our request was : ' Back to Europe ! '
And in 2004 , with Hungary 's accession to the European Union , the legacy of 1956 was fulfilled .
Mr President , I want to ask the presidency of Parliament as well as MEPs across the spectrum to continue to press for the EU , as well as the UK authorities , to try to persuade President Musharraf of Pakistan urgently to use his powers to pardon or at least commute the sentence of Mirza Tahir Hussain .
Mr Hussain is a dual British-Pakistani citizen who has been on death row for 18 years , convicted of a murder of which he has always protested his innocence .
Indeed , he was only convicted in the Islamic Sharia courts after having been acquitted in the normal secular courts .
We learned last week that the date for his execution had been postponed for another two months , putting it beyond the date this week when the heir to the British throne , the Prince of Wales , makes an official visit to Pakistan .
However , I urge everyone to keep up their efforts to persuade President Musharraf to use his undoubted powers under the Constitution to resolve this situation in the sense of justice and not just postpone the execution .
( ES ) Mr President , I would urge the Commission and the Council - that is to say , the European Union - to express their concern to the Argentinean authorities about the fate of crucial witnesses in the ongoing trials aimed at tackling impunity and establishing responsibility for all illegal actions carried out during the dictatorship .
One of these cases involves the disappearance of Jorge Julio López , who is crucial to the case against a Buenos Aires policeman , Miguel Etchecolatz , who was a torturer during the period of the dictatorship , the blackest period in the history of Argentina .
This witness has been missing since September , and this has caused huge alarm amongst the many witnesses who must carry on testifying in order to reveal the truth and in order to ensure that no crime goes unpunished .
I would therefore call upon the European Union to raise this specific case with the Argentinean authorities .
Mr President , on 20 August 1989 , on the River Thames , the gravel dredger Bowbelle collided with the pleasure cruiser Marchioness and 51 people lost their lives .
That tragedy resulted in the Government implementing stricter safety requirements for those navigating on the River Thames .
These safety regulations are now in danger of being diluted as a direct result of the Government 's intention to implement EU Directive 96 / 50 / EC .
The current United Kingdom standards will be replaced by much lower standards under a harmonised European boatmaster 's licence .
However , this is not necessary , as the same directive allows , under Article 3 ( 2 ) , for Member States to apply exemptions on national waterways and issue boatmaster 's certificates under their own conditions .
I therefore call on all United Kingdom MEPs to write to the Minister , Dr Stephen Ladyman , asking him , in the interests of higher safety standards on the River Thames , to apply the derogation allowed under the directive .
Mr President , if the Open Skies transport agreement for aviation is agreed between the United States and Europe , numerous benefits will flow : more routes , more competition and cheaper air fares - better all round for the traveller and the consumer .
A major obstacle , namely , an objection on the European side to the exchange of passenger data with the United States , has now been overcome .
However , there is another obstacle in relation to the ownership of airlines , which is causing major problems in the United States and has been objected to in Congress .
In the meantime , the Irish Minister for Transport , Mr Cullen , is trying to get the Commission to agree to a one-to-one bilateral agreement between Ireland and the United States .
I object to that on two fronts .
Firstly , it will undermine the global trust of Open Skies ; and secondly , it will do irreparable damage to Shannon Airport in Ireland , which has been the gateway for transatlantic travel .
Until such time as there is a full global agreement , then no bilateral agreement should be concluded between Ireland and the United States .
The Commission should reject it .
( FR ) Mr President , for some time now , the influx of migrants has been portrayed as a seemingly unacceptable threat .
This rhetoric has been taken up by the far right , which is perpetuating the confusion between crime and immigration and which is thriving in this area .
The fact is that these migrants are first and foremost victims : victims of the Mafia-like networks that become rich by bringing over men and women who want to build a future for themselves ; and victims of European businessmen and slum landlords who prosper by enslaving a cheap workforce , in the former case , and by renting out insalubrious accommodation at exorbitant prices , in the latter case .
Faced with that , let us put all of the existing Community instruments into operation so that we can combat these sectors .
Let us review the regulation that stipulates that asylum applications must be reviewed by the first Member State in which asylum seekers step foot , because that puts an unacceptable burden on countries in Southern and Eastern Europe .
Furthermore , the overcrowded and inhuman transit camps are no longer acceptable .
Finally , let us have the objectivity and courage to say that Europe will need legal immigrants in order to compensate for its demographic deficit .
Let us therefore move out of our political comfort zone , let us stop making facile ideological statements and let us clearly state that immigration can also represent an opportunity for Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , if we take stock of the Union 's policy towards the countries of southeast Europe , focusing on the Western Balkans , we can see that it has had positive and negative results .
Following the criticism directed at the strategy of further enlargement of the Union , which also concerns the Western Balkans , there is a feeling that the ability of the area in question to be heard by the European institutions has been impaired .
I believe that , within the framework of parliamentary diplomacy , we have a responsibility to make the Union 's strategy more cohesive , transparent and effective , so that the southern dimension of European policy becomes more visible .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , EADS and the industrial projects that this group comprises , including Airbus , make it one of the great flagships of Europe , an industrial flagship , the symbol of our future technology and capabilities .
However , this business is in great difficulty .
I shall not dwell on the reasons - including those to do with the way in which it has been managed - which may justify or explain some of its current difficulties , which , in turn , require effective remedies .
I shall emphasise , instead , the statements made by Airbus 's management team , who explain to us that , if the business is to be competitive , it will probably have to relocate or set up a number of its operations in the so-called ' dollar ' currency area , for the sole reason that the euro / dollar exchange rate is putting one of the European Union 's most important cutting-edge sectors at a disadvantage .
When questioned on this point , Mr Trichet has only one thing to say : ' I do not have to explain myself regarding the exchange rate ! ' .
Do you not think , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that there is an urgent need to change Europe 's monetary policy ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) 50 years ago today , revolution broke out in Hungary .
The site of the first battle in the nascent struggle for freedom from Soviet oppression took place at the headquarters of Hungarian Radio .
The rebels knew that , in addition to force , the system was built first and foremost upon lies .
The symbol of those lies was the mouthpiece of the Communist Party , namely state radio .
The battle ended with the victory of the revolutionaries , and therefore the radio station was able to broadcast the words that would later become a catchphrase : ' We lied at night , we lied during the day , we lied on every wavelength . '
Force and lies : these are what kept communism alive in Hungary , and these were the building blocks of oppression in the rest of the Soviet bloc as well .
Although the Hungarian Revolution was crushed by the overpowering columns of tanks that rolled into the country , today we know that the events in Budapest , Prague and Gdansk did not happen in vain , and that the victims did not give their lives in vain .
Thanks to them , Europe today is free and united .
However , in order to make sure that no system on our continent will ever be built on force and on lies again , we must remember .
It is for this reason that my fellow Members and I have launched an initiative to make 4 November , the anniversary of the defeat of the Hungarian Revolution , a day of remembrance for the victims of communism in Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , on 29 August UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan tabled a study on violence against children by the independent expert Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro before the General Assembly .
This study describes in the blackest terms the phenomenon of violence and child exploitation in the world , highlighting the serious infringements of the rights of the child .
This study is a wake-up call for the collective conscience of mankind and a call to take action to defend fundamental humane principles and values .
I believe , to take advantage of the presence here of Commissioner Frattini , that this UN study should be the subject of debate in the institutions of the European Union , especially the European Parliament , in conjunction with the recent communication from the European Commission on a European strategy for the rights of the child .
The European Union must be at the vanguard of a common system of rules for the protection of children 's rights which are binding on all the Member States .
( EL ) Mr President , we have heard from reports in the media that an airline employee in the United Kingdom is being persecuted and may be dismissed , purely and simply because she was wearing a chain with a cross the size of a five-cent piece around her neck .
We talk about democracy , freedom and justice as principles which must also be consolidated in candidate countries .
We want to give Europeans and everyone living on this planet the security of knowing that they will not be persecuted on the grounds of freedom of expression - irrespective of whether that freedom is expressed by word or by outer garments - and , more importantly , that they will not be persecuted for their religious faith .
In my country , 80 % of the people are baptised and wear a cross their whole life .
How can we demand respect for religious freedoms from candidate countries when we do not protect the possibility of there being such a simple expression of religion ?
I hope that the Commissioner will take steps ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to draw the House 's attention to an occurrence several days ago involving Polish border guards and a German cruise ship , the Adler Dania , which entered the Polish port of Swinemünde , whereupon three Polish customs officers , in civilian clothing and without any written authorisation , sought to confiscate all the vessel 's stocks of spirits .
The captain responded to this by turning the vessel round and speeding back to Germany , with a Polish border protection force speedboat in hot pursuit and , moreover , firing off signal flares in the Adler Dania 's direction .
It defies belief that this sort of thing can happen , but it appears from the letters I have received from those with personal experience of these things that this is not , regrettably , an isolated incident .
There are recurrent problems at the borders within Europe with many new Member States and also with other neighbouring countries , involving such things as the arbitrary levying of charges and attempts at coercing travellers into paying them or else being denied entry to the country they wish to enter .
I demand that action be taken to deal with this .
( EL ) Mr President , a report by a US strategic analysis and study company states that Greek Cypriots and Greek soldiers missing since the invasion by the Turkish army of northern Cyprus were used as guinea pigs in industrial laboratories belonging to the Turkish army between 1984 and 1988 .
Given not only that Turkey continues to occupy the northern part of Cyprus , but also that it has never provided any information or details about the missing persons , and given that the relatives of the missing persons have been suffering for three decades now , I would ask Parliament to take the initiative of demanding that Turkey supply all the information it has on the missing persons , however awful it may be , so that this suffering can be brought to an end .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have taken the floor because I wish to express my displeasure and concern about the future of Europe .
I have always believed that one of the main objectives of the European Union was to protect children , to safeguard their education and health and ensure they grow up to be rounded human beings .
I wish to express my acute displeasure about the establishment in Holland of the paedophile party , a party whose basic objectives are to legalise sexual intercourse between adults and children over 12 years of age and to legalise possession of child pornography for personal use .
In a Europe which is growing old , in a Europe in which the institution of the family is growing weaker by the day , in a Europe in which morals and customs and traditions are disappearing , the establishment of this party looks like a bomb in the foundations of the European construct .
I call on us all to oppose it .
I propose that the European Parliament table a request to the Finnish Presidency to have the paedophile party abolished .
If we want a European Union with a future and prospects , we must primarily and above all protect our children .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have just returned from a visit to Lebanon with a feeling of optimism about the new situation in the area , but also with a greater awareness of the challenges which we all face .
LIFE is returning to the south .
Houses have been patched up and people are returning to live at home or with relatives pending reconstruction with the help of the government and donors , among which Hezbollah is playing an important part .
The presence of the Lebanese army and UNIFIL forces is providing security and satisfaction to the citizens and , I must say , is giving visibility and appreciation to the European Union .
The application of Resolution 1701 does not appear to be in danger , although the balance is fragile and we should protect it for the sake of peace in the area as a whole , just as we must support the Lebanese Government so that it can introduce suitable reforms of the economy , society and the political system .
Apart from the defence of citizens ' rights , I should like also to highlight the need for us to protect cultural treasures ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , via the Presidency of this House I would like to send a message of condolence and solidarity to various municipalities in Galicia , particularly in the province of Pontevedra , in view of the grave situation they are suffering as a result of serious floods since the weekend .
The storm has caused serious damage .
There has been great damage to homes , companies , transport routes , agriculture and cattle .
Unfortunately , there have also been injuries and deaths .
As we all know , last August the Autonomous Community of Galicia suffered an enormous disaster as a result of a great wave of fires , which this Parliament debated in September .
On that occasion we backed the mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund .
The serious effects of the heavy rains over recent days are linked to the August fires , as today 's Galician press points out .
The loss of wooded areas and the tonnes of ash swept away have increased the ferocity of the floods .
This is a further demonstration of the scale of the disaster that struck Galicia in the summer .
Several Galicia municipalities are unfortunately once again in mourning .
Mr President , we had a very useful dialogue last week with a group called EAGLES , which is made up of scientists from around the globe who are interested in helping the developing world , and I think it is a dialogue we need to extend throughout this Parliament .
We are witnessing scientific apartheid on a vast scale : the developed world has too many scientists and engineers and the developing world has none , which is widening the gap between rich and poor .
I have a very simple message which will not take a minute : there is an onus and a duty on the European Union and the Commission to work with the scientific community to persuade it to devote part of its efforts to projects that will help the developing world , whether it is for animal health , human health or agricultural production .
This is a problem which is being neglected at the moment and the poor are suffering .
It is something that this House should take on board by looking at the important role of science in the developing world .
( ET ) A couple of weeks ago the entire world was shocked by the murder of Anna Politkovskaya .
The trampling of human rights and freedom of expression in Chechnya that Anna Politkovskaya sought to make public was stifled using the methods of gangster politics .
A week ago we had to talk about the Georgian crisis , which Russia began with a political show of force , imposing economic sanctions and a transport and postal blockade against Georgia , prohibiting imports of Georgian goods , closing Russia 's border with Georgia and beginning to deport Georgians from Russia .
Today we must be prepared to prevent the possible use of all kinds of military force in connection with the secession attempts of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
The European Union and Parliament cannot simply stand by and watch the situation in Georgia unfold .
We must use every available option - the whole gamut of measures provided for in the European Neighbourhood Policy , the organisation of border guard missions , the facilitation of free trade and the simplification of the visa system - with the objective of preserving peace in the South Caucasus .
( FR ) Mr President , Airbus 's strategic and industrial decisions decide not only the fate of tens of thousands of employees but also the future of a large part of the European aeronautical industry .
It is vital that respect be shown for the knowledge , work , and investment of Airbus 's employees and subcontractors via efforts to prevent a situation in which they are reduced to nothing .
Airbus 's employees should under no circumstances be made to pay for the mistakes and the errors made by the managers and shareholders .
Through the knowledge that they bring , these employees represent the true jewel in Airbus 's crown .
Airbus is failing because of the liberal policies that have been implemented , and , if it is to get back on track , a return to public ownership and funding of EADS at European level is required .
I am also pleased to note that , in both Germany and Spain , many people are speaking out in an effort to see the employees granted genuine powers to intervene in the management of Airbus .
Let Mr Mandelson do his job so that the Americans no longer challenge the system of repayable advances and so that the European Central Bank and the Commission intervene at last to counter the weak dollar .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my intervention relates to the problem of stray dogs on Corfu .
The Austrian animal welfare association has for some years been supporting many projects on Corfu , although the local authorities constantly prevent it from doing its work in an effective and efficient manner .
Foreign veterinarians are disbarred from treating animals , homes for animals that have already been built are prevented from being taken into service , and , even though the travel agency TUI funded the project , stray dogs are not allowed to be sent to families in Germany and Austria , but instead meet a cruel death in Corfu .
I appeal to the Council , and to the Members of this House , to do something about this state of affairs , demanding in particular that aid from overseas be permitted and recognised in order to resolve the problem with the minimum possible delay and for the animals ' benefit .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , 50 years ago this evening the students and intellectuals of Budapest presented 16 demands to the Hungarian puppet government .
The demands were rejected , the authorities opened fire on the crowd and the uprising began .
The Hungarians were encouraged by their faith in assistance from the West .
European unity appeared natural to them .
The expected assistance did not come , however , not even in the form of official declarations .
The Suez Crisis that was unfolding at the same time somewhat limited the West 's ability to act , but the real reason for this reserve was the division of Europe into spheres of influence at Yalta .
13 000 people were repressed by the Soviets , 350 of whom were executed .
Hungary became a cautionary case for other nations that thirsted for freedom .
The Soviet Union no longer exists , but the spirit of Yalta lives on in our fear of standing up in defence of Moldova , Georgia and other countries that Russia considers to be part of its sphere of influence .
In memory of the victims of the Hungarian uprising , I propose that we overcome our fear and take a united stand in defence of democracy and freedom .
( PL ) Mr President , creating a common market for energy that is as efficient , secure and competitive as possible is a priority for the European Union .
It is important to remember , however , that the impact of the Union 's energy policy extends beyond the energy sector , and that the three political objectives of energy policy are to ensure the security of energy supplies , to ensure competitiveness and to protect the environment , notably by countering climate change .
As we are aware , the creation of the internal energy market is brought about indirectly through harmonisation of the legislation of the Member States , and directly through liberalisation of national energy markets .
Nonetheless , Europe needs a single common strategy and broadly based cooperation both as regards the common internal market and as regards foreign partners .
That is why I am delighted that at the recent Lahti Summit , where , for the first time in many years , the European Union countries endeavoured to speak about energy cooperation with Russia in one single voice , and individual Member States did not allow themselves to be led astray by the prospect of the potential benefits of a special relationship with Russia .
( PL ) Mr President , I have attended two important events this month .
One was the conference on the simplification of the common agricultural policy organised by the European Commission , and the other was the Conference of European Farmers , held under the auspices of COPA / COGECA .
It was repeatedly stated that what Europe needs is a clearly defined strategy for agriculture and the future of its farmers .
What is it actually getting ?
Wave after wave of reforms churned out every few years .
Farmers need stability to be able to plan production and investment .
We would do well to remember that if it is denied aid of any kind , European agriculture will have great difficulty in competing with products imported from other countries .
Europe is already at a disadvantage , because the requirements imposed on our farmers are much stricter , and their production conditions are often more difficult .
It is therefore incumbent on us to enlighten the citizens and also certain Members of this House as to why we have a common agricultural policy , what its benefits are and why consumers have to pay its costs .
Mr President , Mr Behiç Aşçi is a Turkish lawyer who has been on hunger strike for 202 days and is now very close to death .
Although not a prisoner himself , he is protesting against the inhuman action of Turkish authorities in subjecting mainly political prisoners to isolation in so-called F-type prisons .
One hundred and twenty-two hunger strikers in such prisons have died so far , and yet the Turkish Government stubbornly refuses even to discuss the matter .
Isolation , sometimes for years , is one of the worst forms of psychological torture and Turkish civil society , including the lawyers ' and doctors ' associations , have called for its abolition .
I call upon you , Mr President , in the name of respect for human rights and in order to save Mr Aşçi 's life , to contact the Turkish Prime Minister urgently and stress to him that isolation in F-type prisons is incompatible with Turkey 's European aspirations and must cease forthwith .
( HU ) Today we remember events that occurred 50 years ago , those of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 , the people 's revolution , which shook the communist system that had been thought to be rock solid .
What were the Hungarian people fighting for ?
For freedom and independence .
We Hungarians living beyond the borders of Hungary were also following the heroic struggle against the overwhelming Soviet power with concern and keen attention .
The defeat of the Revolution was followed by dark , cruel years and harsh reprisals .
Particularly in Transylvania , but in Slovakia as well , those who openly sympathised with the Revolution were subjected to severe retribution .
It is with deep reverence that we recall the victims , the heroic freedom fighters , whose struggle was not in vain .
34 years later , the inhuman system fell , and today we belong to a European Community which is based on democracy , the rule of law and human and civil rights .
It was for these values that the participants fought and the heroic dead gave their lives during the 1956 Revolution .
Mr President , last week the informal EU summit in Lahti , under the Finnish Presidency , marked a very important step in EU-Russia relations .
After a long time the EU was able to speak with one voice and what is especially important is that the EU was united in speaking about EU energy policy .
As the need for an increased energy supply and increased energy security are of common interest to the Union , I would like to stress that some projects in the Baltic Sea region ignore the interests of a number of Member States in terms of security of energy supply , particularly the North European Gas Pipeline project , which in 2000 was granted Trans-European Energy Network status .
I suggest that we call on the countries already involved in the project , namely Germany and Russia , to invite the neighbouring countries , EU Member States , to join the network and provide them with an opportunity of real partnership .
This item is closed .
Establishment , operation and use of SIS II ( regulation ) - Establishment , operation and use of SIS II ( decision ) - Access to SIS II by the services responsible for issuing vehicle registration certificates ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Mr Coelho on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment , operation and use of the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) - C6-0174 / 2005 - ,
the report by Mr Coelho on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council decision on the establishment , operation and use of the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) - C6-0301 / 2005 - and
the report by Mr Coelho on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding access to the Second Generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) by the services in the Member States responsible for issuing registration certificates for vehicles - C6-0175 / 2005 - .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Coelho , the rapporteur , for his excellent work on the legal package for the second generation Schengen Information System .
I also take the opportunity to mention the important work that has been carried out by the Finnish Presidency to finalise the discussions on this legislative package .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission have all taken a very proactive attitude in finding compromises on this very sensitive and complex dossier .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council confirmed earlier this month that this SIS tool remains an absolute priority and the Commission continues to give the highest importance to this dossier .
SIS II will be an important tool to ensure the efficient exchange of information between the relevant authorities .
SIS II will contribute to a higher level of security as it will have greater functionalities than the current SIS that will be better suited to the operational needs of police and other authorities .
Moving forward with SIS II will be a decisive step in underpinning free movement , effective border controls and the ongoing fight against serious crime and terrorism .
At the same time , better safeguards have been included : for example precise data protection rules have been introduced that should also provide for more transparency and accountability .
I strongly hope that the Council and Parliament will agree on a first reading compromise because the legislative framework is a key element - indeed a precondition - that will allow the Commission to complete the development of SIS II and allow it to start its operational phase .
Any further delays on the legal basis will inevitably have a negative impact on the revised timetable of SIS II , and thus on lifting the internal borders of the European Union .
Therefore I can agree to the rapporteur 's proposal and I will continue to hope for a first reading compromise in order to speed up the process of implementation .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , what we have on the table are three documents : two regulations and one decision .
I should like to draw the Chamber 's attention to five issues , the first of which is institutional , namely the absurdity of the legislative process .
We have three different legal documents subject to two different procedures : the regulations are subject to codecision and the decision to the consultation process .
The three documents refer to the same situation ; we do not have three Schengen Information Systems , we have one , on which we are making laws using different legal systems .
This is an absurd situation that must not be allowed to continue .
If the European Constitution had been adopted we would not be finding ourselves in this ridiculous situation .
This was a complex legal procedure which required everyone to work in a great spirit of cooperation .
I should like to thank publicly the shadow rapporteurs and all the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
I wish to thank in particular Mr Lax , Mrs Mastenbroek and Mrs Kaufmann for their invaluable help and for working under great pressure to secure an agreement at first reading .
The second point I wish to make is that , to my mind , this is a good outcome for Europe .
This is because we have more security , better data protection and the system has been tightened up .
Biometric data make it easier to identify people , so that a more reliable connection can be made between the person and the identity document , which serves to strengthen security standards .
Furthermore , alerts can be tackled more intelligently , which we call the interlinking of alerts . This enables a policeman to distinguish between a less serious crime and an act that may be linked to a criminal network or to a series of crimes that require a more sophisticated security response .
Not only are we managing information more intelligently , we are also helping the law enforcement bodies to guarantee security more effectively .
With the three documents on which we are about to vote , we are helping to make our external border controls more effective and movement within the Community more secure .
Thirdly , I believe that this is a good outcome for the new Member States , which justifiably want to give their citizens the feeling that they are fully-fledged citizens with the same right to free movement as those in the rest of the Community .
This is why we must not hold back the legislative process .
There needs to be an agreement at first reading and once this is in place we will be in a position to adopt a legal basis by the end of 2006 as we have undertaken to do .


Fourthly , Mr President , I feel that this is a good outcome for Parliament , because we have managed to achieve most of what we had been fighting for , of which I should like to highlight the following : Community management of the central system , under the democratic control of the European Parliament and the legal control of the Court of Justice ( the creation of a Community agency within five years , established in codecision with Parliament , is provided for ) ; the fact that there is greater harmonisation of alerts in the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , whereby entry into the Schengen area can be refused ( the Commission is invited to submit initiatives , within three years , aimed at achieving higher levels of harmonisation ) ; the fact that European Arrest Warrants are stored in the SIS central system ; the fact that we are using biometric data as a research field only after the drafting of a report to be submitted to Parliament on which Parliament will have its say ; the fact that we have clearly strengthened the rules on data protection and the rights of individuals in relation to the system , the fact that the supervision system has been strengthened at both European and national level ; and the obligation to draw up reports in order to increase transparency regarding the overall functioning of the system .



My fifth and final point , Mr President , is a remark to the Council and a vote of thanks to the Commission .
I wish to thank the Commission , and in particular Mr Frattini , who worked closely with Parliament throughout the process and - let me stress this point - helped the Commission and Parliament to find a great deal of common ground .
I should also like to thank the two Presidencies - of Austria and Finland - for the huge amount of work that they put into this process .
I should particularly like to thank Mr Rajamäki , Finnish home affairs minister and current chairman of the Justice and Home Affairs Council , and all his team , and a special word of thanks for the chairman of the Schengen working group .
People worked very hard and , to my mind , achieved success , both in terms of the legal solutions that we found and the institutional undertakings that we have made ; for example , the Presidency has undertaken to channel all its efforts into adopting the framework decision on data protection in the third pillar by the end of the year .
Mr President , I should like to say , however , that the Council did not always do the right thing .
It failed to honour the promises it made at the high-level informal trialogue in May held in Strasbourg , and this led to a major defeat for the Austrian Presidency .
I hope that the Council does not do likewise with the compromise reached in the Brussels trialogue of 26 September .
I say this because although we managed to reach an excellent agreement at the 26 September trialogue , 48 hours , just two days , before the vote on the compromise text at the Committee on Civil Liberties , the Council sought to open up the SIS to the secret services of the Member States on the basis of an initiative by one Member State .
It must be said that , in terms of its actual content , this proposal makes no sense .
We cannot , on the one hand , increase personal data protection requirements , which we did in the compromise text , and , on the other , open up access to the structures of the Member States , which by definition are not answerable , either partly or totally , to the authorities responsible for data protection .
This paradox makes no sense .
It is also ridiculous for procedural reasons , insofar as two days before Parliament voted on the text that had been agreed upon in the trialogue with the Presidency and Mr Frattini , attempts were being made to amend the text .
One does not make changes to a negotiation and a compromise in 48 hours .
Relations between the European institutions should be characterised by loyalty and good faith .
The President of Parliament is good to his word .
We are ready to vote on a text that we managed to reach over many months and lengthy negotiations .
I trust that the Council will also honour its commitment and that the new second generation SIS will be up and running , at the earliest opportunity , operating effectively and efficiently , and delivering security .
( Applause )
Negotiations concerning all three documents have been long drawn-out and very arduous , but we have finally reached a compromise , both within the European Parliament and , some time later , in our negotiations with the Commission and the Council .
We are aware of the responsibility we owe to a project as demanding as the enlargement of the Schengen area , which is why we on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs adopted the legal bases virtually unanimously - that is , with a large majority .
I believe that the same thing will also happen when we vote at the plenary session .
Any further procrastination in adopting the legal bases will affect the launch of SIS II .
For this reason , the European Parliament should adopt the bases as a matter of urgency , as they clearly provide a cornerstone for the technical set-up of SIS II .
However , how the Council will act and how the next stage of harmonisation will proceed is another question .
It has now become clear that the enlargement of the Schengen area will be delayed for technical reasons .
These difficulties are probably considerable .
The new Member States , among them Slovenia , which have invested a lot of effort in meeting the Schengen criteria , have confirmed that they have fulfilled all these criteria .
Consequently , the delay is not due to any lack of preparation on our part .
Linked to this is the extremely serious issue of the costs we will incur as a result of the delay in acceding to the Schengen area .
I therefore support the alternative solutions which will grant accession to SIS I only to those Member States which have finalised their preparations , that is to say , to those which have fulfilled all the criteria for inclusion in the Schengen Information System within the time limit originally envisaged .
I hope that Parliament will adopt the afore-mentioned legal bases and I would like to thank Mr Coelho and Commissioner Frattini for their outstanding cooperation .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin , of course , by thanking Mr Coelho and the groups ' shadow rapporteurs for their intensive work .
The implementation of the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) should enable us to help remove the internal borders with the ten new Member States .
Enlarging the Schengen area is a priority for our Parliament .
We understand the difficulties faced by our Eastern European colleagues in terms of explaining to their fellow citizens why they cannot move freely within Europe .
That is why we wanted to reach an agreement at first reading so as not to hinder the free movement of all European citizens .
The Schengen Information System must provide us with a high level of security with which to remove the borders , but any centralised database must comply with the principles of proportionality and purpose so as to ensure that everyone 's private life is protected .
That is why we are pleased to see a direct , specific reference in this text to the future framework decision on the protection of data under the third pillar , something for which I am especially grateful to Mr Coelho .
I hope that the Council will be able to send us its first reading of this text very soon , just as it promised to do during our last plenary session .
The SIS is a monitoring tool that has been implemented at the external borders and that has replaced the old fixed installations , which were abolished as part of the efforts to promote the free movement of persons .
We wanted strictly to define those authorities that would have direct access to the data .
The list of authorities granted access will thus be published in the Official Journal , and this will help to prevent any misuse of the data by making it possible to identify by whom , when and why the data from the system were exploited .
Furthermore , our priority is to grant people access to information about themselves , by giving them the opportunity to appeal and to correct any errors .
We have worked together , in a spirit of compromise , in order to arrive as quickly as possible at a joint text .
I understand the concerns of the new Member States following the Commission 's announcement that there has been a delay in implementing the system .
These are , however , technical problems in the system for which the European Parliament cannot be held responsible .
Finally , I should like to call on the Member States not to impose any last-minute requests that might jeopardise the compromise accepted by all of the institutions , and not to further delay the adoption of this text , which is necessary from the point of view of free movement .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) In a short time , we shadow rapporteurs have joined the rapporteur in approving all the legislative proposals necessary in order to extend the Schengen area also to include the new Member States .
I wish to extend a special thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , and to the shadow rapporteurs for the splendid consensus we have achieved and for the constructive outcome of our work .
The fly in the ointment is the timetable .
Despite having done our utmost in order as quickly as possible to phase out internal borders , the Schengen enlargement will be delayed .
By how long is not yet clear .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe do not think that we have had enough by way of answers from the Council and the Commission as to why there has been a delay which , moreover , threatens to go on for some time .
Every citizen who is waiting no longer to have to pass through internal border controls is entitled to be told where the problem lies .
We therefore propose that the Commission immediately set up an independent inquiry into the causes of the delay .
The Schengen area is one of the EU 's most successful projects .
Abolishing internal borders is one very practical way of creating a common European identity .
It might be said to be one of the EU 's most fundamental tasks .
During the preparations for SIS II , the introduction of biometrics - that is to say , the inclusion of fingerprints in databases - was perhaps the most controversial issue .
The solution whereby biometrics are to be introduced in two stages is a good one .
In the first stage , it would only be permitted to confirm a person 's identity with the help of fingerprints .
In the second stage , it would also be possible to make searches using biometric criteria .
I am convinced that it should only be possible to use biometrics with very great care and discernment .
In the SIS II system , their use is , however , relatively uncontroversial because the database concerned contains , for the most part , information about people sought by the authorities .
What is , however , much more controversial is the use of fingerprints in the future common Schengen visas , which will be issued by the new Member States too .
Here , we are concerned in most cases with tourists , relatives and business people who have never had any problems with the authorities .
The use of biometric criteria is a much bigger issue , both technically and administratively , in the case of the visa system than it is in the case of SIS II .
For the visas , the fingerprints of 20 million people per year are to be taken .
Therefore , it is probably important for governments not to delay in considering the possibility of excluding fingerprints from the system , in any case at the beginning .
Otherwise , there is a great risk of the Schengen enlargement being delayed in this important area too , and that is something that we really do not wish to see happen .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , thank you , Mr Coelho for your work on improving this proposal .
It is important for us to enhance data protection , something that the European Parliament is trying to do .
It is important for people to be allowed to know what information is being recorded about them , for sound reasons .
I think that Schengen , including the Schengen Information System , has been beset by problems from the very beginning .
In practice , we have replaced simple border controls by an ability on the part of the authorities constantly to keep a check on people when they are actually in their own countries .
What is being proposed here is an increase in the number of authorities that have access to data .
The proposal thus entails increased use of this data , so we have to be still more careful about the information we submit .
For that reason , I think it inappropriate to submit biometric data .
When the United States debated going down this road , it allowed its Supreme Court to examine the options .
The implication for ourselves of their decision is that there would be a great risk either that many people who are entitled to enter the EU would not be able to do so , or - in the event of the safety margins being reduced - that undesirables would get in .
There are many people - for example , hard-working people with poor fingerprints - who it would not be possible to identify with certainty using fingerprints .
There is a danger that innocent people would be turned away and that guilty people would slip though .
Biometric data is also extremely expensive .
Increased use of such data is unacceptable when it is now to be possible to search for such data . Nor is it acceptable for a decision on the matter to be made through a committee procedure .
Biometric data entails an invasion of privacy , especially as it might very well affect innocent people .
It is not a route we should go down .
A number of governments now wish , at the last minute , to introduce a provision whereby the security police are to have access to the data concerned .
That would put an end to the whole principle of data protection , to the whole principle of the right to know what has been recorded about oneself and to the whole principle of legal certainty and the rule of law .
It would be as well , I think , if the Council were to withdraw this debate from the agenda .
The security police must not have access to such information .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , even though the primary reason why SIS II is needed is that it enables the citizens of the new Member States to avail themselves of their right to unrestricted freedom of movement within the EU , my group will nevertheless be voting against the draft legislation , and there are two reasons why we have decided to do that .
The first has to do with data protection .
The fact is that SIS II is not just about the free movement of persons , but also - and above all - about cooperation between police and justice authorities and a system of investigation .
It is common knowledge , however , that the current arrangements for data protection within the third pillar are unsatisfactory .
If citizens ' rights and the requirements of security are to be kept in balance , what is needed is the framework decision on the protection of personal data .
This is something that this House recently voted unanimously to endorse , but what is the Council doing ?
The framework decision has not been forthcoming .
As we have heard , there are those in the Council who still have reservations about it , and what that means in plain language is that we know , at present , neither when this framework decision is to enter into force , nor what substantial changes the Council has made to it , even though considerations of human rights make it imperative that proper data protection be guaranteed , and , moreover , even before this sort of comprehensive database is created .
Secondly , the inclusion of biometric data is problematic , and for a variety of reasons .
For a start , the impact of the use of biometric data in such a large system has not been assessed , and nor have the conditions for the inclusion of such data been adequately laid down .
Another consideration is that it is not - in my group 's view - acceptable that the question of when biometric data should be allowed to be used as a primary search criterion should be decided without reference to Parliament .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Coelho for the good cooperation , but , while I am on that subject , I would like to emphasise that I take an unsympathetic view of the way in which the Council - largely in response to pressure from my own country - has dealt with this House over recent days .
It is not acceptable that new demands should be made after the conclusion of the trilogue , thereby putting a pistol to Parliament 's head .
It is made even less acceptable if one is aware of precisely why Berlin chose to try to blackmail the Council .
By all means let the police have access to SIS II , but I have to tell the House that I do not believe that the secret services should be allowed to get their hands on it , for , as we have discovered all too often , they are accountable to themselves alone , and for that reason we should not make SIS II more accessible than it already is .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , I wish I could be delighted about the fact that the European Parliament will consider this packet of three documents in the October part-session and that we shall probably take a reasonably rapid decision , which will also mean that it will be a codecision .
While I have a high opinion of the rapporteur 's main position , which is based on the European Parliament 's traditional stance , and while really important issues have been debated , together with issues which , in my view , are not important at all , such as the location of the Community 's agency , we have in reality forgotten about communicating with the public and we have lost track of the time that has been spent .
For the public in the new Member States it is difficult to understand why the technical , financial and human resources for the internal borders of the new Member States will be applied two years later than planned and why Schengen agreement rights will not be extended to citizens of the new Member States until at least 2009 .
In reality , in the eyes of citizens of the new Member States , the Schengen area is a much greater symbol of the European Union 's unity than the European Union constitution .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the European Union is currently working hard at reinforcing external border control , which is important , but there are also the internal borders to consider , and incidents involving suspects crossing borders throw up questions about internal border control .
I see Schengen as a romantic concept .
In the European Union , it is not only innocent citizens who benefit from the free movement of persons ; so did Hussein Osman , a 27-year-old who was one of those suspected in connection with the attacks in London , who was able to travel to Rome without any problems , and that cannot be what Schengen is about .
More frequent and more targeted controls will therefore need to be put in place , not only at national borders , but also on ferries , at airports and at railway interchanges .
This is where an effective information system such as SIS II can be useful .
Going back to the pre-Schengen era is not an option ; after all , the free movement of persons and the effective functioning of the European Union go hand in hand , and the latter is dependent on the former .
( PL ) Mr President , the Schengen Information System is a highly complex information transfer system linked to a computerised database .
In its present form , this system is only capable of serving a maximum of 18 participating countries .
No provision was made for extending it to include the new Member States of the Union after the enlargement .
This was one of the reasons why it was necessary to start work on a new , second-generation information system , namely SIS II .
The new Member States would like to join this system at the earliest opportunity .
Initially , this was planned for October 2007 but , three weeks ago , the European Commission agreed that there would be a one-year delay .
Commissioner Frattini stated that , at best , the new SIS II information system would be ready in June 2008 .
This is not the whole truth , because the date given only applies to the old Member States .
The new entrants , like Poland , will be connected later , with our experts reckoning that it might not happen until the middle of 2009 .
We cannot agree to such a lengthy delay .
We appreciate that the system needs more work , but the middle of 2009 is an unacceptable date .
We want our nationals to feel they are fully-fledged European citizens when they travel .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Coelho and all the political groups for their serious and well thought-out work on the SIS II package .
I agree with the rapporteur , however , that it is not acceptable for the Council to introduce amendments to the compromise already reached in the three-party talks .
That is why , at this juncture , we should give priority to approval of the legislative package at first reading .
The SIS II package provides increased security , better protection of personal data , and tighter border controls .
It also increases both the freedom and the security of all citizens who live in the European Union and travel within it , not just the citizens of the new Member States .
Of course , putting the new legislation into practice is just as important as approving it , and we therefore look forward to the debate on SIS II implementation when Commissioner Frattini is present .
I would point out that , to date , no information has been made available to this House concerning the extent of the delay in constructing the central unit for the SIS II and the reasons for it .
We are therefore eagerly awaiting the conclusions of the audit report on the European Commission 's work on the construction of SIS II promised by Mr Kallas .
This audit report and the forthcoming European Council summit , which will decide on the timetable for removing border controls with the new Member States , will both be good opportunities to debate an issue that is of such importance to ordinary people .
SIS II is being created to fulfil commitments entered into at the highest political level in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Accession Treaty and the Hague Programme .
Meeting these commitments on time is vital for the European Union 's credibility .
It will be judged on whether it can meet the obligations and deliver the specific benefits and advantages it has promised its citizens .
Mr President , let me take this opportunity to thank Mr Coelho for his outstanding performance on this file .
It is , after all , thanks to him and his negotiating skills that the decision-making procedure on this important and complex package of legislation has been finished in time .
Mr Coelho was confronted with some tough choices during this process .
Producing law at record speed is efficient , but it cannot be denied that this efficiency comes at the expense of transparency .
My group is worried about the lack of data protection concerning the second generation of the Schengen Information System .
The Council finally agreed to refer to the framework decision on data protection in the third pillar .
A referral like that is the least we can do to protect our citizens ' rights and we are not there yet - far from it .
The Council initially refused the referral because the decision had not yet been taken .
That is true , but why ?
Is it not the Council that is putting the brakes on this issue ?
And is it not the Council that is aiming to water down the decision , almost to the point that there is hardly anything left to protect ?
I cannot help but mention here the German Government 's offer to make data protection in the third pillar a priority during its Presidency , provided we agree to make some fundamental changes at the last minute in situ .
Well , that leaves a bitter taste indeed , after the British Government promised to deliver if Parliament agreed with data retention and did not ; after both the Austrian and Finnish Presidencies did not seem too keen on pushing the issue forward , but are nevertheless watering down the proposal .
Yes , German Government , you will have to make this one of your priorities , but not in exchange for a favour .
You will have to do it because citizens deserve it and they deserve it now .
The lack of data protection makes it all the more worrisome that the Parliament is asked to give up its decision-making rights concerning biometrics .
Again , this is all in the spirit of efficiency , but at the expense of transparency , and therefore democracy .
So why am I proposing to vote in favour , in spite of all this criticism ?
For many reasons . I will mention just a few .
The citizens of Europe do not appear to be particularly worried about co- or framework decisions ; they are , however , worried about the increasing number of stolen cars finding their way to eastern European Member States and would like us to take the necessary steps to fight that growing area of crime .
In an area without internal borders , we also need to have a joint approach to illegal immigration .
No matter how difficult this issue is for many of us , we need a common tool to deal with the presence of illegal immigrants .
Also , the Schengen Information System will add more meaning and substance to the European arrest warrant and strengthen the role of Europol and Eurojust with the increasing cooperation of our police and security forces .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I believe that the great mystery is this huge technical delay in preparing the SIS .
One might well suppose that there is a political reason for the fact that the SIS , as an instrument designed to guarantee freedom of movement , is in danger of becoming more and more secondary to the requirements of security , which are , of course , legitimate requirements .
I believe , however , that we are overstepping the mark if we want - as the German Government seems to do - to make these databases accessible to the secret services , too .
This , together with the increasingly frequent use of biometrics are likely to be the - let us say - technically necessary result of inward-looking policies on freedom of movement and immigration .
I therefore believe that the reason for these technical delays can only be an eminently political one .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that a worthy end - that of the free movement of EU citizens and the abolition of internal borders - is concealing an unacceptable means .
The second generation Schengen Information System introduces new forms of social control , and the unlimited use of biometric data will in reality undermine personal data protection .
We are concerned because , recently , these data have been misused , with a genuine form of control being exercised .
As we have said time and again , we believe that it is unacceptable for these data to end up in the hands of the secret services .
We are concerned because an administrative function is being turned into an instrument of police control .
While we welcome the commendable work done by Mr Coelho , our group will therefore vote against , since we believe that , instead of debating the free movement of EU citizens , we are debating ways in which they will be completely controlled .
( PL ) Mr President , the delay in extending the Schengen area will have both political and financial implications for the new Member States .
The political implications will involve a deepening of the divide between those who are equal and those who are more equal within the Union , just when that gap should be disappearing .
The financial implications will be considerable , because the bulk of the costs of the delay will have to be met by the new Member Sates .
I very much hope , therefore , that most of these costs will be met from the European Union 's budget , as proposed by the eight countries in the Salzburg Forum .
I also hope that henceforth the Commission will play fair with the new Member States .
The Commission was aware of the scale of the delays a long time ago , but chose not to make them public .
What is even worse is that it is planned for the old Member States to join SIS II in June 2008 , but the new Member States will only be able to join in the distant future .
They may not be able to do so until the end of 2009 .
Discriminating against the new Member States in this way is simply unacceptable .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the question is how effective the Schengen Agreement has been to date .
Did it stop the Islamic fundamentalists in Madrid ?
Has it stopped Islamic fanatics throughout Europe ?
Did it stop them in London ?
So why should we apply it when we cannot defend Europe ?
Tell me ; is there a coastguard in the Aegean ?
Here you have not defined where the borders of Europe are .
Two thousand people a day attempt to enter Greece and another two thousand attempt to enter Spain .
Consequently , we are helping them .
Once they have entered Greece , they can enter Italy , Austria , Germany or France .
We are helping them by abolishing internal borders .
What do we gain ?
And now we want a second generation .
What are we offering our citizens ?
Agents tapping their telephones , cameras watching them , the Schengen system recording their personal data .
We are therefore creating a democratic deficit without any corresponding benefit .
Of course I shall be voting against this dumbing down of democracy .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate revolves around the question as to how the future , modified Schengen Information System can be utilised in a common European strategy , bearing in mind the two main challenges Europe is facing today , namely the tide of illegal immigration - the consequences of which we see from day to day - and the risk of Islam terrorism .
That is the central question in this whole debate .
An information system in which all countries participate and that possesses more functions than its predecessor could prove useful in the tracing and expulsion of illegal immigrants and also in the fight against terrorism .
Such an information system was dealt a heavy blow as long ago as last year , though , when the European Court of Justice stipulated that a country cannot deny anyone access on the basis of their being flagged in the system as a danger to law and order .
After all , the Court specified that a country must be able to decide for itself whether the person involved forms a threat .
A deeper and more fundamental question is whether the individual Member States themselves have taken on board the Schengen logic and the spirit of the Schengen system .
Accordingly , the legalisation of illegals , people who have entered the Schengen area illegally , is a manifest violation of the Schengen agreement .
To put it in a nutshell , the information system must be placed in a broader framework .
It is only useful if the Member States monitor the external borders effectively , adopt an active and consistent policy of tracing and expulsion and come down hard on human traffickers who make a fortune at external borders that are scantly monitored .
( HU ) The integration of the European Union has reached an important milestone with the vote in the European Parliament on the regulations creating the legislative basis for the second-generation Schengen Information System .
Parliament has indicated that it will do everything in its power to ensure that the promises made in the course of enlargement are fulfilled , and that the new Member States can join the Schengen system as soon as possible .
Thanks are due to the rapporteur , who has done everything possible for this to be achieved .
It is precisely in order to avoid further delay that it is important for Parliament and the Council to reach an agreement on first reading .
Thus , it is strange that , while here in Parliament we are striving to establish the legal background as quickly as possible and are prepared to accept compromises , the government representatives on the Council are voting on passages that will necessarily delay the solution .
The key question regarding the path towards lifting the internal borders under Schengen is to know when the new Member States will be able to join the Schengen Information System ; according to the Commission this is causing considerable delay .
The objection given is that SIS II has taken longer to complete than planned , but one cannot help but presume that there are political reasons for the delay , although the Commission invokes technical reasons .
But I would like to ask , can this justify maintaining this clearly discriminatory situation ?
Is it not irresponsible to burden the new Member States with so great a security deficit ?
For Hungary , as for the other new Member States , one of the main challenges since accession has been to attain full Schengen membership .
In popular opinion , this is one of the signs of the credibility of enlargement , and therefore we have to be open to any solution that can make it possible for entry into this system to take place by the planned deadline .
The Commission , the Council , and Parliament have a great responsibility in this regard .
( HU ) We have reached an extremely important stage of a long process .
We would like to thank everyone who took part in this process , and in particular the rapporteur .
Nevertheless , the current situation is not an entirely happy one for us , since it seems that a multilevel membership is emerging within the Union , which we consider unacceptable .
It is not certain that the new Member States will be able to join the Schengen system in October 2007 , although the lifting of internal borders is one of the most important achievements of the European Union , especially for the citizens of those Member States who during the days of dictatorship were either unable to travel to the ' old ' Member States , or could do so only under excessively severe restrictions .
The opening of the borders under Schengen on the one hand strengthens a sense of belonging to a single community on the part of new EU citizens , and on the other hand can increase the confidence of the old Member States in the new ones .
For this reason , the question of what we can join and when is far from insignificant .
The delay officially recognised by the Commission comes as a shock to us .
We know that adequate guarantees for the security of the new system are necessary , yet the opening of the borders is also a moral question for the new Member States .
There are others who share our view , as we can see in the Portuguese proposal .
As an MEP from a new Member State , I have mixed feelings .
I am glad that there is solidarity among Member States , but I regret that for the moment our joining SIS I is not yet certain .
What is certain is that everything that lies ahead will involve budget overruns .
( EL ) Mr President , the second generation Schengen Information System is an enhanced version of the database used to record the data of the citizens of the European Union and of third countries on the pretext of safeguarding public order within the European Union .
When we talk about the second generation Schengen Information System , we need to be clear .
We are not simply talking about a technical aid which will help the Union to function better ; we are talking about an institution of strategic importance , through which the forces of repression will acquire a politically enhanced role in order to combat terrorism and manage immigration , without any importance attached to data protection and without ensuring that data will not be passed to third countries .
In fact , exactly the opposite is happening , given that the Union has endorsed the facility to transfer our personal data to the secret services of third countries , such as the USA , via Europol and Eurojust .
We are therefore all potential terrorists , or perhaps the new order is , at the same time , imposing a new legal order , in which our freedoms must first be sifted by the secret services and then granted to us ?
And this is supposed not to worry us .

- ( LT ) I would first like to thank Mr Coelho , who mentioned at our session today that the SIS II system is very useful for the new EU Member States that planned to join the Schengen area in autumn 2007 .
I would like to note that my country , Lithuania , was very earnest in its preparations for Schengen membership , as was confirmed by a recent inspection of readiness to join Schengen area by European Commission experts .
After all , the free movement of persons , which would be ensured by the enlargement of Schengen , is one of the key freedoms on which the European Union is based .
Unfortunately , we have recently been informed that Schengen enlargement will be delayed for technical reasons because the preparatory work for the second generation of the Schengen Information System SIS II will not be completed on time .
I fully agree with the ideas voiced by the rapporteur and would like to note that we should urge the Commission to present exhaustive and transparent information and findings of investigations to Parliament , specifying how the main SIS II project is being implemented , including the reasons for the delay .
We should also urge the Commission and the Council to take steps to enable compliance with the original date for new EU Member States to join Schengen .
If this is not possible , we must encourage the Commission to present a comprehensive assessment of the impact of the delay , specifying the resources necessary to cover the financial and organisational costs deriving from the development and implementation of SIS II and the liability for such costs .
( EL ) Mr President , with Schengen ΙΙ we are not , for better or for worse , reinventing the wheel .
We already have the Schengen area in Europe for freedom of movement and security .
We owed solidarity to the new Member States and we owed solidarity , which we are granting in this way , given that the Commission has announced that the system will not be ready for several years .
However , with Schengen ΙΙ we also need to ensure that fundamental rights will be better protected than under Schengen Ι . Thanks to the amendments by the European Parliament , Schengen ΙΙ contains more detailed rules on data protection , makes provision for Community control of and responsibility for the functioning of the system , controls by the European Parliament and the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice , bans access to third countries and makes provision for active control by the European Data Protection Supervisor and greater transparency .
At the same time , however , the ministers are unfortunately persistent in their refusal to harmonise the alerts system .
What does ' clear indications that someone has committed a serious criminal offence ' mean ?
We are talking here of the possibility of arbitrary action by over-zealous police officers .
Fortunately , the Commission will try to harmonise it in three years , but you will need to work on this , Commissioner Frattini .
Finally , there is no data protection under the third pillar .
The Council promised Parliament that it would do this , but it did not .
Are we deluding ourselves ?
We are passing a measure here which , for the police and other authorities , concerns exchanges of private data , and yet the Council refuses to bring in this data protection measure , putting pressure on us instead to adopt this proposal .
I thank you , Mr President , but you can be sure that , if we do not have this framework decision immediately , Parliament 's voice will be heard loud and clear .
- ( SK ) Over the past few days , doubts concerning the original deadline for accession to the Schengen area in October 2007 have become a focus of mass media attention in the new Member States .
Compliance with the deadline is conditional on the deployment of the new generation Schengen Information System , SIS II .
In this regard I consider Mr Coelho 's three reports to be very important .
I would like to praise his work , including the amendments designed to make the Commission 's proposal more transparent and to ensure that the Council adopts the consensus in the first reading .
Even though these three reports to a large extent focus on technical matters rather than on the frequently discussed Schengen area enlargement date , their smooth passage and implementation will determine the conditions under which the 2007 deadline might be still feasible .
A delay in deploying the Schengen system would certainly increase the final cost of completing it .
In the case of Slovakia alone it has so far entailed about EUR 6 million .
For this reason we find any delay unacceptable .
In the Hague Programme of 5 November 2004 the European Council called on the Council , European Commission and Member States to take all possible steps to lift border checks on the European Union 's internal borders as soon as possible .
Almost two years have elapsed since then , and the citizens of the Member States cannot understand the European Commission is only now tackling the technical and legal problems associated with implementing SIS II .
In conclusion I would like to call for consensus and for this legislation to be adopted in Parliament at first reading in order to ensure that the European Union does not lose credibility in the eyes of its citizens because of ineffective bureaucracy .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , fellow Members , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mr Coelho and others for their constructive work .

Those of us from the countries that have been able to participate in SIS have seen the ' wanted ' register produce immediate results in our efforts to combat crime that knows no frontiers and that moves from one EU country to another .
We are looking forward to a more developed SIS II system in which all 25 , and soon all 27 , countries can participate .
In the reports made accessible to citizens , this cooperation has given us both an instrument for preventing people with previous convictions from returning and a tool in the fight against drugs .
We have also obtained a tool in the fight against people-traffickers , who not only smuggle in children and consign them to prostitution but also consign them to exploitation as a labour force .
Once SIS II has been extended and brought into operation , we shall be able to supply Europeans with effective proof of our cooperation .
This also means , however , that we must do more work both on combating crime and on protecting personal privacy .
Dialogue is required if we are to be able to meet the expectations that people have of us in the general debate on peace , security and justice as the basis for all the work we do .
Is it not possible for such dialogue to take place more quickly , however ?
( PL ) Mr President , the citizens of the old European Union have enjoyed freedom of movement within the Schengen system since 1985 .
Following enlargement , however , the system has been unable to cope with the citizens of the new Member States .
So , if these people wish to cross a border they are still subjected to checks , and required to spend long hours queuing patiently at crossing points .
The time has surely come to put an end to this divide between the old and the new EU , whereby the citizens of the old and ' better ' European Union can enjoy the freedom of movement laid down in the Treaties , whilst for the citizens of the new and ' worse ' countries time has stood still since 1985 .
It seems paradoxical that although FRONTEX , the agency charged with protecting the EU 's external borders , is located in Warsaw in a new Member State , Poles and citizens of other nations remain deprived of full freedom of movement within the European Union .
I therefore call on this House to adopt the three reports debated today at first reading .
We have to eliminate this tangible border which is perceived as a great wall that continues to divide the old from the new European Union .
It is our duty to get rid of it .
In conclusion , I would like to thank all the Members who have expressed solidarity with the new Member States today .
( ET ) As the representative of a new Member State , I am very glad that the second generation of the Schengen Information System is nearing completion .
The problem , however , is that the completion of the information system has been delayed .
Whereas in June the Council confirmed that everything was under control and that the deadline would not change , two months later the situation was different .
Today it is apparently clear to everyone that the expansion of Schengen will be delayed , but it is not clear exactly how long this delay will be .
I believe it would be better for all parties if an honest answer were given to all those concerned as to when accession will take place .
The new Member States have made a strong effort , and this must continue .
We have problems in Estonia too .
Our homework would , however , be much more effective if there were certainty concerning the future .
Freedom of movement is not the only issue ; there is also the fact that the uncertain situation creates mutual distrust .
How does the Commission plan to act in this situation , and what would the deadlines be ?
This is a very important question today .
Mr President , after months of heavy negotiating , two and a half minutes is simply not enough time in which to enlighten this Parliament with my vision .
I am going to finish my speech if that is OK with you .
It is now up to the European Commission and the relevant organisations within the Member States to make this new system perform in the best interest of our citizens .
I want to call on the European Parliament here , however , to do some serious soul-searching about why we so often insist on having codecision , only to give it up again as soon as we can actually use it , and about our flip-flopping attitude concerning data protection .
We will not prove the added value of the European Parliament to citizens by fighting for rights alone .
We will prove that only by using them to society 's benefit .
( PL ) Mr President , Schengen is one of those EU projects that enables the citizens of the Member States to appreciate the benefits of belonging to the European Union .
It makes travelling easier , helps with border control and also means crime can be dealt with more effectively .
Parliament is keeping to its word and timetable , but the Commission is sadly lacking in this regard .
It is still not clear when the new Member States will be able to join the enlarged system .
The SIS I Plus proposal actually amounts to a step backwards , as it involves applying a different timeframe to the countries of the old and new European Union .
Along with other Central European countries , Poland implemented costly and politically difficult requirements in respect of its Eastern neighbours back in 2003 .
I shall be interested to know how Commissioner Frattini intends to explain to Polish , Czech , and Hungarian public opinion that the entry of our countries into the Schengen area has been delayed , possibly until 2009 .
I shall also be interested to know whether the specific reasons for this delay will ever be divulged to us .
It may well be that too many central EU institutions are located in Strasbourg and that it therefore cannot cope .
But it may be that this situation is the result not of technical problems with the introduction of SIS II , but of the political reluctance of certain Member States to implement the Treaty in their domestic policy .
I shall be unable to rid myself of such nagging suspicions until I receive a response to these questions .
Mr President , I believe that the majority of the speakers have mentioned the major problems faced by the second generation Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) , and that a minority of them mentioned the legal basis .
I am therefore going to speak about the legal basis and about the major problems that the functionality of the system has brought up , but before doing so , I should like once again to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for having worked closely not only with the Council , but also with the European Commission , with the aim of reaching a satisfactory compromise on the legal basis about which I shall say a few words in a moment 's time .
Several of you spoke about the delay in implementing the second generation system .
I will , as ever , be frank with you : I believe that the game that consists in constantly looking for someone on whom to pin the blame , instead of resolving the problem , is not helpful .
Why ?
Because the Member States , and especially those represented by the speakers who have taken the floor in this House , know only too well what has caused this delay .
The Member States have already examined on several occasions the revised time-limits for implementation , which will be submitted for approval at the December Council .
One of you spoke about 2009 .
I cannot guarantee that final approval will be given by the December Council , but the Commission proposal 's target date for the entry into operation of a second generation system is not 2009 , but indeed June 2008 .
As for the delays - I repeat - they are linked to the purely technical problems relating to the functioning of the sites .
Thus the central site , installed in Strasbourg , where we are , has experienced some delays .
However , these delays are also linked to contractual procedures in several Member States , especially in the new Member States .
Furthermore , virtually all , or , at any rate , a great majority , of the Member States have requested more time in order to test the technical connections linking their national systems to the central site .
It is the Member States that have requested an additional three-month extension , not the Council or the European Commission .
The Council and the Commission have committed themselves to limiting the delay , and even to making up for the time lost .
I can tell you that a working group , working alongside the Commission and the Member States , has been set up in order to oversee the implementation of the revised plan that I proposed and that the Member States have examined and are going to approve in December .
We are in the process of evaluating some temporary solutions .
Thus , Portugal 's proposal , which has been called SIS Plus , is only a temporary solution in terms of reducing the time limit and can under no circumstances constitute an alternative to the SIS II system .
I could also take account - and I am saying so here in this Parliament - of the financial impact of the delay on the new Member States .
I am saying this and I am confirming it , but on one condition : that the Member States making the requests are not themselves lagging behind in terms , for example , of contractual procedures .
Furthermore , I can tell you , in all honesty , that , to date , Slovenia is the only country technically able to meet the initial deadline of October 2007 .
I should like to say a few words now about the legal basis .
With regard to the proposal submitted to Parliament , I can say , just as Mr Coelho himself quite rightly said , that this is a good result for the European Union .
The controls carried out by the police authorities will be made more effective , with the result that the external borders will be more secure and an appropriate level of protection of personal data will also be maintained .
Frankly , I hope , like several of you do , that the Council will finally act on the political commitment made by the Austrian and Finnish Presidencies , and by that I mean the agreement on the proposal for a framework directive aimed at integrating data protection into the third pillar so as to create a comprehensive system incorporating security and the protection of fundamental rights .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission have shown that they are capable of working together to reach a balanced compromise .
The new Member States are rightly calling for the controls at their external borders to be lifted .
The fact that we are acting fairly swiftly in guaranteeing all EU citizens a real area of free movement is one of the most visible results of EU enlargement .
Finally , any delay due to the legal basis is going to affect this major political result for Europe , which was a priority objective in the accession treaty .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 .
Women 's immigration ( debate )
The next item is the report by Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on women 's immigration : the role and place of immigrant women in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report which I had the honour of drafting on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is designed to help broaden the debate and our political action on the question of immigration by introducing the parameter of women 's immigration .
This parameter is becoming more and more important given that , in the enlarged European Union , there is a constant increase in women from various areas of the world who are immigrating either in isolation , as independent economic migrants , or within the framework of the migration of their families or for other reasons , accounting for approximately 54 % of all immigrants , although this is not an exact figure .
We all realise today that our objectives for development and social cohesion are directly linked to the management of migration flows , by ensuring that immigrants are valued and integrated into our communities .
As such , the ' femalisation ' - if you will permit the phrase - of immigration is a new challenge which must be studied and taken into account in all our policies .
Female immigrants , either at a personal level or as members of their families , can constitute added value both for our communities and for their communities of origin .
In our report , reference is made to the problems faced by female immigrants .
These problems have to do with the discrimination which they suffer on the labour market and in education and , more specifically , with the recognition of their qualifications and vocational skills and they are problems which result in unemployment and poverty .
Reference is also made to cases of violation of human rights , such as violence and sexual exploitation , which are matters which we have repeatedly debated and condemned in the European Parliament .
We also wish to shed light on the problems faced by women in certain immigrant communities , in which they are the victims of cultural and religious stereotypes , resulting in their marginalisation .
Even worse are the cases of forced marriages and crimes of honour .
The basic thrust of our report and the resolution which we propose is , on the one hand , the protection of the rights of immigrants and , on the other hand , their improved integration into the labour market and social life .
This means , first of all , the application of the acquis communautaire in order to remove discrimination , prevent trafficking and make provision for family reunification and the rights of women as accompanying family members .
The report recognises the right of the Member States to decide on the numbers and rules under which they accept immigrants into their country .
Within this framework of national legislation , therefore , we support respect for the rights of women , their family rights and , more importantly , the rights of children , in accordance with international conventions and protocols .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we recognise that integration is a complex and two-way process .
Therefore , alongside this framework of reception and respect for the rights of immigrants , which we must apply with proper coordination and use of all our policies , we must cooperate seriously with the countries of origin and the immigrant communities in our countries so that we can prepare the proper integration of immigrants and , more importantly , of female immigrants , because they are the ones who know least of all about their rights and about the benefits and obligations which derive from those rights .
These have to do with language , with the authorities , with our values , with the potential for vocational careers and with the potential to participate in the educational system of their children .
Thus our objectives for development and prosperity and our fight for solidarity , justice throughout the world and the protection of human rights will be better achieved .
My warmest thanks to all the political groups whose participation enriched my work and helped us to prepare a text which is cohesive , respects subsidiarity and the Community and international legal acquis and includes a courageous and in-depth approach to the real problems and the real challenges .
Mr President , I must truly congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
I broadly agree with her remarks , firstly as regards access to the labour market .
I believe that the role of women can represent one of the factors contributing to the creation , in Europe , of a genuinely balanced and comprehensive development and employment policy .
As you will know , this is one of the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy and it is primarily a means of guaranteeing women a full role within society and a genuine life of independence , and I therefore fully support the emphasis laid on the theme of employment .
I also support the emphasis laid on the theme of the integration of immigrant women , firstly as regards language learning .
Learning the language of one 's country of residence must be a fundamental part of everyone 's integration , be they men , women , children or babies .
In particular , as regards women immigrants , we note that there has been a delay in guaranteeing them genuine access to the languages spoken in their host countries , and that is a factor that slows down and hinders integration .
As the rapporteur rightly points out , the theme of integration is connected to the crucial dialogue between cultures and religions .
I believe that the European Union is based on absolute values in terms of respect for the dignity of every woman and every man , and that it is therefore impossible to accept , under any circumstances , acts that demean human dignity , in this case women 's dignity , as they are the polar opposite of symbols of integration .
I am concerned about cases in which , for example , women are made , against their own will , to wear submissive symbols of their female status , such as veils that completely cover their faces and do not allow them to be seen .
Unfortunately , these are symbols that sit uncomfortably with integration and suggest the subjection of women .
I also think it absurd that , in some European countries , so-called honour crimes , or , as I would instead call them , ' dishonour crimes ' take place , and I will , of course , be doing even more to promote initiatives aimed at abolishing these crimes .
In my view , they must be treated harshly , not lightly , because , with motives like these , they attack absolute values such as human life , physical integrity and dignity .
When applying the European directive on family reunification , we intend to pay special attention to the prevention of forced marriages .
This is another theme on which I shall be working .
As you know , this is a binding directive for the Member States .
When applying the directive at national level , I shall pay special attention to forms of violence within the family , such as forced and polygamous marriages - which are not permitted by the laws of the European Union and of the Member States - and to the guarantees made to women in the event of separation or divorce , so that they cannot be singled out as second-class citizens when their marriages break down .
With regard to the directives on asylum seekers and refugees , I believe that one aspect needs to be highlighted .
For the first time , discrimination against women must be made to count as sufficient grounds for obtaining refugee status .
I believe that being subjected to violence within the family and to female genital mutilation , or being at risk of being subjected to a forced marriage , is enough of a reason for women who demonstrate that they are exposed to such risks to be granted ' refugee ' status .
Finally , in all sincerity , once again , I should like to point out to the rapporteur an aspect on which I harbour some doubts , namely granting illegal woman immigrants exactly the same status as legal women immigrants .
I believe that there is an area in which absolute rights must be guaranteed to everyone , without any difference in status .
It is clear that people cannot be denied rights to health care , emergency medical treatment and a minimum level of subsistence just because , for a given period of time - perhaps while they are waiting to be repatriated - they reside in a country illegally .
There is certainly a basis of rights that they have in common , but I believe that we should not go beyond that and mix up the two levels .
There is illegal immigrant status , which is regulated and dealt with in one way .
Legal immigrant status is different .
To put them both on exactly the same footing sends out a dangerous message , and it is obviously on this point that we are working , in order to achieve a balanced European policy both on illegal immigration and on legal immigration .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I gladly take the floor to endorse Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report , even though I do so with a touch of sadness , since , last weekend , we received a further tragic piece of news in relation to women , namely the stoning to death of a woman in Baghdad , on Saturday 21 October .
I believe that everyone is aware of the fact that it is only by women having equal dignity throughout the world that a change can occur , too , in the major problems facing the world today .
It was in this frame of mind and with this firm belief , that is to say with a firm belief in the value and the role that women can have now and in the future in enabling this world to move towards a solution of peaceful coexistence , that I welcomed the work done by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , in which consideration is given above all to the fact that women migrants are a somewhat special case .
We would prefer it if this were not the case , but it is .
In a world in which the division is still so clear-cut - and for a large part of the world there is still a division in terms of rights and duties - I believe that treating women and men migrants in the same way would probably be a mistake , just as it is always a mistake to treat different circumstances identically .
The Union therefore needs to pay special attention to women 's immigration , also taking account of implications that do not , in contrast , characterise men 's immigration .
I believe that we can find this focus in Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report , which I accordingly intend to support .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like sincerely to thank Mrs Kratsa for her commitment and her sense of cooperation .
This own-initiative report is , in my view , one of the most important reports dealing with women 's rights that we have had to express an opinion on since the start of the Parliamentary term .
The situation of women migrants has been overlooked for too long by our governments , despite the fact that they are growing in number and that they now account for the majority of the people arriving on EU soil .
They are the ones who forge the first links between their families and nationals in terms of society and integration .
Indeed , this report offers many guidelines aimed at putting a stop to the two forms of discrimination - racial and sexual discrimination - that these women often suffer .
I am particularly delighted that a number of provisions have been included in this report that concern illegal women immigrants , because they represent a sub-category that is deprived of its rights and thus made all the more vulnerable .
It is therefore vital that these women can benefit , in whichever Member State they are resident , from basic rights such as access to emergency health care , legal aid and schools for their children , as is the case in my country .
Finally , I am delighted that this report features another point to which I am particularly attached , namely the status of women who arrive on EU territory within the context of the family reunification process .
These women often only exist in law through their husbands and are therefore placed in a situation of complete dependence .
This report calls for them to be granted an independent and autonomous status as quickly as possible and , above all , for this status to be automatically preserved in the event of the couple separating .
I therefore hope that this report will be adopted by a large majority within our Parliament and that the ambitious proposals that it contains will not go unheeded .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou - for which I am grateful - puts plenty wind in the sails of women 's rights , particularly the rights of women immigrants , and that was long overdue .
We have for too long taken an attitude of cultural relativism towards women immigrants for granted .
I am glad to see that the report incorporates many of the things we have been pressing for , such as the requirement that instances of genital mutilation be reported and that there be penalties , if necessary under criminal law for forced marriages , which have been long overdue .
I hope we will also be able to get language courses for migrant women made compulsory , for language is an important component in integration and , without them , they will be unable to avail themselves of their rights .
We must put a stop to the situation in which girls from families that have migrated to Europe are exempted sex education classes and sports , which are mandatory for others , and in which some of them are even taken out of school or forbidden to go there .
We need to be very determined about this and speak out about it loud and clear .
We also see it as very important that women should acquire a legal status independent of that of their husbands , and it is on this point that I would like to address Commissioner Frattini personally , for I recently , in a written question , asked to be informed as to whether he shared my concern about the series of court rulings in various Member States that , in the way in which they accord state benefits , effectively endorse polygamy .
I was quite horrified to be told , by a Commissioner with responsibility for justice matters , that the object of polygamy was the protection of women .
Bigamy is prohibited in Europe , and I would welcome an answer from the Commissioner , for I cannot imagine that he would knowingly allow it to be stated that polygamy was intended to protect women , whilst certain forms of same-sex partnership are outlawed .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I really am very grateful to Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her wide-ranging report , which we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left fully endorse , and adds a great deal to the information available on the rights of women migrants in the EU .
Knowing as we do that women now constitute 54 % of all immigrants , it is quite utterly incomprehensible and shocking that the attitude of European governments towards them should betray such ignorance and that they should be doing so little to meet the specific needs that women immigrants have .
My particular concern is that we should take this opportunity to note the flagrant deficiencies in the Member States ' integration policies , with women immigrants being expected to adapt to the system in silence and without difficulty , not making any demands and allowing the national labour market to make the maximum possible profit out of them .
When countries spend decades averting their eyes from the challenges that immigrants present and then make them carry the can for their inadequate integration , I see that as no more than further evidence of ignorance and political blindness .
I want to see gender-specific migration management that will be consistent in taking seriously immigrant women 's rights to education , health , safety and independence and in ensuring that those things are available to more and more of them .
If that is not done , we risk a further increase in the trafficking of women , in the exploitation of female domestic staff , in the social isolation of women and in domestic violence .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the excellent work she has done , and in particular on the fact that she has highlighted some important priorities enabling us to ensure that immigration is primarily understood as two-way integration - therefore involving social , linguistic and cultural aspects - that is to say integration based on mutual respect for rights and duties .
Among the main rights that must be guaranteed to women migrants is that of preventing and combating honour crimes , forced marriages , genital mutilation or any other form of violent constraint and exploitation .
In this regard , I , on behalf of my group , have tabled an amendment highlighting the need to carry out extensive information campaigns aimed precisely at women migrants , so that they can be informed of their rights and of the bodies that they can turn in times of need .
Finally , the European Union needs at last to adopt specific provisions to encourage the Member States , too , to draft laws explicitly prohibiting some of the crimes and issues about which we have already spoken .
To conclude , I should like to thank Mr Frattini for the commitment that he has emphasised this evening , too , a commitment that the Commission intends to put to use in addressing these problems .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the very serious problem of emigration , particularly by women , due to increasing globalisation and the complexities of contemporary life should also be considered from the point of view of the irreparable damage to their countries of origin .
In addition I must mention the problem of increasing poverty in countries exploited by rich and highly developed ones .
There are certainly ways in which the opportunity to leave one 's homeland can prove positive .
Nonetheless , emigrants are cut off from a community bound together by its history , traditions and culture .
An individual who could have contributed to increasing the common good leaves .
When that person starts life all over again in a foreign culture and language , he or she is working for the benefit of another society .
Such people are often exploited because of their circumstances .
That is why it is vital to have the relevant legislation in place , particularly regarding social protection and the individual 's right to work .
The document under debate goes some way towards emphasising this .
An appropriate scale of values is also important , where moral values are also given a place alongside purely material gain , and human labour is considered in the broader sense of the word , although the latter should not mean interference in the personal lives of women who want to have children and bring up families .
( ES ) Mr President , emigration is necessary and it also enriches our society in cultural , economic and social terms , and we are not going to deny that today .
It is the case , however , that it can cause us problems if we do not manage it properly .
It should never be a problem , because we must ensure that it is not one when we draw up these laws in all of the parliaments of the European Union .
If the parliaments are not careful , however , they may cause problems that turn into xenophobia and racism in our societies , and that is precisely what we must prevent .
A mistake has been made in drawing up this report , since it has not just dealt with legal emigration , but has treated legal and illegal emigration on the same footing .
This is a dangerous message , because some of the things that this report says may have certain mafia gangs rubbing their hands with glee .
Democracy , which is the system that fortunately governs all of us , is based on the freedom of the individual , and that is guaranteed through respect for the law , both the laws of the Member States - because this problem is subject to subsidiarity - and the Regulations and Directives that we have now and in the future .
The important thing is respect for the law .
I fear that some of the amendments presented by the radical left do not respect the law of the Member States and run counter to equality , democracy and the freedom of the individual .
I would therefore ask the House to think hard about these amendments , which are designed to attract mafias , to confuse emigrants and to attract more illegal immigration .
They are going to be of little use to emigrants and European citizens as a whole , given the draw effects , given the comings and goings and dealings of mafias and given the fact that the criteria for granting residents ' permits are not clear .
I would like to make an appeal to this House and the Commission with regard to cases of mutilation or forced marriage .
When it comes to talking to third countries and giving them money for cooperation , we must - if we genuinely want to protect women and women 's equality - demand of those countries , before giving them that money , that they respect minimum fundamental rights .
( PT ) I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou .
We agree that European immigration policy must encompass the gender dimension and the situation of women in the Member States , because they suffer from twofold discrimination : sexual and ethnic , as has been mentioned by previous speakers .
What is more , they suffer from discrimination both in the host society and within their own community .
The involvement of immigrant women in all areas of the host country 's social life is a vital factor in making them less isolated and in enabling them to help the younger generations to integrate .
For this to happen , a number of barriers need to come down , beginning with the linguistic barrier .
In some immigrant communities , not only are women marginalised , they are also forced into marriages and subjected to humiliating and cruel practices , such as genital mutilation . They also fall victim to honour crimes , as Mr Frattini mentioned .
The Member States have a duty to do all they can to put an end to these criminal practices , victims of which have justifiable grounds for being granted asylum .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her characteristic sensitivity and for the positive proposals on the role and status of both legal and illegal immigrant women in the European Union .
We are concerned here with women migrants who are discriminated against in the workplace , physically and mentally violated , used as commodities for sex trafficking , deprived of their freedom and passports , held to ransom by patriarchal customs and killed in honour crimes .
I should , however , like to point out to us all that , in reality , these women are used and exploited by European families and European businessmen .
They are very often alone , with the pain of having left behind their children in their countries of origin .
They work as carers , alleviating the suffering and the loneliness of the elderly and the sick , and they do not have any security .
I believe that we need to do a great deal in relation to this issue .
These women represent a high percentage of the immigrant base and a major resource for the countries of Europe .
They are not just victims ; these women are all different and , in recent years , they have organised themselves into associations , sought to establish relations and put themselves in touch with women from their host countries .
These women are requesting access to information , health care and housing .
They want to have control over their lives , and we must help them .
That is why we must mainstream the fight against discrimination and apply in every Member State the directives that the European Union has provided itself with - and about which Mr Frattini was also speaking - from the reception of migrants up to and including active citizenship .
The experiences of women migrants and their criticism of inequality are helping to pave the way for establishing democracy in relation to the few differences that exist .
( PL ) Mr President , we are currently witnessing mass migration which has a variety of causes .
There is economic migration , where the aim is to earn more and improve one 's standard of living .
That is the most common type of migration .
Then there is migration to reunify a family or to escape from persecution in the country of origin .
Technological development has meant that it is becoming ever easier and cheaper to travel in today 's world , so the problem of immigration can only increase .
It is therefore incumbent on us to take appropriate measures to deal with the growing number of new arrivals , particularly in Europe .
The sensible long-term solution would be to avoid discriminating against foreigners , especially against women who are in the majority .
Too many immigrants are being consigned to the margins of society at present .
The Member States should create better conditions for immigrants to integrate into our societies , whilst still retaining a pride in their origins .
This would allow us to pre-empt the problem of alienating immigrants , which leads to frustration and sometimes to violent disturbances , and very often results in a life of poverty .
- ( SK ) The Commission 's communication about the demographic future of Europe notes that over the next five decades the working-age population of the Member States will decline dramatically , by an estimated 48 million people .
Even an optimistic scenario involving a resumption of demographic growth and the discovery of new sources of productivity would still leave Europe needing a major inflow of new migrants , estimated at 40 million people .
This may be the most serious challenge facing the European Union .
The report we have before us , for which I would like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , indicates that the position of migrant women plays a crucial role in the process .
This group of women deserves special attention , not only because they are frequent targets of discrimination but also because they have a key mission in facilitating the integration of the first and second generations of migrants ; therefore , the access of such women to education is of fundamental importance .
Against the backdrop of these challenges , the need to develop common procedures for integrating migrants , and to devise common procedures over immigration policy appears both urgent and unavoidable .
The diverging approaches adopted by the individual states give rise to unnecessary confusion .
Developments in the area of human trafficking and human smuggling also point to a pressing need for clear immigration policies , for transparency , for unequivocal rules and for access to the common labour market .
A lack of legitimate opportunities clearly encourages illegal activities , with illegal migrants being greatly exposed to all sorts of human rights violations and left without the assistance to which they would otherwise be entitled as victims .
In our future deliberations , however , it is essential to make a clear distinction between asylum policy , legitimate migration and illegal migration .
Confusing these notions would generate new and unnecessary misunderstandings .

( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this very important and highly relevant report .
The nature of immigration into Europe has undergone a change .
Today , more women than men come to Europe , as there is a great demand for workers in the operational service and healthcare sector .
However , the labour market in question is also characterised by a large grey economy in which the normal rules for pay , working hours and the working environment do not apply .
Women therefore find themselves in a very vulnerable situation without social and economic protection , and many of them perform jobs that do not provide the opportunity of becoming legal .
Their vulnerability puts these illegal women immigrants at greater risk of being abused , both physically and mentally , while their illegal status in itself makes them easy prey for those who wish to abuse them and sexually exploit them in the workplace .
They are also particularly at risk of being denied their fundamental rights , and they become victims of violence and discrimination in their everyday lives .
Many do not dare report assaults for fear of deportation .
It is absolutely imperative to place the conditions in which immigrant women find themselves more firmly in the spotlight .
We need to ensure that the Member States take account , through their legislation , of the problems facing immigrant women .
Those women who are victims of people-trafficking or who are exposed to violence should be given the opportunity of being granted temporary residence permits and have the right to legal aid and access to healthcare and social services , irrespective of whether or not they have a legal right to stay in the country in question .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I concur with Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report , and in this regard I would like to point out , in agreement with her , that the implementation in the Union of the directive on family reunification is unsatisfactory and that there is a need to amend the directive with the aim of reducing the time it takes to obtain autonomous status for spouses , almost always wives , and of guaranteeing that spouses ' status will be maintained in the event of separation , divorce or widowhood .
In addition , I would like to emphasise the importance of several instruments of Community intervention , in particular the Daphne programme , since these instruments fill in the gaps in national policies , which are all too often lacking with regard to the gender dimension in both policy content and data collection .
Finally , the report calls for the risk of female genital mutilation to be included as grounds for requesting asylum .
I agree with this , but I believe that now is the time to include as grounds for requesting asylum other factors involving the repression of female sexuality , such as homosexuality and so-called adulterous behaviour , for countries in which these acts carry violent punishments .
I am thinking , in this regard , of stoning to death in Iran .
( NL ) Mr President , migrant women as a group , vulnerable though it is , are not so much a problem as an opportunity .
They are vulnerable because they may be exposed to discrimination , not only for being women , but also on the basis of their being Muslim , Somali or Moroccan .
They are also vulnerable to domestic violence , or because they do not speak the local language , or are financially dependent on their spouses or fathers .
We must therefore support them by not letting domestic violence and honour crimes go unpunished , but that cannot be done by imposing stricter rules alone .
Rights on paper are not sufficient for women ; they must also be able to assert them in practice , because a woman who is dependent on the perpetrator of domestic violence will , in practice , not benefit a great deal from her rights on paper .
That is why we must promote the financial independence of migrant women by , for example , counteracting discrimination within the labour market .
The economy benefits when more migrant women participate in the labour market .
Another opportunity we cannot afford to miss is the positive impact migrant women can have on the integration of their children in the new society .
That is why , as a host community , we must be open to support of , and contact with , migrant women , for they , too , belong here .
I am pleased that Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou deals with these aspects at great length in her excellent report , and I should therefore like to thank her for it .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and emphasise one consideration .
Any immigration policy must surely take account of specific gender issues , but also the differences between immigrant communities , since the causes of the double discrimination suffered by immigrant women and the problems resulting from it differ according to their reasons for emigrating .
If women emigrating alone for economic reasons find work , it is usually low-level work , sometimes in undeclared jobs , which gives them neither the independence nor the security they were seeking , though it allows them to relate to people and to integrate further .
Nevertheless , women emigrating for the purposes of family reunification usually stay at home , with no opportunity to familiarise themselves with the host society or to learn the language , and that hinders their integration and increases their isolation .
The designation of 2007 as ' European year of equal opportunities for all ' and of 2008 as ' European year of intercultural dialogue ' must help to increase citizens ' awareness of the situation of immigrant women , one that is always tough but which varies in nature , and to implement policies to promote equality and integration in accordance with each different situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make just a brief observation after having listened to many speeches which I endorse .
First , Mrs Breyer , I would like to tell you that I have always considered and will always consider polygamous marriage to be against the law and a serious violation of the right of women to choose freely .
I can therefore confirm to you that I will continue to move in this direction .
Some of the Members who have spoken - Mrs Angelilli and Mrs Morgantini - have raised the issue of communication .
I believe - if I may say so - that giving a voice to immigrant women in a more direct and stronger way can be of great help , even in drawing up stronger European defence policies .
' Giving a voice ' means allowing these people to have effective means at their disposal to be able to speak and to be listened to .
Otherwise , there is a risk - if I may say so - that the voices of these women may also be subject to a filter operated by the communities in which they reside .
In many European countries cases of personal segregation and submission of immigrant women have been observed .
This is the group , among the many with which I work , from which I receive the lowest number of individual complaints .
When compared with other sectors connected with the protection of people 's fundamental rights , individual violence against women in immigrant communities is the area in which the fewest complaints about specific cases are received .
Why ?
Because there is a fear of reporting such cases , because they are never communicated , because the women themselves are subjected to violence so that they do not disclose the abuses that they are suffering within the free and democratic territory of the Member States .
Communication is therefore an absolutely central issue .
Finally , precisely to help this integration effort , I would like to point out that in Spring 2007 I will be publishing a European manual on integration , which will be issued in all the languages spoken in the countries of the European Union , containing descriptions of cases of successful integration in the cities , provinces and regions where they have been found .
By distributing millions of copies of this practical manual , we will publicise positive examples so that they can be imitated .
These are examples coming from the world of local bodies .
I can inform you that up to now the sector for which I have the least information is precisely that of the integration of immigrant women .
I am therefore appealing to you , so that in the coming months I may receive specific examples , both positive and negative , on which I can take action .
Otherwise , we will carry on making important statements of principle without being able to translate them into practical action , something that I , however , intend to do .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
Large number of immigrants , with special emphasis on women , face multiple discrimination and vulnerability to social exclusion .
This is the highest challenge for us how to integrate them into the society , to help them getting access to proper education which helps them to wider employment facilities and to contribution to the development of the European Project .
Proper legal framework is just one side of the coin .
Implementation of legal commitments by the relevant national authorities , willingness of immigrants to respect fundamental European norms , values and to become the integral part of the society is the other .
Huge potential lies in successful integration policies since wider employment of immigrants could help with getting forward with Lisbon employment targets .
No actions can gain success without proper and regular dialogue with immigrant communities .
The dialogues are perfect tools for monitoring integration processes , learning about mutual interests , intentions , request as well as obligations , determining and if necessary , altering methods and of inclusion programs .
The forthcoming European year of equal opportunities 2007 and the year of intercultural dialogue 2008 will be a useful and potential framework opportunity to provide immigrant societies with a wide range of information on their rights , opportunities as well as informing them what Europe is expecting from them .
Recovery of Community funds ( debate )
The next item is the report by Paulo Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the recovery of Community funds .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , if we are to recover the amounts missing from the Community budget , what is needed is suitable determination , paperwork , transparency , stringency , proportionality and harmonisation of the rules and procedures .
Sadly , we are a long way off achieving that .
The European institutions must not shut themselves away in a world of rules and regulations , far removed from reality .
For this reason , this report on the recovery of Community funds takes as its starting point a specific example : never before have we had a bigger sum to recover - it is put at almost EUR 100 million - and the circumstances surrounding the missing money are worse still .
This concerns a crime perpetrated by a criminal organisation that has enjoyed the collusion of any number of European companies , and , following the investigation and cooperation on the part of the Italian authorities , the European bodies were notified of the details of the case .
The Guardia de finanzia held an investigation into the illegal import of butter by firms controlled by the Naples Camorra , the adulteration of that butter with unrendered beef fat , vegetable oils and a chemical known as lipostrol , the sale of tens of thousands of tonnes of the finished product to various European companies and lastly the use of this product for the fraudulent use of export refunds and disposal subsidies for pastry goods .
The findings of this investigation were then passed on to the relevant Community and national authorities .
Seven years after the Italian investigation , and what has happened ?
In one of the Member States concerned , the authorities only decided to launch an inquiry four years after the original Italian report came out , and none of the estimated missing EUR 40 million has been recovered .
In another Member State , the inquiry has not even got off the ground , so none of the EUR 50 million-plus has been recovered .
In a third Member State , the problem was deemed merely administrative and the original fines have been cut and the amounts involved almost nominal .
Outside Italy , where , on the basis of a national initiative , dozens of people were arrested for murder , illegal possession of weapons and association to commit offences , and where complex legal processes are ongoing , there is no realistic expectation of securing any convictions in the countries concerned or of the Community money being recovered .
Everything indicates that the whole process will lapse .
Owing to legal confidentiality , most of the national authorities responsible for food safety have not , as yet , been notified of this fraud .
While the Community and national authorities act with such a lack of determination and coordination in addressing a crime of this magnitude , countless cases have come to light , in which , under discretionary powers granted in the cause of recovering Community funds , the authorities have hounded honest farmers to return money , without any substantive justification and for procedural reasons that are not always genuine , and this has often left the farmers in a state of poverty .
For these farmers the principles of the presumption of innocence , the right to be informed of the nature of an accusation , proportionality and the guarantee of adequate resources to mount a defence are not worth the paper they are written on .
The crux of the matter is that Article 280 of the Treaty is being ignored .
The notion of cooperation between the Commission and the Member States for protecting the Community 's financial interests is pie in the sky .
The effective and equivalent protection of these interests for the citizens is not being delivered .
Against this backdrop , root and branch changes must be carried out , be it by redefining the functions of Eurojust , by establishing a European Public Prosecutor or by some other means .
We need a European initiative that ensures that cooperation on justice , with a view to protecting the Community 's financial interests , is backed up by action , and is not mere rhetoric , as has happened in this case , the biggest of its kind in the area of Community finance .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Casaca for a very good , interesting and useful report .
It takes account of direct management , which is mainly the responsibility of the Commission , and shared management , which the Commission shares with the Member States .
Regarding recoveries in direct management , the Commission thanks the rapporteur for his support in the current revision of financial regulation which we have already placed on the table , in particular the proposals aiming to establish a uniform time limit of five years , and of course the level of privilege for Community entitlement to fiscal claims in national law which , to our regret , the Council was reluctant to support .
Regarding recoveries in shared management , the Commission agrees with the emphasis placed on the responsibility of the Member States , since this accounts for the biggest part of Community expenditure .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's analysis concerning the low level of recoveries by some Member States .
In one particular case , the sum involved is EUR 95 million .
However , I would like to mention that this Commission has laid special emphasis on recovery .
Between 2003 and 2006 , the Commission was able to reduce recovery amounts from EUR 553 million to only EUR 160 million by September this year .
The specific case of the 95 million is the subject of a criminal investigation in the court of one Member State and another is involved in the problem .
So in fact less than EUR 100 million have to be recovered in the near future , and EUR 95 million after the investigation has been completed .
We are very satisfied with the report as a whole .
We are working with Parliament , especially the rapporteur on the Financial Regulation .
We are cooperating closely with the Committee on Budgets on that .
We shall give a proper response to your report and your recommendations in writing .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by extending my group 's thanks to the rapporteur for a really very interesting and also important report , for there is still a lot wrong with the way in which the funds to which the Community is entitled are recovered , particularly in the way in which the Member States go about it , and it is certainly very regrettable that the Council is conspicuous by its absence today .
We can see that more progress has been made since you , Commissioner , took the matter in hand , but I do believe that we will still have to get seriously stuck in to improvements in specific areas over the coming months , particularly in agricultural policy , which is at the heart of the whole recovery issue , and where much is still not as it should be , with 70 % of old claims dating back to the period from 1971 to 2002 .
We are talking here about EUR 3.1 billion , 70 % of which has still not yet been recovered .
The present situation is pretty shameful . The total recovered amounts to less than one fifth of the EUR 6 billion outstanding in 2002 .
The President of the Court of Auditors said recently - and may I say , Mr President , that I object to the timing of this debate , since a very important report is being presented to the Committee on Budgetary Control at this very moment - that recovery was proceeding at an increasing sluggish pace and that the penalties are wholly unsuitable .
The problem lies with the Member States ; I believe that all of us here in this House are on the same side and will , come what may , raise the parity of tax demands and claims for the repayment of funds as an issue in the deliberations on the Financial Regulation , for we regard this as vitally important .
It is also important that there should be more support for the auditors who work where these things happen , particularly those who work for national authorities , for they face the possibility of being punished for their own department 's failings , and so they need our special protection .
There is another problem within the Commission itself .
Until recently , it was impossible to ascertain just how much was currently outstanding , and I hope that the improved accounting procedures will improve matters .
I will close by saying that we will ensure that this issue stays on the agenda .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I believe this report is a long and drawn-out justification for the creation of a European public prosecutor .
Indeed , judging by Mr Casaca 's tone , he is positively affronted to find that the law of a Member State should ever prevail over the Commission : heaven forbid !
According to this document , to get round the problem we should create a law officer with authority to overrule the laws of Member States .
This is to be done ' in the interests of a more joined-up procedure ' , and the other vital reason quoted is to help reduce complexity .
As a staunch defender of the national state , I strongly oppose the creation of a European public prosecutor and anyone in this Chamber who sincerely believes in democracy rather than just paying it lip service should oppose it too .
I particularly call upon MEPs from my country to stand with me in defence of British law .
( DE ) Mr President , it is evident that many regard the squandering of EU funds as a minor offence , for there seems to be no other explanation for the fact that , over the past thirty years or so , irregular payments were made amounting to EUR 3.1 billion , only 17 % of which has been recovered .
Inadequate monitoring procedures and non-compliance with EU rules and regulations appear to be the order of the day .
It is bad enough that billions of euros in EU funds should disappear into fictitious accounts , but when , even in the rare cases where irregular payments are brought to light , the recovery of them is bungled or proceeded with so slowly that the culprits go to ground and the money disappears , it becomes clear that the European Union is suffering from something very like organised negligence .
It is intolerable that there should be repeated instances of the negligent use of EU funds - and , moreover , in the same Member States - without someone having to take the consequences .
Where Member States fail to do everything possible to recover missing funds within a maximum of two years , I believe that those Member States should themselves make good the loss .
Mr President , EU money that is lost or unaccounted for often hits the headlines .
It is a pity that the work done to prevent money being lost in the first place - and to recover funds that are lost - is all too often too technical , too tedious to be reported at all , let alone hit the headlines .
However , efforts to recover funds are being made and should be supported , although , as the rapporteur clearly points out , more needs to be done .
In particular , more needs to be done on the recovery of funds where there is shared management .
We need to rely on the full cooperation of the national authorities to help us succeed .
Sometimes I get the feeling that , as long as we are talking about Community funds , national authorities are not quite so keen to do their part .
In effect they are saying : ' Our responsibility is the national budget , and that is it ' .
However , that is not it .
When EU money is spent at national level , it is clear that national authorities are actively involved .
National authorities also bear a strong responsibility for ensuring that Community funds are not spent erroneously , irregularly , or even fraudulently .
If they are , then action is taken to recover them .
The report rightly calls for Member States to stand up and be counted , to do their part , to better organise themselves and to cooperate more with the Commission so that the recovery of funds is effective and becomes a deterrent in itself .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I very much welcome Mr Casaca 's report , and , as a member of the Committee on Regional Development , I have to say how very embarrassing I find the dramatic increase in frauds and irregularities .
The financial impact on structural policy measures went up from EUR 480 million in 2003 to EUR 694 million in 2004 , the last reported year , in which a good 70 % of the misspent funds were attributable to structural policy . To that we must also add a grey area .
If we are less than fully able to get back the money wrongly paid out - as this own-initiative report says we are - then that shows the EU in a bad light .
It is no small thing to have outstanding debts totalling EUR 3 billion .
This is not , however , just about the financial loss to the EU .
If the recovery of these funds is less than efficient , others will be encouraged to misuse money granted in aid .
Whether money has been obtained by deliberate fraud or paid out in error , the recovery of it must run smoothly and efficiently , and even if the procedure may appear disproportionate in individual cases , the Member States must apply it , so I call on them to proceed with greater rigour and coordinate their public prosecutors ' offices accordingly , while also asking them to make room for the European anti-fraud authority OLAF to become more involved in the proceedings .
As for the Commission , I call on it to do more to make the misuse of subsidies a cause of public disgrace .
Europe needs transparency , and so does its system of grants and subsidies .
Where funds are used for purposes other than those for which they were originally intended , we have to put a stop to it , and for that we need more openness .
I thank the rapporteur for helping to bring that about .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the almost forensic work he has put into this report .
Apart from the obvious loss of money , which is very serious from an EU point of view , the public perception of fraud is quite large and to some extent it is unfair and detracts from the very good work that the European Union budget does throughout Member States .
We should remember that by concentrating on the problem that is there .
Unfortunately , the public blames this anonymous European Union , when the problem is much closer to home in their individual Member States .
That message needs to go out very clearly too .
It is unacceptable that there is so much money outstanding - some EUR 3.5 billion is owed as of June 2002 .
A great deal of money in the agriculture sector has just not been recovered because of the difficulties with Member States not cooperating .
The reform of the common agricultural policy in 2003 should see an improvement in the position in relation to agriculture : the introduction of the single farm payment , its close links to cross-compliance measures , will ensure that money is only paid out when it should be .
I have a niggling worry that because of past failures in agriculture , we are coming down very heavily in policing cross-compliance .
I have farmers come to me saying that they get no notice of inspections and are faced with significant penalties for very minor mistakes .
That is going too far , and we need to be careful not to push too far in that direction , because while it is very easy to tackle and trace EUR 5 , EUR 5 billion seems to slip through the net .
I am pleased that Commissioner Fischer Boel has said she will look at less draconian implementation , while at the same time ensuring we meet the rules .
We do need to get the money back .
But I would like to end by making the point that the talk , and hopefully the work towards better regulation , should improve this position .
The past is not a pretty picture .
Let us hope the future is a nicer one .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written Statement ( Ru1e 142 )
( FR ) It has to be said that the recovery of Community funds , following irregularities or fraud , remains insufficient .
The financial regulation needs to be applied more rigidly , and revised .
Thus , Parliament believes that the simplification of the recovery procedures and better coordination between the Commission services and those competent at national level constitute a crucial line of work .
The main problem is that no national authority is totally responsible for the quality and supervision of the national controls even though 80 % of the responsibility for executing the Community budget falls to the Member States , because they jointly manage it .
The complex nature of the mechanisms thus prompts the media to hold the Commission responsible for the problems associated with illegal operations and , hence , even for the recovery of funds , even though these problems lie above all at Member State level .
Enhanced cooperation between OLAF , Eurojust and Europol , a broader application of the recovery procedure through the use of legal channels and a request by Parliament for the Commission to lay down a regulatory framework for the financial handling of irregularities and for it to regularly present a report , via the Directorate-General , on the state of the recovery procedure , are all so many important measures that will make the procedures more transparent and effective .
Implementing measures ( level 2 ) of the " Transparency " and " Prospectus " directives ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the Implementing measures ( level 2 ) for the ' Transparency ' and ' Prospectus ' directives .
Mr President , allow me to address two measures proposed by the Commission on which Parliament will vote tomorrow .
They concern the postponement of the decision on the equivalence of third country accounting standards - we aim to reach that decision by July 2008 - and the general implementation measures for the Transparency Directive .
I would first like to thank the rapporteurs for their efficient and helpful work on these important and sensitive matters .
Along with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , they have worked very constructively with the Commission and all parties concerned .
The careful work of Parliament has demonstrably improved the legal texts .
I would also like to thank the Committee of European Securities Regulators for its excellent work .
The draft measures now represent a balanced and efficient solution .
Firstly , on equivalence : postponing our decision on equivalence will not only ensure that EU markets remain open while work on convergence is ongoing , but will also allow us to work actively with United States and other third country authorities towards the elimination of reconciliation requirements for EU issuers abroad .
This is and will remain our number one objective .
The additional two years will enable us to align the equivalence decision with the Securities and Exchange Commission 's timeline in its roadmap towards eliminating the need for reconciliation between IFRS and US GAAP .
The United States authorities are committed to working towards the recognition of equivalence of IFRS and US GAAP .
With the new timing of the equivalence decisions , we will be able to work in parallel towards common agreed objectives .
In this context , it is important to emphasise that nothing is predetermined .
We will decide on equivalence by mid-2008 , in the light of progress in convergence , and it is certainly not a foregone conclusion that any specific GAAP will ' pass the test ' .
It has always been our priority to keep our options open .
I know that Parliament shares that objective .
Before 1 January 2008 , we will have decided on both a definition of equivalence and the equivalence mechanism .
This will be done by way of comitology , with the full involvement of Parliament .
Exemption for issuers of professional securities from the need to provide narrative description of differences between third country GAAPs and IFRS remains an issue of concern .
We know that Parliament has doubts about this amendment .
Its aim is strictly to remove the ambiguity in the existing Prospectus Regulation .
We regret that we were alerted about this ambiguity only a few weeks ago , but we are convinced that this amendment is necessary to ensure legal certainty .
Secondly , on the transparency measures : the Transparency Directive is a major step towards integrated European financial markets that investors and the public can trust .
To achieve this , it is important to complete the transparency obligations by adopting the Commission implementing measures today under your consideration .
Parliament has made several proposals to the Commission for improving this text , which I appreciate .
The Commission is ready to accept the substance of most of them , unless this is not possible for technical reasons .
In particular , Parliament raised questions on the notification to be made by market makers indicating their intention to make use of one of the exceptions to the Directive .
The Commission prefers a solution that limits the administrative burden , and therefore the cost , for market makers .
This is why the Commission is in favour of market makers filing this notification with their own competent authority only , instead of with potentially 25 authorities .
I believe this solution fits perfectly with the simplification agenda that the Commission supports .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , in this era of globalisation we often bemoan Europe 's laggardness in setting global standards .
However , International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) are essentially a European project incorporating a principles-based system of accounting .
Much of the world will adopt that European accountancy standard .
It is appropriate that we allow third countries the time to adapt , but 1 January 2009 is surely long enough a delay for that purpose .
Until now our European companies have had to adapt to US general accounting principles while we accepted US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ) in Europe .
With IFRS there is no reason for that discrimination to continue .
I am glad that the American authorities are intent on meeting the deadline for agreeing equivalence .
They even seem increasingly persuaded of the advantages of principles-based accounting .
Nevertheless , finding commonality between a strict rules-based system and a more flexible principles-based system is not simple .
Both sides of the Atlantic agree that equivalence , rather than strict convergence , will be a suitable outcome .
That is why we call upon the Commission to stick to the January 2008 deadline to define what equivalence will be , so as to make the ultimate time limit of 1 January 2009 a strict time limit .
Any third-country companies reporting in the European Union from that date on will have to report either in IFRS or an accounting system that is agreed to be equivalent , and that agreement will be reciprocal .
European accounts , in accordance with IFRS , will be accepted without adjustment in the US and other consenting third countries .
That will help European companies to cut costs and compete for capital in a globalised marketplace .
My group looks to the Commission to pay due attention to the proposals in our joint resolution and to achieve a successful outcome of these important negotiations before 2009 .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner and thank him for his words about the report .
I believe it is the close working relationship that has developed between Parliament , its various groups and the Commission that has helped to steady the rudder on this one .
Quite clearly we are entering a very dangerous time : we have two years in which to get this right , to measure the value of equivalence and reach convergence with countries around the world .
So the Commissioner is absolutely right to point this out not only to the USA but also to other third countries .
However , the USA is certainly the big project that we all know about .
That is going to be the tough one , and we are quite clearly afraid that the billions of dollars and euros between our two capital markets at the transatlantic level will be put in jeopardy if we do not get this right .
I am very positive that we are on the right route and I believe that what Parliament has put forward has helped to strengthen the methodology , also scrutinising the approach which will be involved in this particular battle .
Looking at the bulk of this directive and the amendments from the supervisors and others in this House - and I am very grateful to colleagues who have assisted on this issue - I believe that we have not overburdened the business community .
That is and has always been vital .
You cannot use the term ' light touch ' all the time and then overburden business .
This is an important cross-border capital market issue and we need greater coherence and communication between the various operators within that market .
We also need to ensure that investors are protected and that the right information is communicated to them in a relevant and timely manner .
These are issues which , of course , are now left to the Member State .
I think the Commissioner might agree with me that we should be using the most modern methods to communicate to investors .
I do not have much time , so I shall not pursue all the issues of this particular directive .
However , I should like to turn to one recital in the original directive and bend the Commissioner 's ear .
That recital concerns the voluntary initiatives to help companies report what they pay governments around the world in the extractive industries .
As the Commissioner might remember - and I am sure his departments will - this was an initiative which was to help end corrupt practices .
It was aimed not only at places as far-flung as Africa , but also within our own borders .
Companies were meant to volunteer information about what they pay governments so that we in turn would know , and investors would know , just what money changed hands between governments and companies .
It was aimed at the extractive industries because it was clear that this was an area in which an awful lot of money was going abroad , away from the countries where it should have been used .
My final question to the Commissioner is to ask what he and his services might do to support that initiative .
I think this House would enjoy hearing again what your predecessor gave as a promise some years ago .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say something about the implementing provisions of the transparency directive , which Parliament , since they are what are termed Level 2 measures , is capable of influencing only to a limited extent .
That makes it all the more important that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted , unanimously , a draft report on the basis of which the plenary will now adopt a resolution of its own .
By presenting a united front , the committee has succeeded , even before tomorrow 's vote , in getting the Commission to accept some of its core demands .
The first is that market makers cannot be compelled to invest the financial instruments that they keep for market-making activities in a separate account , although the supervisory authority can require a separate account if the market maker is unable to identify , at any given time , the relevant financial instruments when asked to do so .
Secondly , fair competition requires that the same conditions should apply to parent companies of management companies and investment firms from third countries as do to those from the European Union .
Finally , a distinction is to be drawn between transactions on stock exchanges and outside them , for , while , in the former , ownership is transferred when the contract is concluded and immediate notification is thus made not only possible but also necessary , the conclusion of the contract and the transfer of ownership may be separate when transactions are concluded off-market , and it would be wrong to require notification as soon as a contract was concluded , since a report at this juncture could , unlike in the former instance , have the effect of distorting the market .
Despite Parliament 's success on this negotiating front , there are still areas - and Commissioner McCreevy has indeed referred to them - where the Commission has not yet done as Parliament would wish , including , for example , such questions as , firstly , to which authority a market maker must apply for an exemption from the notification requirement when he reaches a specific threshold value ; secondly , what is the minimum content required of non-consolidated half-year accounts not drawn up in accordance with international financial reporting standards , and , thirdly , how it can be guaranteed that accountants will proceed in the same way when auditing half-yearly reports .
I appeal to the Members of this House to vote ' yes ' tomorrow , in order that we may seize our opportunity to get the Commission and the Member States to carefully examine Parliament 's demands on these outstanding items and , in due course , accede to them .

Mr President , as I did in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I am today standing in for my colleague Professor Lauk , the shadow rapporteur of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to whom we all wish a good recovery following the operation on his shoulder .
It is on his behalf that I would like to thank not only the rapporteur , Mr Skinner of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but also the shadow rapporteur of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mr Klinz - who , like me , hails from Hessen - for their constructive cooperation .
It was the compromise reached by these three that made it possible for us , in the committee , to adopt the draft resolution unanimously .
Even the Commission has been efficient .
Commissioner McCreevy has incorporated the essential points in his draft of the implementing Directive and , following consultations , made further modifications .
This solution makes for more transparent information on securities authorised on the regulated market .
There are three points that the PPE-DE Group saw as particularly important .
The first had to do with the need for the requirements applicable to half-yearly audits not to be excessively bureaucratic , the consequence of which was that the figures for comparison purposes do not need to be submitted immediately upon the entry into force of the directive ; a more reasonable transitional period was decided upon .
Secondly , where voting rights were concerned , our intention was that subsidiaries would be listed both as part of their parent companies and as independent entities , and we managed that too .
Thirdly , where publication , of necessity , has to be accomplished rapidly , it should be laid down in detail which media are to be used .
That was agreed to as well .
These productive changes have prompted my group to endorse Mr Skinner 's report .
Both Mr Lauk and I look forward to it receiving broad support in this House tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the number of globally-active enterprises is on the increase ; their need for comparable and globally recognised group accounts in order to gain access to international capital markets has been an agent of change in accountancy at the international level , and the headlong progress of globalisation is making the harmonisation of accounting procedures across borders a matter of positive necessity .
The adoption of the International Accounting Standards Regulation was an important milestone in the creation of an integrated single financial market and in the harmonisation of accountancy in Europe .
A developed capital market puts national economies in a better competitive position , and studies have demonstrated that Member States with a high degree of share capitalisation and high stock exchange turnovers relative to their gross domestic product also achieve more growth and create more jobs .
That being so , it is certainly desirable that the IFRS and American GAAP accounting regulations , together with the accounting principles generally accepted in third countries , should be made more closely approximate as an essential contribution to the development of standardised and internationally recognised accounting standards and hence to the integration of capital markets .
Rather than aiming simply to do away with the existing difference in the accounting systems of the United States , Canada or Japan , the primary object of convergence must be the creation of high-quality accounting standards , which alone will be of lasting value and meet with unconditional acceptance .
It is of vital importance to European businesses that the SEC , the USA 's stock exchange supervisory body , should recognise year-end accounts prepared in accordance with IFRS .
The one-sidedness in the recognition of accounting standards should become a thing of the past by January 2009 at the latest ; that is the only way in which European businesses will become more competitive .
- ( LT ) The document being discussed is technically concise and clear - we are speaking here about accounting standards .
Yet , as we emphasised in our draft resolution , in economic and political terms this issue is very significant and complex , since in essence it concerns the role of the European Union in the global financial market .
International financial accounting standards based on principles form a constituent part of our European financial model , which will be adopted by developing countries as well .
Therefore , the European Commission must take action in support of the application of such standards in developing countries , promote their quality and European nature and in this way develop an image of the European financial market and offer various solutions ( not only in a technical sense ) .
We should not forget that the United States also has a perfectly functional system of accounting standards .
Therefore , whether we like it or not , international and American accounting standards are presently competing in the market of the European Union ; that is , we , the legislators , are competing .
I believe that the European Parliament is ready for this competition , but for businesses it is too costly to adhere to more than one standard , and the developing markets feel confused .
They do not know which standards are to be implemented .
Consequently , the European Commission should look for ways to harmonise the standards or encourage harmonisation of the standards at the level of appropriate bodies .
We should not forget that it is not only a technical issue that we are discussing , but rather the development of the global financial market , and for harmonisation of the standards we need two things : clear guidelines for implementation of harmonisation and a clear definition of what harmonisation really means .
Some of us think that informal negotiations are more effective , since no one needs to voice their positions in advance .
Different methods and tactics in negotiations are possible , but I do not think the European Parliament would agree that decisions to be made in harmonising accounting standards should infringe on key IFRS principles , their high quality and reputation .
It is out of the question for the European Parliament to make decisions without consulting Parliament and the players in financial markets .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to use this opportunity to highlight two crucial points in both these reports .
The first is that , formally speaking , and as far as I am aware , the new comitology procedure is not yet applicable in this area , but I take it as read that the Commission will take due account of how this House votes , since it will be applicable to new amendments in the future .
The second has to do with the question as to how we should apply the IFRS standards in future , an aspect that will become more and more important .
What I can say on behalf of our own group is that we , in principle , welcome IFRS standards as an international rule for European businesses , but it has to be said that there are conditions attached to that .
Convergence must be achieved , but that must also involve the European outlook and European priorities prevailing in future discussions on this subject .
It is for that reason that I am annoyed when I hear , emanating from the Board of Trustees , signals to the effect that a thoroughly critical view is being taken of the discussion as to whether , and if so when , convergence is achievable .
The main question , though , has to do with how , in future , we are to devise further standards .
It is no secret that we have now had a debate on what are termed ' IFRS for SMEs ' .
The wheels are very definitely turning , and discussions are in progress in the relevant bodies ; all of this has become quite separate from any political process , and so I would like not only to encourage the Commission but also to urge them to monitor this process very rigorously in the interests of its being subject to political and democratic constraints , and ensure that this House is involved .
I am this House 's rapporteur on this subject area , and I also have experience of Basel .
You can take it as read that this process will not work on the basis of an agreement being reached at international level and Parliament being left with no option but to adopt it ; that is why there needs to be close dialogue between Commission and Parliament .
The Commission is not merely encouraged , but also urged , to take active account of European interests and not to allow the Board to present it with faits accomplis in the way it has done before on other issues .

( FR ) Mr President , on the occasion of this debate on the adaptation of the Prospectus and Transparency directives regarding the road map negotiated by Mr McCreevy with the US authorities , we are in a position to review the way in which the IFRS have been implemented .
The greatest caution must be exercised in relation to this matter .
One of the great contributions , I believe , of this Parliament is the way in which it ensured , during the equivalence negotiations , that there was genuine equivalence and not just a deadline that would elapse before it was finally pointed out that , where there were once differences , there would now be equivalence .
As you know only too well , Commissioner , this issue is all about negotiation .
You have succeeded in getting the Americans to commit themselves to reconciliation at the end of the time period and , when that time period expires , you will remain empty-handed if , in the meantime , this Parliament has not helped to consolidate the matter so that , in the end , we secure an acceptable recognition of equivalence .
I very much regret the fact that we were unable , before this plenary session , to organise with our colleagues from the US Congress the videoconference that I proposed , that my fellow coordinators accepted and that would have enabled us , together with the US political authorities , to hold the necessary debate on the latter 's ability to comply with this road map that you have made your own , Commissioner .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking my colleagues who have worked on these very difficult dossiers .
I welcome the spirit in which the implementing measures for the ' Transparency ' and ' Prospectus ' directives were formulated , after the very tough MiFID procedure for which I was the rapporteur before the spring break .
It is extremely important for the European Parliament to be able to have confidence in comitology , especially now , after the July decision .
We are delegating a large part of our decision-making powers to the Commission and we want to ensure that the legislation enacted in the Lamfalussy process gives the best possible technical quality , as well as democratic legitimacy .
However , for Parliament to get rid of , for example , the sunset clauses - which is the wish of the Commission -we still need more guarantees on the improved procedure of the comitology decision and on Parliament having full influence on the second-level measures .
For the record , MiFID is a very important process and will certainly do far more than many people think for the financial services sector .
It is also a good example of the influence Parliament can have .
Industry and the market participants want us to use our powers more and people really respected the changes Parliament was making with that report .
I think the same thing will happen with the ' Transparency ' and ' Prospectus ' directives .
It is very important that the European Parliament strengthens its powers in those areas .
Through this we will be able to give more support to the Community .
Sometimes there is unnecessary gold-plating by the Council .
It has put forward proposals which are placing the single market at risk and I think that the Community 's soldiers - the Commission and the European Parliament - should march together on these issues , as it would benefit the single market .
Mr President , I shall briefly touch on the two topics .
As regards the equivalence decision , it is right to postpone it .
It is the most efficient way to promote the use of IFRS .
It gives us leverage in our efforts to obtain the removal of reconciliation requirements for EU issuers abroad , as it ensures that EU markets remain attractive to foreign issuers .
It will benefit EU investors and issuers alike .
I am aware of the concerns of Members of the European Parliament and others regarding many of these issues , but a clear roadmap has been set out .
If there is goodwill on all sides we will reach a satisfactory end , but in any event if we do not reach a satisfactory outcome then , as we say in my country , nothing is lost .
So I think that the prolongation of the time period is the correct decision for many reasons .
First , so that we give ourselves here in Europe an opportunity to see how IFRS has been implemented in the various Member States - and we will be learning in that process as well .
We have a clear commitment from our colleagues in the United States as to the roadmap and the time lines there and , all things being equal , we should reach a satisfactory conclusion .
But if we do not and if we are not satisfied , then , as I say , nothing is lost .
Worldwide more people are moving to the IFRS accounting standards which Europe adopted as from last year , so therefore it will be to our benefit .
Concerning the great question posed by Mr Radwan and others about this question of convergence and equivalence , let us see where we are in the few short years hence .
On the transparency directive , I shall deal with the point raised by Mr Skinner .
His point relates to a provision in the recital of the level 1 directive , and this recital stipulates that payments by the extractive industries should be reported .
This as such is not the subject of today 's debate , but I can confirm that the Commission will monitor this issue .
Concerning the implementing measures to the transparency directive , I should also add that I understand some of the concerns expressed in relation to future developments .
In this regard , the Commission commits itself to making a declaration that will be added to the minutes of the European Securities Committee on the date of the vote on the draft implementing measures .
It should state that the Commission undertakes to re-examine the issue of the auditors ' review of half-yearly financial statements once the work in relation to the international standards on auditing , currently under development , is sufficiently advanced .
The Commission will also re-examine , within two years of the final deadline for transposition , the question of the minimum content of the condensed set of half-yearly financial statements that are not prepared in accordance with international accounting standards .
The Commission also undertakes to conduct a review of how the regulated information is disseminated in practice pursuant to the obligations of the transparency directive and the future implementing directive .
This could be undertaken two years after the end of the transposition period for the implementing directive .
In this way we will ensure that the transparency directive tools are adapted to improvements in the market .
Pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received two motions for resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
LIFE + - Financing of the Natura 2000 network
The next item is
the recommendation for second reading ( 06284 / 1 / 2006 C6-0226 / 2006 on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the Financial Instrument for the Environment ( LIFE + ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Isler Béguin )
the debate on the oral question to the Commission on financing of the NATURA 2000 framework by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety B6-0441 / 2006 ) .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by thanking the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and , in particular , my fellow shadow rapporteurs for the work that we have done together , because I believe that it can be said - even though , as is customary at this hour , the Chamber is not very full - that we have genuinely carried out a joint piece of work and that this report , which bears my name , could just as well bear the name of my fellow Members , Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines , Mrs Ries or even Mrs Lienemann , who apologises for not being able to take part in this evening 's debate .
We have also produced a joint piece of work with the Commission .
Unfortunately , it is regrettable that the Council is not present , because , ultimately , our results will depend greatly on it .
I am entirely convinced that the cooperation that we have been able to put in place during this first reading and that follows on from the common position will enable us to reach a consensus with the Council and with yourself , and I am counting on you , Commissioner , to pass the results of this debate on to the Council .
Indeed , ladies and gentlemen , LIFE + is no longer the programme that we once knew , but will indeed constitute the Union 's ' environment ' budget heading .
Thus , it is LIFE + that will govern Europe 's innovative policies , that will rise to the challenges , such as the fight against climate change and the efforts to rid the air and soil of pollution , that will prevent biodiversity damage and that will provide the Environment DG and the NGOs , our bio-indicators par excellence , with the means to endow the Member States ' environmental policies with European added value .
In fact , as you will know , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking here about an ' impossible budget heading ' , given the derisory sum that the Council and the Commission have granted it .
We made an attempt , at first reading , to increase this LIFE heading , which , I must point out , does not even represent 1 % of the overall budget , with the aim of bringing it into line with the policies much-publicised by the Union itself .
The debate focused back then on support for the Natura 2000 network , our flagship environmental policy .
By adding EUR 21 billion , which even the Commission felt was necessary if Natura 2000 was to be managed properly , the European Parliament sent out a strong signal to the Commission and to the Council .
We were right to do so .
Today , with the reduction in the Structural Funds budgets , a form of unbridled competition has begun in the regions , and all of our colleagues are having a change of heart .
As Natura 2000 does not specifically feature in the financial regulations , well , it will undoubtedly be environmental volunteers who produce the results .
We should not get our hopes up too much , however , regarding the share that will be reserved for the protection of nature and biodiversity , despite the fact that , at the European Parliament 's first reading , we were virtually unanimous in our support of an ambitious European policy .
The common position proposed to us has spectacularly ignored our warning .
Worse still , it is deviating from it in an alarming way , going so far as to grant 80 % of the delegated management responsibility to the Member States , even though you did not mention this percentage in your initial proposal .
What minister would refuse such a gift ?
Admittedly , we also realise that , with too few staff members , the Commission is afraid of managing multiple projects .
This is made all the more difficult by the fact that , with a reduction in the number of European officials having been announced , there remains little hope of the Environment DG strengthening its staff .
Let us make it very clear to you : this approach is not the right one because the European level remains the most relevant and most secure one for dealing with environmental issues .
We even feel that this handover of power from the Commission to the Member States is dangerous .
In our view , this initial strategy to renationalise the environmental policies is the sign of a slow disintegration of the European idea .
Each Member State demanding its initial bet would thus be free to dip into the Lisbon Strategy , and thus to become an unrivalled competitor - and we know full well that competition generally goes hand in hand with environmental damage - or to claim that sustainable development , which requires a global approach , is the opposite of such competition .
We also know the extent to which the label ' environment ' serves to justify problems that destroy the environment .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the trap that we refuse to fall into because to do so would be to negate all of the successes that Europe has had in relation to the environment .
If there is one policy that can be seen , identified , recognised and appreciated by Europeans , it is indeed the one that we have succeeded in implementing on environmental protection .
We all know that LIFE must enable us to deal with emergencies and to implement policies aimed at restoring our environment .
The EUR 100 million that were extracted at the time of the financial perspective and that we are demanding , Commissioner , be allocated entirely to the environment will not be enough to achieve these aims .
Commissioner , unless you are a magician , it will be impossible for you to keep your promises with such derisory sums .
Entrusting them to the Member States therefore means running the risk of failure .
Our ambition is for the Union to remain the flagship , the global leader that takes the initiative for establishing laws to protect the planet .
That requires the Commission to be able to produce ambitious policies , to assume responsibility and control of the quality of the projects launched at Member State level and to reject any that are unsuitable .
European policy must under no circumstances compensate for the Member States ' failings in relation to the environment , and , as you will understand , we are refusing to give them a blank cheque .
On the other hand , we are perfectly aware that the delay that this procedure could cause is also liable to cause delays in terms of funding .
That is why , together , we have tabled the same amendment , so as to ensure that the work done by your Environment DG continues to be funded , pending an agreement , of course .
Above all , we also want it to be possible for this work to continue and even for you to launch new projects and oversee the funding of the work done by NGOs .
We should like to make it clear in this House that , legally and financially , that is possible .
To conclude , Mr President , I would say that the ball is now in the court of the Council and of the Commission and that we are convinced that we are going to reach an agreement amongst ourselves precisely so as to ensure that this ambitious environmental policy is taken forward .
That is what our fellow citizens expect , and they encourage you in that regard .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , there are two parts to my speech .
In the first part , I shall put the oral question on Natura 2000 by Mr Florenz , who is not present and who has asked me to speak on his behalf .
The question is as follows : since the Commission estimates that EUR 6.1 billion per year is needed to maintain and conserve the Natura 2000 protected areas , and since the funding is expected to come from the rural development funds , the Structural Funds , LIFE + and the fisheries funds , how does the Commission intend to coordinate this policy ?
How does the Commission intend to send clear messages about its coordinated policy to users , to proprietors and to those who are in charge of Natura 2000 land .
Where are the funds ?
What actions must be taken ?
How accessible is European Union protection and aid ?
This is something that is still not clear .
Matters need to be drawn up in a very clear way so that there can be full genuine communication between the proprietors and the Commission .
With regard to LIFE + , I agree with everything Mrs Isler Béguin has said .
The results of the vote reflect a genuine agreement within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , though there may be discrepancies and differing positions due to the diverging views of the different States .
Why ?
Because the new LIFE + now being presented represents a decentralised policy and is very different to the policy in place until now .
We believe that LIFE has traditionally been a leader programme for funding innovation projects and innovative management models , particularly in the field of the environment .
It is a prestige programme , which NGOs have looked upon as a guide and a model .
For local and regional authorities , it has become a path that must be followed , a permanent reference .
We want that reference to remain .
This has , however , been the case because emphasis has been placed on the universal nature of environmental policy , a factor that has been one of the reasons for the success of European policy in this field .
Europe knows that environmental policy cannot just be applied to a single region .
It requires a global approach .
The European Union has always made this clear , and the 6th Environmental Action Programme has taken that into account at all times .
Policy in the fields of climate change , desertification , water , waste , safeguarding quality of life , well-being and pollution are all of a universal nature , and that is why we want it to be applied beyond Europe and for Europe to become a model for the whole world .
We should remember , however , that LIFE was created in order to bring this about , and that is stated in the text of the financial statement , which I am going to read and which states that LIFE + credit ' is intended to fund economic contributions for actions intended to apply , update and implement Community legislation and policy in the field of the environment , including the integration of the environment into other policies ' .
How can we do this if the policy is only national ?
How can we do this if Europe loses its leadership , if it leaves these actions in the hands of the Member States ?
We therefore advocate in the clearest and strongest terms a more centralised model in which Europe once again provides guidance and initiative .
We understand that the Commission has a lack of resources .
We are going to support it in the future , where possible , because this policy of reducing the number of officials cannot carry on .
Unless Europe has a management structure and management capacities , as well as qualified personnel , it will not be able to carry out this task .
With a view to its being able to do so , we undoubtedly believe that part of the management should be returned to the European Commission and that international European projects should be created , so that Europe can improve its capacities in the future , by means of ' capacity building ' , in order to ensure that projects are better monitored , to find ways to coordinate policies and to continue taking action that cuts across policy areas .
That is our proposal , and we shall cooperate fully in the conciliation process so that we can reach a quick agreement , so that funding can be guaranteed and , of course , so that the Commission can do its job .
That is precisely why we are here : in order to cooperate with the Commission and tell the Member States that the policy of sustainability is a process and that Europe is more than just a market .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Isler Béguin , for her exceptional work and for her report on this proposal .
I should also like to thank Mrs Gutiérrez for her very positive approach and to assure both ladies and all the Members of Parliament that the Commission will work to facilitate this approach and to achieve fast agreement with the Council .
I must stress that , since September 2004 - when the College of Commissioners adopted the Commission proposal - about one year after first reading , we have made a great deal of progress with LIFE + and the position of the European Commission has changed significantly on several counts in comparison with its initial proposal .
I believe that the Council 's common position , with which the Commission agrees to a large extent , satisfies many of Parliament 's basic demands .
The draft regulation now includes a section relating to nature and biodiversity .
LIFE + will be able to fund measures and activities for exchanges of opinions and best practices or demonstration projects , including those relating to the management and designation of Natura 2000 sites and guidelines for habitats and birds .
The percentage of LIFE + relating to the management of nature is large .
At least 40 % of the resources will be made available for expenditure in this sector .
I should like to stress that this percentage is a minimum limit and that the Member States may spend a greater percentage if they so wish .
As far as the question of funding for Natura 2000 is concerned , the Commission has secured funding opportunities through the Structural Funds , the Fisheries Fund and the Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
The Commission may , of course , encourage spending on Natura 2000 ; however , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the Member States have the jurisdiction and discretion to decide on the extent to which they wish to make use of these funding opportunities .
The Commission , for its part , will do what it can to ensure the Member States make use of the funding opportunities whenever possible .
The opinion of the Directorate General of the Environment is always sought before strategic reference frameworks and operational programmes for the Structural Funds and rural development programmes submitted by the Member States are approved .
I repeat that one of our top priorities is to safeguard suitable funding for Natura 2000 and that is why I particularly value Parliament 's support on this issue .
However , the most important subject of debate this evening is the method of implementation of the programme .
According to the common position , 80 % of funding for LIFE + is to be made available to the Member States .
I consider that Parliament 's preference for maintaining central management of the programme to be an indication of its confidence in the Commission .
However , this choice , as I emphasised earlier , requires more human resources .
That is why the method proposed in the common position is preferable .
First , it is in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , granting the greatest possible flexibility in order to cover the various requirements of the Member States .
Secondly , it ensures that all the countries receive a minimum percentage of the funding .
Within the framework of the current LIFE III system , they often do not receive any money .
Thirdly , it is transparent and controlled and safeguards the maintenance of added value for the European Union .
As you know , delegated management is at the epicentre of the Commission proposal .
The Member States are relying on it and are already preparing their draft programmes .
That is why the Commission cannot accept the various amendments deleting all references to delegated management .
Unfortunately , the outcome of the informal meetings between Parliament , the Council and the Commission following the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on 14 September did not enable us to make significant steps towards achieving agreement as regards delegated management .
Nonetheless , despite the differences , we are all in favour of the LIFE + programme and of its being applied as soon as possible , so that funds can be disbursed and there is no delay in the execution of the programmes .
The Member States have over two billion euros for the LIFE + programme .
A way needs to be found so that this money is disbursed as quickly as possible , even if this means compromise on all sides .
We must therefore continue to work together to find practical solutions , especially as regards the method of implementing LIFE + .
Within this framework , we shall make every possible effort to bring about a compromise between the Council and Parliament and we shall intermediate in order to facilitate an agreement .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Within the framework of the LIFE III programme , running since 2000 , we have spent more than EUR 950 million on various environmental protection programmes for the successful completion of countless local , regional and cross-border projects .
Even more importantly , it is precisely these projects which have brought the Union into close proximity to ordinary people , and which contribute most directly to improving the living conditions of EU citizens .
These are important considerations at a time when the popularity of the European Union is at an all-time low .
The status of LIFE + , and within it of the Natura 2000 programme , gives cause for concern and raises at least two significant questions .
The first is the fact that it is already clear that no timely decision will be taken regarding the new programme , and , as a result , we will not be able to launch the environmental protection programmes next January , as planned .
In my view , this is a serious problem .
Therefore , I propose that we follow the solution adopted in 2004 , when a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council extended the LIFE III programme , which was then expiring , for two more years with an additional budget of EUR 317 million .
I propose that we now take a decision that will keep the LIFE programme , which is due to expire in 2006 , in force until the new regulation has been accepted .
The second problematic area is the Council 's proposal to delegate 80 % of the funds to be managed by the Member States .
In my view , this is contrary to the logic and the practice followed hitherto , according to which environmental protection , by virtue of its cross-border nature , calls for a supranational approach .
For this reason , I personally can only support proposals that leave a greater proportion of the power to decide on the funds available within the competence of the Commission and of Parliament than does the present proposal .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , please accept Mrs Lienemann 's sincere apologies for being unable to attend this evening , as you are all aware of her commitment to this matter .
It is , however , with the same pleasure and the same convictions that I take her place .
I would like to remind you of all the support that our group offers to Mrs Isler Béguin 's report and to pay tribute to the agreement reached by our political groups on an ambitious strategy to consolidate the only direct financial instrument intended for European environment policies .
It should also be emphasised that it is our Parliament that obtained additional budgetary credits for LIFE , although well below our initial aims .
Today , it is once again MEPs who are calling for strengthened resources to support the implementation of the Natura Directive .
An effort has been made , undoubtedly insufficient , but obtained in a tight budgetary situation within which we must work .
Our disagreements , as matters stand with this issue , concern the method chosen for financing activities .
LIFE is an exemplary European instrument .
It has proved itself , and we cannot accept that this policy should be renationalised , as planned , with the management of 80 % of its budget delegated to the Member States .
The European Union must not content itself with handing out money , it must hold the reins of this environmental policy .
At a time when the European idea needs to be safeguarded , and given that this is a policy largely supported by EU citizens , it is unacceptable to undermine the European dynamic in this way .
Our credibility in the eyes of Europeans is at stake following the statements in the future sustainable development strategy .
Moreover , LIFE must retain its exemplary status , which is founded on the choice of innovative and reproducible projects .
It is clear that we must guarantee Member States the level of funding that they expect , while requiring that the selection of projects is informed by a double rationale : one involving the European dimension and meaningful environmental practice .
Our group supports Mrs Haug 's amendment calling on the Commission to guarantee continued funding for programmes now under way .
Indeed , we cannot accept that NGOs and other parties involved in LIFE should be penalised .
Mr President , twelve months ago , together with our rapporteur Mrs Isler Béguin , we deplored this veritable gift made by the Commission .
I am referring to a subject on which a great deal has been said already : the delegation of environmental policies to the Member States , which are to manage up to 80 % of the LIFE + budget .
In this regard , I share our rapporteur 's regret that , during our informal discussions with the Finnish Presidency , the latter did not take a firm step in the direction of meeting public concern for a better environment and quality of life .
It is clear that a solution must be found to this institutional disagreement and , in the meantime , the principle of providing continued funding for Community environment policy must , of course , stand .
This is the aim of our Amendment 32 .
Like my fellow Members , I therefore question this ' blank cheque ' offered to the Member States on a plate .
Why renationalise what Europe as such does so well , even with so very few resources , as has already been said : namely , protecting biodiversity and rare species ?
I would point out some of the successes achieved in the areas of nature , the environment and third countries since LIFE was first set up , in 1992 .
In my own country , Belgium , no fewer than 120 biodiversity protection projects have been cofinanced by the European Union .
It is thanks to LIFE and the proper overall functioning of Natura 2000 that 20 % of Belgium territory is now classified as a special nature protection area .
Furthermore , last Thursday , the Commission unveiled 75 environmental projects that will benefit from the Union 's support - support totalling EUR 136 million thanks to the LIFE programme .
To return to Belgium , I am delighted that the restoration of the Hautes Fagnes plateau covering more than 4 500 hectares in the beautiful Ardennes region is one of the projects accepted .
Should we see this as a good omen ?
I hope so because , in championing Europe in terms of its environment , we are also providing for the health and well-being of future generations .
I am sure , moreover , that , as I have emphasised , Europe has everything to gain by committing itself wholeheartedly , as Europe , to this fight to preserve the natural world and biodiversity .
To conclude , Mr President , this is a fight that , as has been said and as it is important to emphasise , has transcended political divides throughout the debate .
The fact that we have all rallied strongly around our rapporteur - whom I would like to thank and congratulate once again - is the best proof of this today .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Florenz for his question .
Last year , I was the rapporteur for Parliament 's report on the financing of Natura 2000 .
In that report , we expressed concern about the willingness of the Member States and of the Commission to take this issue seriously .
There will be plenty of voices speaking out for the natural world when it is time for headline speeches .
Just think how solemn the Heads of State or Government were in Gothenburg in 2001 in their assurances that Natura 2000 would be implemented .
Yet , for all that , everything was forgotten when it came to the budget being adopted , when the separate budget heading for Natura 2000 was rejected point blank .
Now it will be interesting to see whether those promises are recalled when the agricultural lobbyists again try to ensure that all the subsidies , including the rural development funds , go to large-scale agriculture and to industry .
The Commission will have to be stricter in this area .
The slackness and lack of supervision that have been the case up to now are on the point of having disastrous consequences , first and foremost for the natural world , but also for the reputation of the EU , as many of my fellow MEPs have mentioned today .
For many people , the protection of nature and the environment is one of the pivotal benefits of the EU .
We politicians , when we have had to defend and expound upon the necessity of European cooperation , have continually made reference to what the EU can do in this area .
At present , however , many experience an indifference on the part of the EU in respect of those values that cannot quickly be converted into money .
Rapid action needs to be taken if our good name is to be rescued .
The Commission should make it a condition for the payment of , in particular , rural development funds that the Member States put forward plans and also appropriate sufficient resources to Natura 2000 .
It should remember also to remind agriculturalists that the rural development funds do not constitute agriculturalists ' own private money .
Natura 2000 must receive its share , and without agriculture receiving compensation for this .
Agriculture should bear its share of responsibility for the health and diversity of nature .
This would be good news for everyone in rural areas .
There are splendid opportunities for money-making in the development of Natura 2000 .
We know , for example , that approximately a quarter of a million people are engaged in the protection of nature , while the potential in the tourism sector is greater still .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her exceptional report and her strong position as regards the demands of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in connection with LIFE + .
A key point is to secure adequate resources for the Natura 2000 programme .
That is why I heartily support the call for another EUR 50 billion to be added to the LIFE + budget .
If we leave the 50 million in the margin , with just one political commitment , as called for by the Council , we shall have no clear guarantee .
I also support the call by the Committee on the Environment for 55 % of LIFE + to be allocated to nature and biodiversity , which are issues of critical importance in the effort to achieve the corresponding objective of the European Union .
In all events , the additional EUR 100 million agreed within the framework of the financial perspective should be committed to above the 40 % proposed by the Council .
If the percentage remains 40 % , this essentially will mean a proportional reduction in the corresponding funding for biodiversity in comparison with the previous financial perspective and that is unacceptable .
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur , who has reacted to the Commission 's proposal to grant 80 % of resources to the Member States , thereby giving them a blank cheque .
The resources for LIFE + are not there for the Member States to plug financial gaps , but to promote joint European programmes .
Commissioner , you know full well that , in the country we both come from , money often goes to cover wages rather than to protect the Natura 2000 network .
We want a strong European policy ; all of us in the European Parliament want more Europe for environmental protection .
If the Commission wants the same , then why does it not stand up for it against the Council ?
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I would tend to support the 80 % management of LIFE by Member States .
This would ensure a much better and fairer spread of funds across the EU and across the many different types of environment within the EU .
It would bring more local knowledge to the project selection process and make public awareness easier to achieve .
I have only one hesitation as an Irish MEP : I believe that the second half of the second pillar of LIFE - implementation of existing environmental policy - is critical .
This is a priority , because there is no point in funding new policies and projects when we have not learned to implement the standards we have already imposed on ourselves .
Frankly , this is a problem in my home country , when it comes to industry .
My Member State 's Environmental Protection Agency seems to be very reluctant to force the same compliance on industry as it does on the public .
In my willingness to support management of LIFE + at Member-State level , I would still like to see a reasonable level of scrutiny to ensure that the projects selected prioritise efforts to improve compliance by industry with EU environmental law .
( PL ) Mr President , a number of amendments were proposed during the first reading of the LIFE + Regulation .
It was unanimously agreed that this financial instrument fails to meet expectations in the area of environmental protection .
The main difficulty concerned the restriction of financial resources for implementation of all the policies in this area .
The financial understandings with the Council and the Commission were not transferred to the environmental protection budget for the next seven years .
In my view , the difference of approach between Mrs Sinnott and most of the other Members is rather abstract in nature .
My conscience would be much easier if I voted in favour of this report in the certainty that the resources allocated to the various countries will be devoted to environmental projects .
The problem is that the funds are being spent on staff and not on environmental projects .
I believe this is the reason why we really are compelled to intervene in some way .
To conclude , I should like to say as an aside that at a time of crisis concerning our vision of the Europe of the future , and of scepticism about European institutions , the environment could serve as a true common point of reference for many citizens of European Union Member States .
( FR ) Commissioner , during the first reading , our message concerned the limited funds allocated to LIFE + .
Today , the European Parliament is interested in sending a clear message to the Council and the Commission .
Under no circumstances can we accept that 80 % of the credits for LIFE + should be delegated to the Member States for management by national agencies .
Why is this unacceptable ?
It is because environmental policy is one of the European policies most highly regarded by Europeans and seen by them as being one of the most transparent .
One wonders for what possible reason the Commission should want to abandon this opportunity to show people the direct impact of a Community policy on their everyday lives .
There is no sense in this , particularly at a time when we are being criticised for a lack of communication with citizens .
LIFE + is an indispensable financial instrument for all our environmental policies . Yet there is such inconsistency .
In session after session we are voting for strong environmental commitments in the framework of sustainable development , while LIFE + is being whittled away .
In this too , moreover , we are not in agreement with the Council .
Handing over responsibility for 80 % of the funding to the Member States means taking the risk of causing all our commitments to fail and seeing this funding diverted from its initial objective .
Yes , Commissioner , we are all in favour of LIFE + , but not in the guise that you are proposing .
We must retain a centralised model managed by the Commission , with projects selected on the basis of their merits and the added value they will bring .
As you are well aware , we shall otherwise face the watering down of our environmental policy .
Renationalisation is not the right solution .
We must use these resources not to pay civil servants but to launch and fund projects .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the nationalisation of LIFE from the outset contradicts the application of this environmental tool to date
The proposal to delegate the management of 80 % of the admittedly inadequate budget for LIFE + to the Member States would mean that all the European added value would be lost and , most importantly , that the Member States would be given carte blanche to - possibly - follow national objectives .
We are therefore calling for efficient and transparent management under the control of the European Commission of important programmes with added European value .
Finally , if no agreement is reached , I consider it especially important that we support the common proposal , on the basis of which it will be possible to fund activities which will have to be brought under the programme in question from 2007 onwards .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Béguin on her exceptionally positive report .
Mr President , I agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Isler Béguin , that during the first reading Parliament significantly improved the Commission 's proposal on LIFE + , particularly with respect to the amount to be included for the funding of Natura 2000 .
I therefore welcome Amendment 18 , which restates the sum of EUR 100 million agreed during negotiations on the financial perspective .
There are , however , some reasons why I am not enthusiastic about Amendment 10 , which , for the new Member States , deletes the very important second paragraph of Article 6 of the Council 's common position .
I am afraid that centralised allocation of funding entirely through the projects favours old Member States that are more familiar with the procedures .
It is common knowledge that institutions of the new Member States are not yet sufficiently prepared to compete with their projects on an equal footing .
The Commission 's proposal that 80 % of funding should be allocated to the Member States rectifies this objective initial disadvantage , and detailed eligibility criteria should ensure European added value of funding .
Seen from this angle , I do not consider it renationalisation .
With regard to the implementation , I would not object to the Council 's solution to the problem .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have now often enough heard it said that all of us are opposed to this European programme being handed back to the Member States .
It should remain European .
Here in this House , we talk about environmental programmes and how to fund them , but we should consider well the way in which we do this .
It is not acceptable that the habitat programme or the Birds Directive should be used in the Member States to do things that actually go against this House 's normal understanding of things .
Environmental policy should indeed be treated as having the value it does , but frogs are not meant to enjoy more protection than do human beings , and one function of the Commission and of its offices is to maintain the proper sense of proportion in this respect .
What matters is that we , here in this House , should join with you in the Commission in putting into effect programmes that add European value .
This must not be about a mere transfer of funds , that is to say giving Member States back their money and leaving it to them what becomes of it .
Nor is it acceptable that these funds should be used to finance NGOs with whose background and connections we are not familiar .
We must , then , take care that European taxpayers ' money is used properly .
( DE ) Mr President , the second reading of the financial instrument for the environment shows us once more that the Financial Perspective for the period from 2007 to 2013 does not adequately enable the EU to perform its functions as regards the environment , and , indeed , much else besides .
The fact that we are in such a problematic financial position makes it important that we should , tomorrow , give our rapporteur support in the shape of a massive majority .
The Commission may well be indicating its willingness to compromise , but we know that the negotiations will be extremely tough , for the amendments that the Commission has this evening declared itself unable to accept are at the very heart of this House 's position .
As has already been said , handing this programme back to the Member States would imperil European environmental policy and the value that Europe adds to it , and it is for that reason that I support all the rapporteur 's amendments to delete , for they take us several steps in the right direction .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the determined work by the rapporteur has already produced substantial results at first reading .
Nevertheless , the resources allocated for LIFE + for the 2007-2013 period are not sufficient to meet the environmental challenges of the coming years and we therefore risk jeopardising the positive work that has been achieved thus far .
For this reason , it is particularly important to support the rapporteur 's Amendment 3 , in order to be able to guarantee more adequate funding , at least after the 2008-2009 review of the Financial Framework , with a view to adapting LIFE to the necessary changes and ensuring a high level of Community cofinancing .
Furthermore , I would like to underline the significance of the destination of European environment funds , in that they should not be used to make up the financial deficits of the Member States - it has in fact been pointed out many times that they are often used to pay civil servants - but to implement European projects that put the Gothenburg Sustainable Development Strategy into practice .
Finally , I am glad of the fact that the new LIFE + programme pays greater attention to the issue of energy efficiency , lending financial support to new technologies , and I agree with the rapporteur on the need to involve civil society to a greater extent in the development phase of both multiannual programmes and annual national programmes .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Members for their very positive contributions and for the acknowledgement that the initial proposal - adopted by the Commission in September 2004 , with the help of Parliament - has been improved considerably .
What we have to strive for is a balanced solution .
In this respect , I will try to facilitate an agreement between the Council and Parliament .
With regard to the amendments , I am aware of 31 amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and a further amendment introduced since last week .
The late amendment , similar to what happened in the budget debate , encourages me to believe that Parliament wishes to help find a solution to the funding gap that the late adoption of LIFE + will create . While the budget question will ultimately be solved by the budgetary authority , the Commission will do all it can to facilitate an agreement that , with your support , will provide funds to DG Environment throughout 2007 .
Turning now to the 31 amendments on LIFE + , I will divide them into four distinct blocks .
Firstly , on the delivery method , the Commission cannot accept the group of amendments opposing delegated programme management .
Secondly , on allocation of funds , the budget , ring-fencing etc . , Parliament has tabled an amendment aiming at adding the whole EUR 100 million extra to the LIFE + instrument .
If Parliament and the Council were in agreement to allocate that amount to the LIFE + programme , I would welcome the opportunity to see the programme expanded .
Parliament also calls for at least 55 % of LIFE + funds to be allocated to the nature and biodiversity component .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment , since it would reduce the flexibility needed by several Member States to tackle other pressing environmental concerns .
The 40 % in the common position is a minimum and nothing prevents Member States spending double that figure on nature and biodiversity if they so wish and can justify it .
Thirdly , with regard to comitology issues , the amendments seeking greater involvement by Parliament during the various phases of programming and introducing the regulatory procedure with scrutiny would be acceptable in principle .
Lastly , with regard to a series of amendments seeking clarification , greater transparency , etc . , on questions such as the application of the Aarhus Convention , cross-border projects , specific reference to the impact of climate change on biodiversity , the role of the Commission in supporting integration , etc . , my view is that these amendments could be acceptable to the Commission in principle , subject to some drafting changes .
I should like to repeat what I said earlier , namely that we should continue working together to find practical solutions , especially on the implementation method for LIFE + .
In addition , together we need to solve the 2007 funding gap .
I am heartened by Parliament 's good wishes in that respect .
We need a funding instrument for the environment in order to spend our EUR 2 billion budget .
I am therefore willing to help find a practical compromise between the Council and Parliament on these issues and I am willing to help facilitate such an agreement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Community civil protection mechanism ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Papadimoulis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community civil protection mechanism ( recast ) C6-0076 / 2006 .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , first I wish to thank the European Parliament and , in particular , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the rapporteur , Mr Papadimoulis , on drafting an exceptional report .
The Commission proposal to recast the 2001 Council decision establishing a Community civil protection mechanism takes account of the demand by both the European Parliament and the Council for resources and facilities to be strengthened in the field of civil protection in Europe .
Its objective is to strengthen the mechanism with the experience acquired from previous emergency situations .
It provides a basis for the further development of cooperation in the field of civil protection by improving and strengthening the existing project in this sector and by launching new activities .
We must highlight two innovations which we are proposing : funding for the cost of hiring equipment and of hiring transport means .
We often face situations in which aid is available but there are no suitable means for taking it to the scene of the disaster .
As a result , this aid either arrives late or does not arrive at all .
In the case of emergencies which affect several European countries at once , such as , for example , forest fires in summer , floods in spring and possible simultaneous terrorist threats throughout Europe , the Member States may find it hard to provide help to other Member States , due to their own needs .
That is why the Commission proposed that a safety net be created at Community level , so that we have the facility to hire the necessary transport means and equipment .
The Commission , of course , knows that the European Parliament understands the importance of the benefit which will accrue from the reforms in question and expresses its thanks for the support which it has already given to the proposed new funding mechanism .
As emphasised in the Barnier report , the result of the enhanced cooperation in the field of civil protection will be better protection , both for the citizens of the European Union and for the inhabitants of third countries .
It will ensure that the Community as a whole can offer more coordinated and more effective and more prompt aid to any country affected by a major disaster .
I should remind you here that the proposal to hire transport means and equipment was part of the proposal for the new funding mechanism on which Parliament formulated its opinion earlier this year .
The negotiations which followed in the Council proved to be very difficult .
That is why we are calling on all the members of the European Parliament who wish to advance this proposal to do what they can at national level to support it ; otherwise we shall not be able to achieve the enhanced cooperation in the field of civil protection called for by Parliament .
Mr President , over recent years we have experienced a tsunami , hurricane Katrina and earthquakes in Pakistan and Indonesia with high death tolls , while in the European Union the Member States have frequently faced major floods and storms , forest fires , disasters at sea and industrial accidents .
The repercussions of these tragic events are huge not only in terms of human lives , but also to the economy .
That is why the citizens of the European Union are rightly calling for a more effective approach .
Improving the European Union 's ability to respond to emergency situations is a priority for the European Parliament .
That is why we are today debating ways of improving the Community civil protection mechanism .
During the preparation of the committee proposal we are debating , various alternative proposals were examined . One of them was recast , which the Commission chose and which is the least ambitious choice , because it introduces a limited number of improvements to the Council decision governing the civil protection mechanism .
Could the Commission therefore tell me how it arrived at this choice , the least ambitious choice , despite the repeated announcements by the European Council and the resolutions by the European Parliament on greater and stronger development of the Community civil protection mechanism ?
The main weaknesses identified in the recast proposal tabled by the Commission relate , firstly , to the transportation of rescue teams and equipment .
Today every Member State bears responsibility for organising the transportation of its own civil protection aid .
However , this shortcoming undermines the effectiveness of European aid .
In 2005 alone , in five emergencies , Member States were unable to send experts and equipment , because they did not have the means to transport aid where it was needed .
I think that the Commission needs to do more to address this problem .
The second weakness relates to the development of a European rapid response capability .
Today , Community civil protection aid is provided by the Member States on a voluntary basis .
This does not add up to the European rapid response capability demanded by the European Parliament .
In its communication on 25 April , the Commission proposed the creation of special standby modules which would be mobilised on request by the competent European authority .
I ask you , why did the Commission not include its own proposal in the recast ?
The third problem relates to early warning .
The ability of the European Commission to respond to natural disasters also depends upon the existence of early warning systems .
The recast states that the Monitoring and Information Centre in Brussels should be linked to the systems of the Member States and international organisations .
That is good , but it is not enough because , immediately after the earthquake caused by the tsunami , the governments learned , but the citizens never learned .
That is why a suitable legal basis must be set up within the framework of the Council decision , so that early warning systems can be developed within the framework of the mechanism .
The fourth weakness concerns the coordination of interventions in third countries .
In this sector also more work needs to be done , because there is a blatant lack of coordination .
Some Member States work constantly through the Community mechanism , some Member States prefer to work with the United Nations , some Member States work with both and some Member States with neither .
This fragmentation and lack of coordination completely contradict the ambitious announcements by the European Council .
As rapporteur , together with the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups , we tabled amendments which were approved almost unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
In brief , they relate to information for citizens , to the integration of civil protection measures in education programmes and advertising campaigns , to land management and use , in order to strengthen prevention , to the definitions of terms based on the agreed international terminology , to the inclusion of public health and to the use of military means on an auxiliary and voluntary basis .
Finally , I should like to mention the Barnier report on the creation of Europe Aid .
In January 2006 , the President of the European Commission and the President of the European Council asked Michel Barnier to examine the role of the European Union in dealing with crises .
It turned out to be a very detailed report with interesting proposals .
Unfortunately , however , both the Commission and the Council simply welcomed the report as an important contribution and did nothing about it .
I should like the Commissioner to tell me how the Commission intends to make use of the Barnier report .
The price of the lack of a unified and effective Europe when it comes to crisis management is very high , which is why we need to proceed more effectively and with greater coordination .

Mr President , the Council decision being approved , with our adopted amendments , is the product of an exhaustive preparatory procedure and of the experience acquired over recent years from dealing with natural and man-made disasters , disasters which , apart from their huge impact on every aspect of citizens ' every day lives , revealed objective shortcomings in the capacity for national intervention and , hence , enhanced expectations for Community assistance .
We are therefore being called upon today to strengthen and arm the Union so that it can respond to this demand by the citizens for effective intervention in the fields of the prevention of and rapid response to natural and man-made disasters .
This is therefore an expression of the real solidarity sought between the Member States , which will further strengthen the feeling of participation in a community and will thus further strengthen the European conscience .
As far as the amendments to the initial proposal are concerned , I consider it necessary to draw your attention to the following points :
An effective early warning and response system is founded on the following four components : identifying and assessing risks , constantly monitoring them , a warning and communication mechanism and , lastly , preparedness - the capacity to react and assist .
I too , like the rapporteur , should like to emphasise that the amendments which we tabled concern matters such as the early warning system , standby modules from the participating states , response and citizen information guidelines , best practices for dealing with situations and , lastly , mutual consular assistance for determining contact points between Member States .
I should also like to say - and I think that this should be accepted - that we must pay special attention to the public health sector , because disasters are usually accompanied by dangers to public health , either as a result of a lack of food or water or from epidemics and , consequently , this component should also be included in the proposal .
Finally , I should like to observe , as our rapporteur said , that the Barnier report is an exceptional report , which should be taken into account because , otherwise , what was the point in doing all this exceptional work ?
I think that , together with your report today , we shall have an effective mechanism .
To close , I should like to thank our rapporteur for his excellent work .
Congratulations , Mr Papadimoulis .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Papadimoulis on his report and the Commission on its initiative .
The EU has at its disposal various legal mechanisms for preventing , and responding to , natural disasters .
There are indeed a number of Parliament resolutions to this effect .
I myself drew up a report on the European strategy for responding to natural disasters on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in which I advocated the need for the Union to have quicker and more effective resources for responding to serious emergencies .
On the basis of the experience of recent years with the forest fires in southern Europe and the floods in Central Europe , the creation of detection and early warning systems to protect the citizens and their property from natural disasters , including earthquakes and tsunamis , has become a priority .
Although responsibility for managing the response to natural disasters rests primarily with the country affected , with the Union playing a supporting role , the Community civil protection mechanism set up in 2001 lacked resources and powers . In other words , it fell short of what was needed .
This recast , improved proposal is worthy of praise . It will lead to better coordination and quicker assistance for the people affected .
More needs to be done , however , and the model needs to be perfected , not only on the basis of the Barnier report , but also the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , of which I should like to highlight the following : cooperation in civil protection should be based on a European strategic coordination centre responsible for gathering and disseminating information on emergencies and for providing additional resources for rapid intervention to fight natural disasters ; the involvement of communities in prevention and response , for which they will need training and information ; and greater investment in training the assistance intervention teams .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Papadimoulis on his excellent work .
His report translates in practical terms that which has already been provided for in the report on the Solidarity Fund , which represents the legal and financial basis for intervention in the field of civil protection .
The European Union currently has financial means and new knowledge based on the experience of the Community Civil Protection Mechanism , created in 2001 , which will enable us to improve the instrument 's practicality and effectiveness .
It is true that the emergency response to disasters must come first and foremost from the local level , with prevention and reconstruction measures , but it is also true that there is a need for crisis management measures , which can and should be coordinated at European level , if we want to achieve significant economies of scale and , above all , greater efficiency .
Furthermore , when the scale of a disaster overwhelms the local or even national capacity to react , it would be desirable to be able to provide rapid additional assistance from other countries , using their available skills and resources .
We should in fact bear in mind that in many cases major disasters have effects that transcend borders , having an impact on the territories of neighbouring countries .
In addition , I agree with the rapporteur on the importance of proper and appropriate planning of land use and of prevention and management of disasters with a view to reducing risks .
There is a need to strengthen the European civil protection system , in order to be able to provide coordinated responses to tackle emergencies and contribute to a European Union capable of giving its own citizens confidence and safety .
I believe that we have to learn to live up to these legitimate expectations .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all learn from the past and from our own experiences , and I believe that disaster prevention is one area in which we do this .
The documents you have submitted and Mr Papadimoulis ' outstanding report represent an attempt by us at putting these experiences to good use .
Three aspects need to be considered : firstly , the preventive measures ; secondly , interventions in a crisis situation , and , thirdly , how to deal with the aftermath .
While the European Union can afford a great deal in the way of preventive measures , it is an unfortunate fact that disasters strike in a variety of regions and for various reasons , so it is of the utmost importance that we , here in the European Union , should learn from one another .
It is in this respect that the European Union has a particular task to perform .
During interventions to deal with a crisis situation , the Union must discharge its particular role as a coordinator .
The Member States must not be discharged from their responsibilities ; the prevention of disasters is and remains a national responsibility , and it is for that reason that I take an extremely critical view of the EU 's current acquisition of equipment , which represents what might be termed an attempt at duplication , and certainly is not beneficial .
It is important that duplication should be avoided , and we should concentrate on good coordination of the resources present in the Member States in order to do that .
The next stage is dealing with the fallout , and a crisis response instrument - in the shape of the Solidarity Fund - has already been put in place by the European Union in order to do this .
Here , too , we should consider how more efficient use may be made of it , possibly by changing the basic rates and concentrating on dealing only with crises that affect Europe as a whole .
( EL ) Mr President , the protection of European citizens from accidents and natural disasters is directly connected to their economic and social security .
Over recent years , there has been a huge increase in the number of natural disasters , resulting in an equally huge increase in requests for assistance from the civil protection mechanism on the part of the governments of the Member States .
Civil protection is a complex system which consists of prevention , intervention and , lastly , restoration .
The excellent report by Mr Papadimoulis on the proposed recast does , I think , improve the Council proposal in a way which strengthens the supportive and supplementary actions by the Union when they are needed .
However , I stand by the ongoing need for instruction of the parties involved and I consider that greater information for the public is needed , especially in areas with a high degree of risk , in order to help improve prevention and preparedness in the areas in question .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank all the speakers for their excellent comments .
Before I touch on the matter of the amendments , I should like to reply on the question of the Barnier report and to say that the Commission has already started work on many of the issues connected with this report , the most important , of course , being the development of civil protection modules .
Meetings have been held with specialists from the Member States in order to ascertain what types of modules should be available in each case and the specific terms and conditions for each type of module .
A second field of work relates to exercises and , despite the fact that no provision is made for the creation of a European institute in accordance with the Barnier report , we do nonetheless propose that a network of centres should be developed which will extend the existing exercise programme .
We also agree that the Monitoring and Information Centre should be reinforced . We have already requested an increase in the number of employees , of officers , to be employed at the centre .
We have also asked the Member States to give us the opportunity next year to use certain specialists at the MIC .
Finally , the Commission has two legislative proposals , one for the means of financing and one for the recast of the 2001 decision , which will give us the possibility of working in another sector , the transport sector , about which I spoke earlier .
Now , as far as the amendments are concerned , the European Parliament has presented a series of important amendments with a view to strengthening civil protection capabilities at European level .
The amendments relate to the need to safeguard prompt transportation of civil protection aid , the importance of early warning and alert systems , the interoperability of civil protection modules and the role which the mechanism can play in helping the citizens of the European Union .
The Commission can accept most of the proposed amendments .
However , there are some which cause problems and cannot be adopted as they stand .
I refer to those relating to the provision of measures relating to prevention , public health and deliberate maritime pollution .
As regards the measures relating to prevention , the Commission wishes to emphasise that the proposal for the means of financing civil protection will cover actions in this sector .
The Community civil protection mechanism is designed to cover actions in the sectors of preparedness and intervention only .
Nonetheless , the Commission agrees with the European Parliament about the importance of actions in the field of prevention and has promised to promote them within an appropriate framework .
As regards the inclusion of public health , the Commission recognises that civil protection actions very often aim to protect public health .
However , the civil protection mechanism set up at European Union level does not form part of public health policy , which is covered by other existing Community mechanisms , such as the Community action programme in the health sector .
As far as deliberate or intentional maritime pollution is concerned , the Commission fully supports the proposal whereby it must be possible for the civil protection mechanism to intervene in cases of extensive maritime pollution caused either accidentally or deliberately .
The proposal by the European Commission to extend the scope so that it also covers man-made disasters covers this possibility .
However , the term ' intentional , deliberate ' maritime pollution usually refers to the jettisoning of small quantities of oil from ships and the Commission wishes to avoid the interpretation that the scope of the regulation covers jettisoning to such a minor degree .
It would be practically impossible for the Commission to mobilise the mechanism - nor , as I said earlier , does it have the staff - and this sort of minor jettisoning should be dealt with by the means available to each country .
That is why the corresponding amendments were not accepted .
Finally , the Commission would point out that a series of amendments relates to aspects of existing legislation .
The Commission supports some of these amendments in essence .
However , the interinstitutional agreement on the use of the recast technique does not allow the Commission to accept them , unless they are of vital importance to the application of the new provisions contained in the proposal or derive directly from the new provisions .
However , the Commission will bear the issues in question in mind within the framework of the development of our policy in this sector .
These are the main issues on which the Commission 's position differs from that taken in the European Parliament report .
However , I wish to stress that these differences of opinion do not overshadow our common objectives .
We agree fully with the ambition of the European Parliament to develop a very strong European intervention capability in the field of civil protection , both inside and outside the European Union , and we thank you for your support .
I shall send the European Parliament secretariat a full list of the Commission 's positions on the amendments .
I should like once again to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Papadimoulis , on his excellent work .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 12 noon .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( SV ) The European Parliament is now dealing with a proposal for revising the Civil Protection Mechanism set up in 2001 .
There is no doubt that disasters put great strains on the parties affected .
Coordinated European civil protection is not , however , the solution to the problem , especially in the form in which it appears in this proposal .
Civil protection in each Member State is funded through taxes .
It is up to each State to choose how tax revenue collected from its citizens is to be distributed .
This proposal may entail a risk of certain Member States choosing to invest a minimum of resources in national civil protection , relying on other EU countries contributing when a disaster occurs .
This problem of free-riding is very serious and is unfair towards people in those countries that choose to have strong civil protection .
Where international efforts are concerned , these should be coordinated through OCHA and funded by the Member States and not by the EU .
The Commission 's document also talks about rapid reaction forces and about the Member States having to give notice of available resources , including military resources and military capacity , in cases where an affected country requests that type of aid .
The June List resolutely objects to these proposals .
A country 's military resources are a matter for that particular nation , and it is up to each Member State to decide whether or not such resources should be mobilised .
European order for payment procedure ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the Council common position ( 07535 / 3 / 2006 C6-0227 / 2006 for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council creating a European order for payment procedure ( Rapporteur : Arlene McCarthy ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , Commissioner , almost 12 months ago we first gave our approval to the European payment order , a new law to assist in simplified debt recovery for businesses and citizens owed money in another EU Member State .
Today , a year later , the committee 's view has not changed .
We believe that we need this pragmatic and practical EU law , in particular to ensure that businesses and citizens have an affordable system to recover those debts owed to them .
Why ?
Because until this law comes into force , recovery of debts from another EU State is a costly legal process .
In some cases , money spent on lawyers and administrative costs exceeds the amount owed to the individual .
More significantly , studies and experience show that companies which do not get their debts paid are at risk of collapsing , with knock-on effects not just in terms of job losses , but also for other SMEs in the supply chain .
Out of between 30 and 40 billion invoices in Europe each year , as many as 1 billion default and turn into debt cases .
Interim Justicia carried out a survey on payment practices in 16 European countries some 10 years ago .
The average delay then was just 14 days .
By the end of 2003 , however , this had not declined , but risen to 16 days .
According to a World Bank study , ' Doing Business in 2004 : Understanding Regulation ' , the Nordic countries have the most efficient and effective legal systems of the countries surveyed .
They take the least time to reach a solution while keeping costs low .
Italy is one of the countries with the longest delays worldwide .
The explanation it is said lies in the lax appeal process , which allows proceedings to be disrupted at any point during a trial .
Spain , by contrast , has one of the most complex legal systems , which generates higher costs and leads to longer court proceedings .
My own Member State , the UK , has some three systems operating for payments , again creating confusion for businesses or the public .
Extensive differences in legal regulation of overdue payment recovery therefore lead to uncertainties , especially in EU trade , and the additional costs prevent the EU 's aim of equal opportunities for market access for both local and EU operating companies .
It is clear that a lack of enforcement systems for payments undermines the internal market and business confidence and that , as a result , SMEs have continued to experience cash flow problems caused by late payments .
The European payment order will also apply to individual citizens who work or live in another Member State and who can also take advantage of this new law .
Of course , the high and expanding volume of trade within the EU and the increased movement of people raise the likelihood that more and more businesses may become involved in cross-border litigation .
There is a risk that citizens may not be inclined to assert their rights because of the obstacles they face , particularly in dealing with the legal system in another Member State and with unfamiliar procedures and unknown costs .
It is essential , therefore , that the EU provide for a judicial area where private individuals and businesses can have access to justice and redress in the case of an uncontested claim .
This procedural law will help facilitate that access .
The payment order introduces a practical EU-level instrument for obtaining an enforceable decision and I believe in this way we can demonstrate to citizens that the EU is delivering a practical tool to assist them with redress and remedies .
I want to put on record my thanks to members of the committee , in particular the shadows , Mr Wieland , who is here this evening , and Mrs Wallis , who cannot be here .
They have not only supported my approach but have made useful and constructive proposals for amendments at every stage of the procedure .
The committee consulted with key protagonists and we believe we focused on the core issues .
Both my shadows were concerned to ensure that the forms and the annex , the bones of the proposal , were simple enough for businesses to be able to fill them out with minimum bureaucracy .
Only time and experience will tell if this has been achieved .
That is why , under the new comitology procedures , Parliament needs to be consulted and informed of any changes the Commission would like to make to the system .
I would also like to thank the British Presidency , in particular the Minister Baroness Ashton , who was instrumental in helping us to make progress on the clear drafting of this law .
So now , Commissioner , at second reading we are down to the last few details .
Mrs Wallis is concerned that the Commission should seriously address the potential discrimination affecting citizens and businesses where EEA members can participate in the single market , but cannot be a party to the EPO .
I hope the Commission will address this issue .
The forms should be user-friendly and simple and we would therefore like the Commission to take on board our amendment in this area .
Finally , since we started this process a year ago and since the Commission 's original proposal , we now have a new institutional agreement , with effect from July 2006 .
The committee and Parliament insist that the new regulatory scrutiny procedure and rule should be respected in this legislation and on the payment order .
Commissioner , let me say how much we have appreciated the cooperation of your departments in this area .
I hope that , together with the Finnish Presidency , we can sign off the European payment order and begin the process of putting it into law across all the Member States of the EU , so that businesses and citizens can be confident of operating in the internal market in the knowledge that the failure to pay a debt does not end up in endless court proceedings with no outcome .
Thanks to the European Union , there is now a simple and user-friendly system for speedy payment of debts which , I believe , will drive forward the internal market for SMEs and boost the EU economy .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs McCarthy , warmly for her work and her efforts to bring this project , which is very important for our citizens , to a satisfactory conclusion .
Like the rapporteur , I would also like to thank the former United Kingdom Presidency , particularly Baroness Ashton , for the work done in moving ahead with this important project .
As you know , this regulation on the European order for payment procedure aims at facilitating the mass recovery of uncontested claims in Europe .
It is thus very important , as it will allow all creditors in Europe to recover their claims in a uniform way and more rapidly and cheaply than in ordinary court proceedings .
It will also alleviate the burden on the courts by removing from ordinary proceedings those claims where the debtor does not contest the debt .
The proposal potentially concerns all citizens and economic operators in Europe .
A European order for payment can circulate freely in Europe and will be enforced automatically .
There will be therefore no need to request a declaration of enforcement - the ' exequatur ' - in the Member State of enforcement .
Concerning the amendments , I can accept the third amendment as proposed .
On the second amendment , I can accept the compromise amendment on the comitology procedure , which is in line with the Council decision taken in July 2006 .
On the first amendment , while I understand the reason and the concern expressed by the committee , I think that we should not at this stage reopen the question of the definition of a cross-border case , adopted at first reading by the Council and the European Parliament .
At the same time , I can confirm that the Commission is available and willing to look more closely into the effects of the regulation for parties domiciled in third countries and , in particular , states of the European Economic Area .
I am ready to give very careful consideration to any proposals .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs McCarthy , has set out the essentials of why this matters in economic terms .
This European order for payment procedure represents a major step forward in the application of laws across borders , and , in particular , a step forward for business , which has a particular interest in the legal soundness of claims being established without delay , in the prompt assignment of title , and in this claim being capable of being enforced , without further cost-intensive procedures , in the country of the debtor .
It has to be said , though - and it is to this that I want to give particular attention - that legal relationships across borders will become increasingly important to private citizens , who find it particularly difficult to enforce claims across borders , whether such claims are contentious or not .
Today , it is undisputed claims that we are discussing , and that is why this first step is so important .
Private individuals find the business of getting what they are entitled to complicated enough as it is , and they have serious problems with getting claims enforced in a country other than their own ; this instrument will make things easier for them .
A form that even an ordinary member of the public can complete will make it possible for claims to be enforced relatively simply and without great expense .
Another consideration is that constant reference has been made to businesses and to creditors , but not enough has been said about the debtors .
Systems have been introduced in the Member States of the European Union - not least in the one from which I come - to make the establishment of such claims a positively economical business , not least for those who owe the money .
The debtor who is willing - but perhaps not able - to pay up , can agree reasonable repayments with the creditor , who has an interest in establishing title and thereby preventing the debt from lapsing , and , in the absence of a contested case , fewer costs are incurred .
It is therefore in the interests of all parties that we should make cross-border legal proceedings speedy , efficient and affordable .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , late payments are the main cause of insolvency , which threatens the survival of businesses , especially small and medium-sized ones .
They jeopardise the operations and solvency of these businesses , often resulting in the loss of many jobs .
Swift and efficient debt recovery when no legal dispute is involved is therefore vitally important for business entities in the European Union .
It helps to preserve jobs .
The Member States have attempted to solve the problem of large-scale debt recovery in the case of undisputed claims , generally by simplifying proceedings regarding payment orders .
There are , however , significant differences between national provisions and the way individual procedures operate .
As a result , the latter may be inadmissible or impossible to apply in cross-border situations .
It is therefore appropriate to respond positively to the proposed regulation setting up a European procedure for payment orders .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.20 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
You wish to take the floor , Mr Carnero González .
I imagine that it is for a point of order .
On the basis of which Rule do you wish to speak ?
( ES ) Yes , Mr President , I simply wished to mention the fact that the media is reporting that a European citizen , of Spanish nationality , Mr Emilio Morenatti , has been kidnapped in Gaza this morning by a group of armed men .
I would ask that you call upon the Presidency of the Council and the Commission to do everything they can ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
That is not a point of order .
I understand your concern , but the Rules of Procedure must be respected .
I take good note of what you say , thank you .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
The Council is requesting the application of the urgent procedure with regard to the proposal for a Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 on the management of fishing fleets registered in the Community outermost regions C6-0295 / 2006 .
Who will speak on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries ?

( ES ) Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries in the absence of its chairman , Mr Morillon , in order to support this Council request for urgent procedure .
We are talking about approving , as you have said , and as the Commission proposes , the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 639 / 2004 on the management of fishing fleets .
The fisheries sector in the outermost regions is suffering a structurally precarious situation .
The Council 's approval of the Regulation on the European Fisheries Fund was accompanied by a joint statement by the Council and the Commission in support of these regions , extending until 31 December 2006 the derogations regarding the possibility of granting State aid for the renewal of the fishing fleets registered in those regions .
Although the extension ends in two months ' time , the Regulation has not been able to enter into force due to the slow pace of the process for adopting decisions within Community legislation .
Our committee is in favour of the urgent procedure and urges the Commission and the Member States to adopt the measures necessary to ensure that the sector can receive the aid without delay .
( Parliament agreed to the urgent procedure )
This item is therefore included in next Thursday 's Voting Time at 11.30 a.m. and the time limit for presentation of amendments is tomorrow Wednesday at 10.00 a.m.

Commemoration of the 1956 Hungarian uprising
Ladies and gentlemen , I would now like to make a statement , and I shall do so standing , on the ' Hungarian Revolution ' of October 1956 .
Half a century ago , the Hungarian people rose up against the Communist dictatorship and against the occupation by a foreign power .
On 23 October 1956 , Hungarian university students took to the streets of Budapest to protest against the Communist government and they were soon joined by citizens from all professions and sectors of society .
I must tell you that that is my earliest childhood memory of politics .
At that time , the news in my country was full of the resistance by the Hungarian people .
I can remember our school teacher showing us where the events were taking place on a map , the voices on the radio and photographs in the newspapers of burnt-out T-34 tanks in the centre of Budapest .
It brought alive in me for the first time the notion of fighting for freedom .
For two weeks there was hope ; then the radios stopped and a complete silence fell , and behind that silence thousands were killed and hundreds exiled .
For some time those who rose up in Budapest hoped that the free West would come to their aid . It did not .
For some time , they were led to believe that it would .
We looked on as powerless spectators as thousands of Hungarian men , women and children fled their country and sought refuge in the West .
It was an indescribable tragedy for the Hungarian people , but it was also the first chink in the armour of the Soviet system - a chink that would grow and would lead to the fall of the Berlin Wall - and it was undoubtedly a great moment in the history of that country .
Around that time , at the end of June , the Poznan uprising in Poland , with the workers from the Cigielski factory demanding ' bread and freedom ' , was another significant moment in that upheaval .
Those events were undoubtedly related .
In fact , during the ceremony organised this year to commemorate the events in Poznan in 1956 , the Hungarian President , Laszlo Sólyom , said that ' Poznan and Hungary rose up together against the Soviet occupation .
On 24 October 1956 the Hungarians took to the streets carrying placards reading " Poznan - Warsaw - Budapest ” ' .
That was a source of inspiration for what happened later , although it took a long time .
It took a long time , until the spring came in Prague in 1968 .
It took a long time , until the strikes in Poland in 1970 , which led to the recognition of Solidarnosc , ten years later , which was the pickaxe that brought the wall down .
History repeated itself in 1989 .
Hungary and Poland laid the first stone of the reunification of the continent , and I believe that this is a good point to quote from Albert Camus in 1957 , on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Hungarian Revolution .
Camus said : ' Hungary conquered and in chains has done more for freedom and justice than any other European people for twenty years [ ... ] .
In Europe 's isolation today , we have only one way of being true to Hungary , and that is never to betray , among ourselves , or anywhere , what the Hungarian heroes died for and never to condone , even indirectly , what killed them .
It would indeed be difficult for us to be worthy of such sacrifices .
We can , however , try to be so , in uniting Europe at last , in forgetting our quarrels , in correcting our own errors , in increasing our efforts and our solidarity ' .
A reunified Europe today is prepared to make further progress and to disseminate the European spirit even further , thereby helping to create a world in which our actions are guided by the principles of freedom , solidarity and progress .
We owe that to those who died for their belief in a free Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are , today , commemorating the uprising by the people of Hungary 50 years ago , when people rose up in desperation against a totalitarian dictatorship .
We are commemorating the events of the autumn of 1956 today because what they did , they did for all of us .
They did the idea of freedom , justice and democracy proud .
They stood up for human dignity and filled it with renewed vigour , continuing to demonstrate it even when they were crushed by tanks .
They went into exile for all of us , suffered for all of us , thus to be borne in remembrance for all of us over the years and the decades .
The heroes of the Hungarian revolution are heroes for us all .
They are heroes for Europe .
We are commemorating them today because we are indebted to their legacy .
We are paying homage to their achievement because we - especially here in the European Parliament - are bound to one another by the pledge that there must never again be such a challenge to freedom and human dignity in Europe .
Their life stands before us like a relief showing the great heights that humanity is capable of reaching when we are compelled to defend the values and the dignity of Europe .
We bow down before them .
What began with the first mass demonstration in Budapest on 23 October 1956 and ended when Soviet troops were sent in on 4 November was a revolution for freedom .
The participants in the Hungarian uprising quite rightly spoke of revolution , or forradalom .
By contrast , the Communists who were in power at the time accused them - wrongly - of mounting a counter-revolution , or ellenforradalom .
The difference is not simply a small fragment of a Hungarian word .
The difference is enormous .
It is the difference between freedom and serfdom .
The people of Hungary acted for our values in Europe , since the freedom for which the heroes of the Hungarian uprising of 1956 strove and died is a part of the European identity .
Our aims are the aims of those people in Hungary back then .
Nothing could better illuminate the potency of these events than the fact that , today , we are commemorating the Hungarian uprising of 1956 and that we have with us in this House freely-elected Hungarian MEPs .
For me , this will always be the miracle of my generation .
Hungary 's freedom has become the freedom of Europe , and Europe 's freedom remains the guarantor of Hungary 's freedom .
Allow me just to express my great appreciation , in the light of today 's events in Budapest and in Hungary , to the Hungarian Members of this House , irrespective of the groups to which they belong , for the fact that they have made it possible for us to agree on a common text , a joint resolution .
This shows us that we share common principles that bind us together irrespective of the disagreements of everyday politics .
I ask that , in the altercations in Budapest , no side should act disproportionately , that the demonstrators should not receive a disproportionate response , since we are linked by common values , namely the values of freedom , which also link us to 1956 , as well as linking us in the modern day , 2006 .
Let us always , in every disagreement , put this sharing of values at the heart of things .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is a connection between the anniversary that we are commemorating today , namely the anniversary of the Hungarian uprising against their Soviet oppressors , and the anniversary that we will be celebrating next spring , the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaties of Rome .
These two events took place within a short space of time and both of them were motivated by the same spirit .
The Treaties of Rome were characterised by the spirit of freedom and the binding together of peoples in freedom .
This was precisely the spirit of the uprising in Hungary too .
The people of Hungary wanted out of a system that had been forced upon them ; they wanted their own sovereignty as a free people .
They had to fight that system and struggle against a power that wanted to take that right away from them .
Fifty years later we are commemorating those men and women who sought out the right that we , the European Union , today guarantee to each people , namely the right to be able to live in freedom and self-determination within the democratic international community .
Those men and women who had to fight their oppressors for that right are true heroes of European history .
They had no weapons , they could not resist an army and they faced the tanks with their bare hands and their chests torn open - we all know the pictures .
The courage shown by these men and women is worthy of our admiration .
In my opinion , that courage , and the stance that was , as both the previous speaker and you , Mr President , have pointed out , to be found not only in Hungary but also in Poland and twelve years later in Czechoslovakia , that courage is also part of the heritage of Europe .
It shows that on this continent , men and women have always been prepared to dedicate their lives to freedom .
The courage of those men and women is up there with the best that Hungary has to offer Europe .
It is also up there with the best that we as Europeans have to preserve .
I believe that the fall of the Wall that came later , the fact that it was possible to tear down the Wall , to overcome the Iron Curtain , grew out of the courage of the days that we are remembering today .
One thing is completely clear , and that is that however bitter oppression may be in any particular case , however painful a dictatorship , it will not last forever .
No oppression can keep down the desire of a people for freedom , the desire of humankind for freedom , in the long run .
Every dictatorship yet in the history of humanity has fallen at some point .
Just as this communist , Stalinist dictatorship fell , so will the other dictatorships in the world .
This means that the courage of those men and women in Hungary fifty years ago is the courage of men and women in other parts of the world who are fighting oppression in their own lives today .
This is an ongoing fight ; it is not over .
By commemorating these events on the 50th anniversary we are also commemorating the fact that the people of Hungary have succeeded , having achieved their democracy and their freedom in their country , in transforming the act that forced them into the Eastern Bloc into an act of freedom whereby , through free self-determination , they have joined the European Union .
What that represents is a completely different concept , namely that of voluntarily joining an international community through free self-determination rather than being forcibly pushed into a community of force .
It is precisely this that is the giant step forward that we have made in Europe over the last 50 years .
This uprising took place when I was a little baby , just 10 months old .
I was a child in 1956 .
The fact that I have been able to live my life in freedom is an enormous privilege , an advantage that the Hungarians of my generation did not have .
I am grateful for this , but I am even happier that , at this point in my life , we who were born in freedom in Western Europe are today able to live together , as Europeans , with those born under oppression , in the Union in which we share .
There could be no finer gift for my generation here and in Hungary .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe would like to pay homage to the 1956 Hungarian revolution , to the courage , to the determination of the Hungarian people in the fight for freedom , to the memory of the victims of repression and to the suffering of an entire people .
1956 was a turning point in the contemporary history of Europe .
In June 1956 , as the President has said , the uprising of Polish workers in Poznań was met with bloody repression .
The liberalisation of the regime , which took place in Poland in October 1956 , lasted only a short time .
That year was marked by the events in Hungary .
The Hungarian revolution was popular , national and anticommunist .
It was crushed mercilessly by the Soviet army .
The streets of Budapest were the scene of a bloody repression , and Hungary was gripped by terror and oppression for a long time .
Today we are commemorating this anniversary without trying to settle our scores with the past .
But in order to inscribe these events in the history of European freedom , and to feel a sense of community , the European Union needs to have a common memory .
The heroism of the men and women of 1956 cannot be forgotten .
We must remember Imre Nagy , a communist who became a protagonist of the anticommunist revolution , who was assassinated in a secretive and cowardly manner .
We must remember István Bibó , a great thinker and man of action in the service of freedom and democracy , who was thrown into prison and condemned to silence until the end of his days .
We must not forget that Europe , faced with the drama of 1956 , certainly expressed its indignation , but remained silent and impotent .
This is a lesson for Europe now and in the future .
It must be strong , united , and show solidarity .
It must find its raison d 'être in freedom , democracy and respect for human rights and the rights of peoples .
And for Hungary , today , we should hope that the Hungarian people and its leaders will draw from the courage of 1956 the strength to find the wisdom needed to put the public good and the common interest above political controversies .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , there are a number of red threads running through history , and it is one of those red threads that we are taking hold of here .
It started on 17 June 1953 in Germany , then ran through Poland and Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 , until Communism was finally defeated .
The Hungarian uprising was an uprising for democracy ; it was a national uprising , but also a political one .
I would remind you of the Petőfi group - the Hungarian intellectuals who founded the Workers ' Councils together with the workers , first in Budapest and then throughout Hungary .
They had the hope to try to reinvent democracy .
That is what happened in Hungary in 1956 .
As we remember this uprising now , 50 years on , we can also add to that memory another one , namely the 100th anniversary of the birth of Hannah Arendt .
She was one of those intellectuals who had the courage to name two totalitarian regimes in a single breath - communism and fascism .
This is precisely what history teaches us : we have never had a permanent hold on democracy .
We will only keep hold of it if we fight for it every day .
Poland and Hungary are showing us that today , as are the dangerous developments in France , where there are fascist , far-right forces at work .
We must continue to stand up and fight for democracy .
The people of Hungary and Poland 50 years ago and those of Czechoslovakia in 1968 , and also the people in this country who fought against fascism , have shown us that it is sometimes necessary to give one 's life for democracy and freedom .
We should take this lesson to heart , and not be afraid to say that totalitarianism - whether fascist or communist - is and always will be totalitarianism .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that I express a point of view largely shared by my group when I say that I agree that the 1956 uprising in Hungary should be considered first and foremost as a popular uprising for freedom and independence .
I also agree that the bloody repression of this uprising by the Soviet army should be unreservedly condemned .
Finally , I agree that this Hungarian tragedy should be seen as an emblematic event , because it sheds light on the heart of the existential crisis of a model which would disappear thirty-three years later , as it was unable to reform itself profoundly .
By contrast , we cannot accept a unilateral reading of contemporary history that demonises the communist idea .
To stay with the case of Hungary , I would remind you that high-ranking communists played a major role in that country in the movement contesting the regime .
We are all familiar with the part played by Nagy Imre , the reforming communist Prime Minister who paid with his life for his commitment to the side of the insurgents .
It is less well known that the famous Petofi circle , whose activities are considered as one of the trigger factors of the movement , was formed on the initiative of young communists .
I could go on to cite the name of the great communist philosopher György Lukács , who was also involved in this struggle for reform .
In fact , over a whole period , we witnessed a rising tide of protests inspired by communists , whose criticisms were unfortunately stifled .
History was not written in advance , it is no more so today .
And so , let us condemn Stalinist crimes as much as necessary , but let us not rekindle the spirit of the cold war which was never productive for freedom and independence in any area .
The reunified Europe has more to achieve by turning resolutely towards the future .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over 2 500 tanks against an unarmed people , 75 000 Red Army soldiers , thousands of victims , over 2 000 people shot by the Kádár government instated by the Soviets , 12 000 prisoners sent to gulags , 200 000 refugees : these are a few of the terrifying figures that sum up a nation 's tragedy , but also the beginning of the end for a party and a power which , following the shameful and iniquitous Yalta agreements , dominated half of our continent .
The first signs came in Berlin in 1953 , followed by the cry for freedom in Poznań , in Poland , in 1956 .
Stalin had been dead for three years , but his political successors , despite Khrushchev 's report to the XX Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in February 1956 denouncing the Georgian dictator 's innumerable crimes , used repressive and criminal methods , for fear that power should slip from their hands in Hungary .
The revolt descended into a great tragedy .
Imre Nagy 's reformist government was swept aside , and he was assassinated .
Only with the fall of Soviet communism could the victims of those years finally be rehabilitated . Referred to by Hungarian communist leaders and the Kominform as a ' rabble ' , in fact , they were and they remain a symbol of human dignity , oppressed by one of the most insensitive and violent dictatorships that history has ever known .
This great tragedy must remind us today of the negativity of an ideology and a political practice that left millions of victims in the regions of the world in which the regime was installed .
Some of those who , at the time , defended the use of tanks and the shootings are today reappraising their actions , and , as always , they speak of mistakes .
They do not speak , however , of rejecting those ideas that led and inevitably lead to dictatorship and oppression .
Only by rejecting and condemning those ideas quite openly can we be guaranteed a future of freedom .
Remembering the tragedy of the Hungarian autumn , we appreciate the Union once more as a protector against any humiliation of the dignity of the individual and of peoples .
Furthermore , we recall that there are still regimes that exert an iron grip on the lives of their citizens and that represent a threat to free peoples : the world 's many dictatorships , from North Korea to Iran and Cuba .
Yet we also remember the dangers of new forms of fundamentalism .
May the West never again choose silence , and may Europe be a champion of freedom and justice .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , today , we in this House are commemorating a tragic political event that took place in Hungary 50 years ago .
The insurrection that broke out at that time , and that was brutally crushed by Soviet troops , has opened the eyes of many in Western Europe to the dangers of the Communist ideology as dictated by Moscow .
The historical significance of Budapest 1956 is much more than local or national .
As a 13-year-old schoolboy , all that I grasped was that my mother 's beloved home country fought a heroic battle for a freedom that it passionately desired .
The images of Prime Minister Imre Nagy and General Pál Maléter and the fight against the Russian tanks are etched on my mind .
We desperately - against better judgment , indeed - hoped that the West would send support .
We felt so much for the victims and for the refugees .
My parents taught me back then that Hungary is not an Eastern European , but a Central European , country , with strong , religious and cultural ties with Western Europe .
Now , 50 years down the line , the Soviet bloc has been dismantled and eight , and soon ten , of the former satellite states , are part of the European Union .
What have we done with this regained freedom ?
National Socialism was defeated in 1945 and Communism 45 years later .
Did anything positive come to replace them ?
Are we able , on the ruins of those ideologies , to build a society of tolerance , accountability and love of one 's neighbour ?
We need patience and perseverance to achieve this .
Since it took fifteen years for the Netherlands to be reconstructed after five years of occupation , it is likely that a few generations will be needed before all the wounds of oppression , sustained over a 50-year period , are healed .
May the Hungarian people display the courage and strength to conquer the past together and to collectively work on a future in peace and freedom .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 50th-anniversary celebrations of the anticommunist uprising draw our attention to the crisis experienced by Ferenc Gyurcsány 's socialist government .
The new Hungarian elite has reclaimed the 1956 revolution and the communist symbols in order to justify liberalism .
This strategy aims to give legitimacy to the current government , given its affiliation with the communist intelligentsia , and to reassure a population that , socially , is beginning to seriously suffer under the effects of liberalism .
Communism in fact amounts to an excuse on would-be social grounds to exploit the people , as demonstrated today by China .
Hungary has its place in the European Union because , in its experience of resisting totalitarianism , it brings new political sensibilities and , as in 1956 , a popular ability to generate hope .
Today , the protests by the extreme right against Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsány , who has admitted having lied about the state of the economy in order to win the elections last April , have seen 100 000 people demonstrating in Budapest on the occasion of the 50th anniversary .
Demonstrators clashed with police for hours in the streets , leading to arrests and injuries .
Supporters of the leading right-wing opposition party are themselves claiming the role of the true heirs of 1956 .
In my opinion , it is not a case of rewriting the history that everyone knows , or that European socialists and communists fail to recognise .
It is all too easy to appeal to the emotions , evoking the bodies of men , women and children who fell under the blows of the Soviet Union in the name of communism .
The Italian communists , Hungary and the Communist Party leaders sided with the USSR against the Hungarian revolutionaries .
Party Secretary Palmiro Togliatti and his successor Luigi Longo declared their solidarity with the re-establishment of internationalist justice many times , even years later .
The current President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , appeared in the newspaper L 'Unità condemning the revolutionaries as thugs and disreputable troublemakers .
Fifty years later , in his autobiography , he does not retract this statement , but merely explains what is known to everyone , that is that in those years the Italian Communist Party and all European socialism was inseparable from the fortunes of the socialist block , led by the USSR .
We should not so much condemn the Soviet Union 's imperial actions , but rather strongly condemn those who , at the time , enthusiastically chose to support the invasion , in the name of communist and socialist internationalism .
That concludes this item .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( EL ) The debate in the European Parliament and the resolutions tabled for 50th anniversary of the Hungary uprising are yet another organised attempt to rewrite history and fuel anti-communism .
The celebrations by the representatives of capitalism and the presence of the secretary-general of ΝΑΤΟ , the President of the Commission and other imperialist leaders at the event in Budapest are the best testimony of the objectives of the Hungarian uprising , the overturning of the socialist system and the restoration of capitalism .
The publication , moreover , of official documents which prove the active involvement of imperialists and organised support for the revolutionary forces are the best response to those who distort the nature of the events by calling it a popular uprising .
The common , copycat shouts of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance about democracy and freedom are an attempt to sanctify capitalist barbarity and present it as the only way forward for the peoples .
At the same time , they are hiding their fear of socialism , which is a social necessity .
The forces of the left are taking on huge political responsibilities with their stand .
Even though they know about the undermining and aggressive role of imperialism in the former socialist countries and their murderous role in all the grassroots movements , they are adopting the imperialist propaganda in the name of ' objectivity ' .
They are not taking a class-orientated approach to the events , thereby giving imperialism an alibi .
( IT ) I speak , with great pride , on behalf of the New Italian Socialist Party , a small group of uncompromising Italian socialists who have always chosen the same path and have refused offers from those on both the right and the left inviting us to give up .
This red thread of independence , which runs through to the present day , had its crucial moment in 1956 . At that time , the Italian Socialist Party , under Pietro Nenni , firmly condemned the violent attack by the communists that drowned the hopes of the Hungarian people in blood and massacred the insurgents .
This was the national uprising of a proud people , who were fighting not only against the physical and moral sufferings inflicted by communism , but also against the political and cultural drabness that had stifled the traditions , identity and patriotism of the Hungarian people .
As the tragedies of the following years demonstrated , to speak of communism and freedom has always represented a patent oxymoron .
The members of the New Italian Socialist Party will never tire of repeating this truth , which was for too long denied in Italy by the Italian Communist Party .
We therefore honour the 5 000 Hungarian martyrs who did not bow to injustice and who fought to the death to exert their right to a better future , to a prospect of freedom , democracy and peace .
Breast cancer ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question to the Commission on the reintegration of breast cancer patients into the job market and use of social funds for continued training of health professionals in the field of breast cancer , by Mr Andersson and Mrs Jöns on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - B6-0433 / 2006 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the early detection and treatment of breast cancer in the enlarged European Union by Mr Florenz and Mrs Jöns on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B6-0434 / 2006 ) and
the oral question to the Commission on breast cancer by Mrs Záborská and Mrs Jöns on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B6-0436 / 2006 ) .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Špidla , Commissioner Kyprianou , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the chairmen of the three committees , Mrs Záborská , Mr Florenz and Mr Andersson , most warmly for their fantastic cooperation in preparing this debate .
I would also like to thank you , Madam President .
Breast cancer was on the agenda three years ago , and it is now time to take an initial look at the results , which appears to be urgently necessary .
In the 25 Member States , 275 000 women contract breast cancer every year .
The risk of dying from it is twice as high in one Member State as in another .
To make it worse , younger and younger women are contracting the disease : just in the last few years , the number of women under 40 affected has doubled .
Breast cancer is still the number one cause of death in women between 35 and 55 .
However , I am also shocked at how radical treatment still is in many Member States .
In some countries , mastectomies are still the rule rather than the exception , even in the very early stages of the disease , even though in 80 % of cases these days it is possible to operate without removing the breast .
As you can see , then , we are progressing at a snail 's pace .
This is particularly true in the new Member States , where the missed opportunities and deficiencies throughout the chain of care are at their worst .
However , at least in the old Member States , the fact that the structures remain , as before , inadequate to catastrophic has less to do with public budget problems than with the economic and class interests of the doctors .
Let us begin with early detection : the development of an across-the-board breast screening programme according to EU guidelines will involve a one-off cost for the public purse of no more than EUR 1.25 per citizen .
I am therefore sure that nobody in this House wants to claim that this money is not available .
If we had an EU-wide breast screening programme , we could save the lives of 31 000 women in the EU a year , help to reduce healthcare costs and substantially reduce subsequent costs for the whole of society .
To date , though , only 11 countries have a quality-assured screening programme , and these programmes are a long way from being continuous .
In your country , too , Mr Špidla , you must put a stop to the practice of passing off opportunistic screening as EU screening .
In Cyprus , too , Mr Kyprianou , progress is still very sluggish .
Now we know , of course , that you are both on our side , but it would nonetheless have been nice to have the Commission 's progress report now , instead of in the Spring , which is when it is expected .
We also call on you to put greater emphasis on the option of using money from the Structural Funds to develop a screening programme .
However , even the best early detection system is of no use if subsequent treatment is inadequate or inappropriate .
Time and again , breast cancer is operated on and treated in hospitals with barely any experience .
I would therefore specifically like to thank the Commission for the EU guidelines for breast centres , which we have received from you since last year .
The ball is now in the Member States ' court , though , because the only place in the whole of the EU with such centres at the moment is - amazingly - the United Kingdom .
That is why we will also call today , in our joint resolution , for the Member States to establish sufficient breast centres nationwide by 2016 .
This is absolutely feasible by 2016 .
We would need around 1 800 such centres EU-wide .
Then all women would have the opportunity to get the same optimum treatment , regardless of where they live .
In order to ensure that these breast centres actually work in accordance with the EU criteria , that they really do perform a minimum number of operations on primary breast cancer , namely 150 a year in a single centre , that the specialists really have specialised exclusively in benign and malignant breast diseases and that they really do carry out interdisciplinary consultations before and after the operation for each case of breast cancer , we now also need guidelines for the certification of breast centres .
In this connection , we would call on you in the Commission to embark on drafting these guidelines with real speed .
We would also ask you to draw up guidelines for the job description of breast nurses , who have a very important role to play in these centres , as guides and mediators between doctors and patients throughout the treatment process .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Jöns .
That is a very personal thank you .
author . - ( SV ) Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Jöns for her great commitment and for having got to grips with this tremendously important issue .
As Mrs Jöns has already said , this is the most common form of cancer among women .
It is also the most common cause of death among women aged between 35 and 59 .
What is more , we know that breast cancer is on the increase among younger women and that the chances of detecting the disease vary a very great deal from one EU Member State to another , as do opportunities for breast-screening .
I know from my own country , Sweden , where breast-screening has been available for many years to women in certain age groups , that such screening has reduced the death rate amongst women and that it is important to detect the disease early in order to provide the right treatment .
All of this means that the efforts mentioned in the resolutions discussed by Mrs Jöns are incredibly important .
Three committees are involved in this work .
We in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs do not have responsibility specifically for health and healthcare matters , but rather for the link to the labour market .
We now have , I am happy to say , a labour market that is designed to involve women and where women can be found in ever increasing numbers .
In my own country , the proportion of women in work is just as high as that of men .
If someone contracts a serious illness such as breast cancer , one purely factual consideration is that time out has to be taken for treatment .
It is sometimes possible for a woman to go on working , but to do so means also being able to discuss with her employer what changes might be made to her work patterns so that she might continue in employment while she is receiving treatment .
It is also possible for someone to become seriously ill for a period of time but then get better as a result of treatment and be able to go back to work .
The question is then one of how she can be successfully re-integrated into working life , and in such a way that the breast cancer treatment does not have a harmful effect on it
It is important for us to address these issues . That is the first point to be made by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Our second area of concern comprises the professionals involved in these issues .
There is constant progress in terms of research and development and procedures for treating breast cancer .
It is important for medical staff to be kept up-to-date at all times on new procedures as they are developed .
We do also have instruments at European level - specifically , within the framework of the Social Fund - with which to help staff develop their skills .
In this area too , we must be able to make use of the Social Fund for the purposes of skills development , so that staff can use the best methods .
This is also something to which the Lisbon Process is relevant .
The Lisbon Process is , of course , about best practice , and that means that we are supposed to look to those countries that have made most progress .
Finally , I would like to mention something else that I have spoken to Mrs Jöns about .
Breast cancer is a disease that strikes women , but it is important that we men get involved in working towards better procedures .
It must not be women alone who are committed to better methods of fighting diseases that affect women . It is , rather , something to which all of us - both men and women - must be committed .
( Applause )
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am grateful to you , Mrs Jöns , for allowing me to co-author this question with you .
I was delighted to do so , because I was struck during the debate by just how little I had heard on this topic up until now .
As I followed the debate , I thought about how faint-hearted we really are in Europe , how stupidly we have acted in the past , and how many questions we have left open for this continent .
I will try to add my political weight to the balance in this matter , because in terms of content I have nothing to add to what Mrs Jöns and others have said .
I call on both Commissioners to summon up all their courage to deal with this topic , and to combat the faint-heartedness of the Council .
The Council has often - and I have experienced this all too often - weakly said : that is subsidiarity , a national matter .
Information and communication are the main tasks for the future , including with regard to this terrible disease , and I would therefore ask both Commissioners to exert all their political influence to convince the Council and to establish guidelines .
Just think about it for a minute : we even have guidelines for drawing up guidelines , but we do not have any guidelines on how we should combat breast cancer , the most important disease on this continent , in the future .
I think the idea of developing a job description for highly qualified nurses is an excellent and interesting one , and I pledge you my full support .
( Applause )
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are once again gathered in plenary to debate an issue which affects both public health and the lives of women and families in our constituencies : breast cancer .
Already in 2003 , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality had asked a question on this subject to the European Commission .
Commissioner , at the time it was your predecessor , Mrs Diamantopoulou , who took the first steps to respond to Parliament 's requests .
Today , we ask you to recognise the progress that has been made .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is concerned with reducing mortality rates among women affected by breast cancer , improving their quality of life , and providing women and their associations , but also their close families , with information on the risks and treatment of breast cancer .
In this debate , we should also take account of the role of men .
Husbands , fathers and their children are also affected by these specifically women 's diseases .
I also remember the many parents whose daughters are affected by the disease and who provide them with support .
Within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , we are working on the various aspects of the disease in order that one day we might see a Europe free from breast cancer .
I am encouraged by the great interest that the committee has shown in this issue . I would like to thank my colleagues for their excellent collaboration , which really deserves to be acknowledged .
Breast cancer is a public health issue that is important for all women in the European Union .
Every two minutes , someone is diagnosed with breast cancer .
Every six minutes , a woman dies from it .
This disease makes no distinction on grounds of race , religion or culture .
We must have the honesty to recognise all the causes of breast cancer , without exception .
It would be useful to compare the levels of increase across the Member States , in order to come to a conclusive strategy .
All women ought to have easy access to the means of diagnosis and to quality treatment in the early stages , independently of their origin , social status or level of education .
In this way , thousands of lives could be saved .
This would be an example of truly positive discrimination .
It is now crucial to make every woman aware of the risk of the disease , and to increase the resources allocated to breast cancer prevention and screening in the Member States .
Commissioners , like me , you know from experience that the medical equipment is too expensive for regional hospitals in the new Member States .
The medical industry is not prepared to make an effort in terms of finances ; it is too concerned with making profits .
All the same , I ask you to examine seriously the possibility of funding breast cancer prevention through the Structural Funds .
The efforts of politicians , doctors and scientists in developing the network of cooperation in all the Member States could enable us to ensure equal access to the means of screening and health care .
Only through this close collaboration can the fight against breast cancer transcend ideological divides and personal rivalries .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I should like to thank Parliament for having organised this debate on breast cancer .
The very detail of the questions shows the wide range of issues involved .
I will not try to address every question separately ; that would be an impossible task , given my limited speaking time .
However , I would be very happy to provide detailed information at a later stage .
I shall therefore focus on three key areas , but first I should like to acknowledge the magnitude of the problem , already mentioned by many speakers .
Every year , 270 000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer in the European Union .
That affects their lives and the lives of their families and it has a very significant medical , social and economic cost .
The first issue I should like to touch upon - and it has already been addressed - is how far we have come since the European Parliament 's resolution of 5 June 2003 .
It is true that the resolution set out some ambitious targets for the Member States to reach by 2008 , notably a 25 % reduction in mortality and a reduction in differences between breast cancer survival rates in the Member States to 5 % .
I have to admit that it is too early to know exactly how much progress has been made .
Member States have committed themselves to report to the Commission on the situation by the end of this year , three years after the adoption of the Council recommendations .
The Commission will therefore produce an implementation report in 2007 .
I can assure you that the lack of information from some Member States will not delay production of the report .
Instead , the report will indicate the Member States that have not provided the information .
There are already signs that the resolution and other actions have had positive effects and started to make a difference .
We expect progress on aspects such as the exchange of best practice models to facilitate application in different parts of the EU and the guidelines for screening diagnosis , delivering some very significant reductions in breast cancer mortality .
In addition to providing the results on mortality , we hope to have the data to be able to set out a clear picture of the timeframes involved and developments as regards inequalities .
The second general area I should like to touch upon is research .
Breast cancer will feature strongly under the Seventh Framework Programme .
This will cover both the detection of the disease and , crucially , the causes - in other words , how it can be prevented .
As regards detection , research is focusing notably on improving breast cancer screening and alternatives to conventional mammography , in order to improve early detection .
Examples already supported under the Sixth Framework Programme include mammography with molecular imaging or the application of positron emission tomography - PET - specifically designed for breast cancer examination .
Early detection is , of course , crucial in ensuring successful treatment , but that is still treating the disease rather than the causes .
I am therefore very pleased that work on the causes of cancer is a priority in the Research Framework Programme .
That work will cover the three key areas of genetics , environment and lifestyle .
Thirdly , the issue of campaigns : these can play a very important role in public health issues , in raising awareness of key issues by private individuals , public authorities and decision-makers , as well as , of course , health professionals .
Not only does it enable individuals to help and protect themselves , it also puts pressure on the decision-makers to give priority to this problem , which they sometimes fail to do .
The European Parliament 's 2003 resolution has been an effective part of an ongoing campaign to increase awareness .
Awareness-raising among women on the importance of screening has been a key part of European action against cancer .
Such campaigns can be supported under our public health programme .
In conclusion , we all agree that breast cancer has to be tackled and best practice examples show that significant results can be achieved .
However , we have to understand that it is a continuous process .
We must never become complacent , even if we are encouraged by the initial success of some of those efforts and initiatives .
A coherent and collaborative approach is needed , covering in particular the three aspects I highlighted earlier .
Of course , we have to admit that most of these actions are principally for the Member States , but the European Union can and will provide support - as in the case of research - where possible .
As an indication , I can refer to future support for breast cancer screening guidelines , which will continue under the current and future health programmes , the European Council network and the European Union network for information on cancer in Europe .
A new project that has now been shortlisted answers some of the questions relating to the extension of the guidelines .
The European Union guidelines will be updated to cover not only the setting of standards for breast cancer nurses but also the specification for specialist breast units .
They will set the standards , principles and benchmarks to which Member States will have to adjust their breast cancer screening , training and treatment .
These initiatives will cover the need for information and consultation in the new Member States as well and will help to integrate the relevant experts within existing networks .
We must never forget that each year more than a quarter of a million women depend on such action .
They and their families depend on the priority we and the Member States will give to such an important and serious problem .
We must not let them down .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , all of those present in this Chamber are aware that breast cancer is a terrible ordeal for the sufferers .
We are all aware of what an ordeal it is for their families and for those closest to them .
This is a disease that can turn a person 's life upside-down .
The treatment is arduous and lengthy , and often stops sufferers from working or leading a normal life .
My fellow Commissioner Mr Kyprianou spoke just now on issues of health and prevention in relation to breast cancer .
In my short speech , I should like to focus on reintegrating breast cancer patients into working life .
Breast cancer severely disrupts people 's lives .
Life changes direction and women are often ill-prepared for such a change , although in reality they often cope with the situation better than their relatives , friends , colleagues and employers .
The latter often do not know how to behave towards women with breast cancer .
There is no universal solution .
Each individual situation needs to be treated on its own merits .
There is little information or guidance available on how to deal with breast cancer sufferers from a legal , work , health or psychological point of view .
The Community should improve the mechanisms for helping breast cancer patients .
Experience has shown that it is better for women with breast cancer to carry on going to work , assuming , of course , that their physical and mental condition allows them to .
In order to make life better for patients while they are unwell , special working hours and adapted holiday arrangements , for example in tandem with working from home , need to be introduced .
This would also help them to reintegrate more easily and more quickly into the working environment .
Support for employers and colleagues could play a crucial role during treatment .
Psychological help should also be permanently available , and to this end , an educational awareness-raising campaign should be launched , aimed at employers and the workplace in general .
As I said before , it is important to create the conditions whereby women with breast cancer can quickly and successfully be reintegrated into the labour market .
The specially adapted working conditions that may be needed during treatment should perhaps be extended until some time after treatment , in order to help the patient to reintegrate .
Breast cancer patients must not be allowed to suffer discrimination in the work place .
The European Directive of November 2000 provides a general framework for equal treatment in employment and prohibits discrimination on the grounds of disability .
The question remains whether long-term illness falls under the heading of disability .
In the United Kingdom , for example , following lengthy discussions on this issue , the law prohibiting discrimination against the disabled has been updated and now provides for protection against discrimination against cancer sufferers .
The European Court of Justice will need to decide whether this interpretation applies to the directive on prohibiting discrimination .
EU legislation , specifically Directive 89 / 391 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the health and safety of workers , also states that employers must adapt the nature of work to the worker 's state of health , which implicitly includes those with chronic and long-term illnesses .
I welcome the proposal to draw up a charter to protect those with chronic and long-term illnesses in the workplace .
I feel , however , that the social partners should develop such a charter in conjunction with the relevant bodies at national level .
Apart from legislative instruments , the Commission supports cooperation between the Member States via the open method of coordination in the area of social protection .
Investment in health is one of the goals of the new structural funds for 2007-2013 , in particular in the convergence regions .
The objective is to increase the number of healthy working years and to enable as many people as possible to play an active role in society .
This objective relates both to health infrastructure and to the training of health workers , an issue that has been mentioned in this Chamber .
The measures in this area may include health support , disease prevention , knowledge sharing and the training of highly qualified workers .
Honourable Members , the European social model is based on solidarity with the most vulnerable members of society , towards whom we have a moral responsibility .
Breast cancer sufferers are physically and psychologically vulnerable and fragile , as well as actually having to fight against this disease .
They need support , they need decent healthcare , they need protection against discrimination , they need to be reintegrated into working life under the best possible conditions .
Honourable Members , I think that you can rely on us in this matter .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , we have heard a list of all the things we need , and what the House is saying is that we need action to achieve those things .
This resolution offers one of those rare occasions where we have total unity round this Chamber : unity across committees , unity across political groups .
It is unity on what is a rare disease .
It is one of the rare diseases that is not the result of poverty ; it is the result of increasing prosperity .
That is why it is very much a European disease growing in prevalence .
The most common cancer among women is breast cancer .
We know the figures : 275 000 a year ; 88 000 dying a year .
That is why we demand access to better services , better research .
But medical science is making hope possible : early diagnosis , new drugs , specialist nurses , new therapies and knowledge leading to prevention .
All those things mean that we do not have to accept this terrible toll among women .
But it is also an issue for men .
One thousand men in the European Union die each year from breast cancer .
Fill this Chamber with men - every seat filled , and the galleries and the interpreters ' booths , and the platform - and wipe it out .
That is the number of men we are losing each year to breast cancer .
Men need specialist services too .
They also have problems because although it is easier to spot in men , it is left too late and so the tumours are too large .
So they need screening .
Too many men cannot cope .
They cannot cope , not just with the disease , but with going home to their families and telling them they have got breast cancer .
They cannot cope with going down to the pub to tell their mates they have got breast cancer .
Some - and ' some ' is too many - kill themselves rather than face the consequences of their diagnosis .
That is our fault .
We do not enable them to cope ; we must .
For men and women , our message is that we have a united resolution and we demand united action from the Commission .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , my thanks go to Mrs Jöns for bringing this issue back before the House .
This disease is not only a women 's issue , as Mr Bowis and Mrs Záborská have said .
Hundreds of thousands of men , hundreds of thousands of families , are affected by the disease each year .
My mother-in-law died of breast cancer and my wife 's eldest sister was diagnosed with breast cancer ten years ago , but thanks to early and successful treatment she is alive and well today .
I am sure you can imagine the shadow this disease casts over me and my family .
But , as we have heard , it is a particular ordeal for the 275 000 women who contract the disease each year and , tragically , the 88 000 women who die of the disease each year in the European Union , and their families .
These are figures which can and must be radically reduced .
We need further research into prevention .
But it is particularly shocking to me that mortality rates vary by as much as 50 % across the Member States and that mastectomy rates vary by up to 60 % .
That too is unacceptable .
There is clearly a pressing need for best practice to be spread evenly across the Union into every region and that best practice needs to be built around the European guidelines for quality assurance in breast cancer screening and diagnosis .
Another pressing issue is the fact that an increasing number of younger women are developing breast cancer - 47 % under 55 years of age .
Add to that the fact that up to 20 % , a fifth of former breast cancer patients , do not return to work and it becomes clear that something needs to be done if we are to meet the Lisbon target for women 's participation in the labour market .
I therefore fully commend the resolution 's call - and I am pleased to hear Commissioner Špidla respond positively to it today - to draw up a charter for the protection of the rights of breast cancer patients and currently sick people in the workplace to facilitate their reintegration into the world of work .
Their working hours need to be tailored to their treatment pattern and their reabsorption into the workplace needs to be built around their rehabilitation .
Five women per day are diagnosed with breast cancer in my own region .
I hope that , with proper research into prevention , that figure will be reduced .
I also hope that our work can come to mean that those diagnoses will not represent a death sentence ; rather a diagnosis needs to become a trigger for early , sensitive , humane intervention , successful treatment and re-entry into the world of work and a full and fulfilling life .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I should like to add my thanks to Mrs Jöns for this splendid initiative .
She has done a tremendous amount of work on it .
The lifetime risk of developing breast cancer in European women , as we have heard , is one in ten , and it is the biggest killer of women between the ages of 35 to 59 , and the second biggest overall .
Mr Bowis was absolutely right : we must not forget that although it mainly affects women , one thousand men die of breast cancer each year .
Still not enough is being done by Member States .
With advanced screening techniques , it is possible for breast cancer to be identified at an early stage .
The European Commission published a new set of guidelines on breast cancer screening and diagnosis in April .
They estimated that 32 000 breast cancer deaths across Europe could be prevented .
But many Member States do not have technical screening facilities or trained nurses in place .
I urge every Member State to sign up to the European guidelines but , more importantly , to implement those guidelines .
We need to do even more in terms of education .
Lifestyle , as well as genetics , can apparently affect the likelihood of getting breast cancer .
We also need to make sure that those diagnosed with breast cancer are not discriminated against in the workplace , as we have already heard .
They should be allowed to continue to work during treatment , if that is what they wish to do ; but , if not , to be able to resume their careers afterwards .
That should be covered by the 2000 Employment Directive on anti-discrimination in the workplace - we have done that in the United Kingdom .
But many Member States do not class breast cancer as a disability , which is why we need a definition of disability .
With so many people developing breast cancer , we must get that right .
We must also have an exchange of best practice , particularly as mortality rates vary by 50 % between Member States .
It is up to us all to keep this high on the political agenda .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we have before us an excellent motion for resolution , which talks a great deal about better prevention and treatment for breast cancer .
As several of you have already pointed out , it submits proposals for , for example , better screening .
Quite right too , and we should build on that .
However , I would like to stress once again that it is also a matter of prevention .
It is an old wives ' tale that genetic factors and lifestyle are the only causes of this illness .
New studies have confirmed that harmful environmental factors in the form of toxic chemicals or increased radiation are responsible for half of all cases of breast cancer .
That is something to which we must pay attention .
Alongside comprehensive research into the causes , health protection must be at the forefront of European chemicals legislation .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , we initiated a move towards greater health and environmental protection in Europe .
However , today 's vote on breast cancer also provides clear support for a strong REACH , because it is clear that the changes in women 's hormonal systems make them particularly susceptible to the harmful effects of chemicals .
Studies from the USA show that female farmers who use certain pesticides on their fields are more prone to breast cancer .
Women who live within a mile of a special waste site for herbicides and pesticides are also at greater risk , and we know that many of the softening agents previously used in cosmetics contribute to the growth of breast cancer cells .
Prevention should have an even higher priority in our fight against breast cancer .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , I have listened to all the previous speakers and I too wish to take my turn in thanking the authors of the resolution and those who have worked so intensively to combat breast cancer .
I shall comment , Commissioner , on the inequalities and on treatment .
As you know , the mortality rate is higher in the ten new Member States and screening programmes are very ' kindergarten ' , to coin a phrase .
I include my own country in this which , as you may know , has a pilot rather than a national programme .
It is a pity , Commissioner , to leave the country where someone will fall ill with breast cancer and the country and hospital in which they will be treated to luck .
This is due to the fact that the guidelines on the development , firstly , of quality mammograms and , secondly , of countries with specialist treatment centres - breast clinics - with specialist nurses , are not easy to consolidate .
I shall not , of course , omit to refer here to what John Bowis also said earlier : that men also get breast cancer and that we should not always refer solely and exclusively to women .
As we are debating breast cancer today through this fine initiative , I should like to point out that other forms of cancer , Commissioner , are not poor relations .
There are other forms of cancer where , with precisely the same guidelines , we can reduce the repercussions and the mortality rate .
What we need is a strategy for cancer as a whole , which coordinates all 25 Member States , and to stop sucking on the sweetie of subsidiarity , with the result that no money is granted from the Structural Funds in order to develop these programmes .
I beg you to please examine these issues .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , I wholeheartedly support this question to the Commission from each of the three committees on what I regard as a most important topic .
I also want to welcome the positive response from the Commissioners .
I co-signed this resolution on breast cancer as I believe the European Union can do much to assist Member States in this area through extensive research , benchmarking and sharing of best-practice principles , as well as offering Member States substantial professional , material and technical assistance through European programmes .
The main concern that legislators and health teams face today with regard to breast cancer is that every woman , irrespective of her place of residence , social status , occupation and education , should have access to high-quality screening for treatment and aftercare in the event of cancer .
We need to improve the service of information to women , both younger and older , about the risks of and availability of treatment for breast cancer in order to ultimately reduce the mortality rate of women and to improve their quality of life and assist them in returning to work if they so desire .
There is a need for more extensive research on the causes of breast cancer , in particular on the effects of hazardous chemicals and the environmental pollution , nutrition , lifestyle and genetic factors .
I call on the Commission , through the Seventh Framework Programme , to provide financial support for the further development of blood-based tests , to provide funding for comprehensive investigation into the causes of breast cancer , to urge Member States to set up information and counselling centres , whilst simultaneously reporting back to the European Parliament on the results of more recent research conducted in this very important area .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the alarming statistics on women suffering and dying from breast cancer certainly call for a resolution calling on the Commission and the Member Sates to combat this epidemic and conduct breast screening .
Importantly , they also point to the need to take preventive action , which should involve the elimination of risk factors .
It would therefore be appropriate to draw logical conclusions from existing research .
These results indicate that breast cancer is not simply due to toxic damage , but that its main cause is the use of hormonal contraceptives from an early age , along with hormone replacement therapy .
In addition , breast cancer can be triggered by complications following abortion .
Furthermore , breast cancer often occurs amongst childless women , or amongst women who become pregnant relatively late in life and who go through the menopause relatively late .
The more children a woman bears , the smaller the chance she has of developing breast cancer , ovarian cancer or cancer of the uterus .
It follows that the increased incidence of cancer can also be linked to the feminist concept of womanhood , which aims to deprive women of motherhood , exploit them as a potential part of the workforce and practically force them to control their so-called reproductive life , which virtually amounts to perceiving them as animals .
According to psycho-oncologists , the increased incidence of tumours is not unrelated to the spread of mental disorders , notably depression .
These result in reduced immunity to disease and allow the development of tumours .
Preventive measures should therefore involve spreading a culture of life as an alternative to the widespread notion that everything around us is about to collapse .
( SK ) I would like to inform you of the outcome of discussions held on 20 October 2006 at one of the largest and oldest women 's organisations in Slovakia , the Union of Slovak Women .
At the meeting the women were discussing the intolerable breast cancer situation in Slovakia and other European countries .
Nowadays , cancer is curable if diagnosed early enough .
Thus , given that the disease is preventable , women are dying partly because of our ignorance .
Therefore , I am here to inform you of the ' Don 't Let Us Die ' initiative conceived on 20 October .
I call on politicians , physicians , patients and the general public to prevent their mothers , wives , partners and daughters from dying of a disease that need not be fatal .
The European Parliament enacts regulations on nature protection , European motorways are being built , but investment in health is overlooked .
The European Union is also striving to reduce life-style differences between Member States .
Indeed , we are doing well in many areas .
However , statistics on cancer curability indicate that there are major differences between Member States , and these include breast cancer survival rates .
Slovak women have a 30 % lower chance of surviving this kind of cancer than many women from Western Europe .
It is deplorable that we cannot effectively guarantee the screening needed to boost the survival rate .
It is necessary to give women the opportunity to see their doctors for screening in the evening or at weekends , and at the same time to reward doctors and medical professionals properly for this additional work .
I believe that the majority of women are aware of this problem and behave responsibly .
They only need the appropriate access to a doctor .
Prevention , however , is not free ; it requires considerable funding .
Therefore , everyone should be exerting more pressure to ensure that spending on prevention is not crowded out by other priorities .
We should approve a budget that provides for investing in prevention , which means not only fitting out hospitals and purchasing mammographs or sonographs , but above all investing in human resources so that a sufficient number of health professionals are available to operate this equipment .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to draw attention to something that has already been said .
Firstly , I believe that the European Commission 's policy is a good one , trying to harmonise aspects in a field in which it does not have any real competences , but where it can exercise leadership , and in this regard we insist that it extend its policies and carry on emphasising self-examination and pointing out the differences amongst the various countries . I am not saying that it should condemn them , but I do say that it should highlight any shortcomings .
Above all , I also believe that its website should be expanded and self-examination should be introduced , for example , and a series of other possible actions taken , as is already happening in some commercial organisations .
Secondly , I would like to draw attention to the family tragedy that normally accompanies cases of breast cancer .
I believe that families are very frequently broken up and that many women do not dare to report their case precisely because the cancer interrupts their work rhythm , disrupts their normal lives and would prevent them from looking after their families in the event of their having to undergo surgery .
I therefore believe that the European Union must broaden its action and deal also with this area of family assistance and of awareness-raising .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been stated , breast cancer is a major health problem , and increasingly so .
It is second only to lung cancer as the most prevalent type of cancer , but the causes of lung cancer are partly known .
Smoking and asbestos are significant among them and air pollution is a risk factor .
Something can be done in order to prevent lung cancer ; as people can , for example , stop smoking .
Little is known , in fact , about breast cancer , though , other than the statistics .
The incidence of breast cancer in the Netherlands is higher than anywhere else .
There are also statistical connections , and I would thank the Commissioner for the extensive and detailed response to my written question .
The Commissioner claims that there is a connection between obesity and breast cancer ; there is also one with having children late in life .
There is a socio-economic factor : low-income groups do not get screened as often and are therefore more likely to die of the disease .
Finally , according to the Commission , perhaps the most important factor determining the risk of breast cancer is hormones , particularly oestrogens .
These can be oestrogens from various sources , including chemical pollution , or exposure to environmental factors , but also the use of medicines or contraceptives .
Commissioner , this is important information .
In all contacts I have with women 's groups , there are two factors that keep cropping up .
Many breast cancer patients suspect that their illness is related to the environment , medicines or the use of the pill .
Could you therefore give the necessary incentives so that research in this area is given the necessary priority ?
More clarity is needed about the effects of hormone-regulating substances in the environment and the use of hormones such as medicines and contraceptives .
I am particularly indebted to Mrs Jöns for her unstinting concern for , and commitment to , women with breast cancer .
Her work is a true inspiration to many women .
I should also like to express my appreciation for Europa Donna , which I should like to thank for the excellent work they are doing in making it possible for European countries to learn from each other , which is exactly what we should be doing .
( FI ) Madam President , the number of cancer cases will grow dramatically in the years to come as the European population ages .
Many are worried about the adequacy of resources for treatment and growing costs .
This has to do with economic growth , and also the increase in patients ' own costs .
Guaranteeing our citizens equal opportunities to receive treatment in healthcare and nursing is an important policy issue both within the Member States and at EU level .
We must ensure that age does not mean that people are less entitled to services and good care .
Next I would like to say a few words about the integration of patients into the world of work .
I understand that it is important for growth to get people back to work .
This is often important for patients as well .
We patients are quite normal people on the whole .
Nevertheless , we also have to remember to be humane when integrating people back into work .
From the point of view of humanity , it is important that everyone has sufficient time to recover from their illness .
We have to remember that recovery time differs from one person to another .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur very much for some excellent work .
I want to protest against Commissioner Špidla 's statement that breast cancer stops people from living a normal life .
It does not actually need to be that way .
I myself am an example of someone with breast cancer which , if discovered in time , operated on and treated properly , does not in any way prevent someone from leading a normal life and working .
Finland is one of the European countries in which breast cancer is becoming common fastest , but thanks to screening and treatment , the mortality rate has not gone up for decades .
Improved screening and treatment alone are not enough , however : we also need to examine the causes of cancer .
My colleagues , Mr Breyer and Mrs Corbey , mentioned that new research suggests that as many as half of new cases of breast cancer may be explained by environmental factors , one of which is industrial chemicals , which we are exposed to all the time .
A cocktail of chemicals that damage hormones is particularly dangerous , especially for the foetus and during puberty .
We need to do something about this .
( PT ) Madam President , as we know , breast cancer is not only the most common cancer in women , it is also the biggest killer of women between the ages of 35 and 59 .
Accordingly , the policy of information on breast screening must be improved and stepped up , programmes to detect cancer at an early stage must be put in place and support for research into preventing breast cancer must be strengthened .
Hence the importance of the issues that we put to the Commission . We are also hopeful of a positive response from the Member States so as to ensure that all women , regardless of their social and economic status , have access to the prevention , screening , early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer , and can be reintegrated into the labour market without suffering discrimination .
( FR ) Madam President , in France , in practical terms , breast cancer means first of all , at the screening stage , a mammogram , followed by anatomical pathology confirming the presence of cancer .
This assessment should be extended to include the liver , the brain and the bones , which are the three areas targeted by metastases .
At best , in France , a bone scintigram will be taken ; MRI and above all PET scans , used for early metabolic diagnosis , are not performed .
During treatment , if patients receive radiotherapy , it will be carried out by a low-ranking technician .
As a result , accidental irradiation sometimes occurs around the heart and the thyroid .
Finally , after treatment , if , when a patient suffering back pain is examined , a scintigram is taken showing a suspicious shadow on the bone , screening by PET scan will still not be performed .
Why ?
Because in France , for 35 million women , there are only two PET scanners .
Why ?
Because the budgetary austerity pact forbids spending on hospital equipment .
As a result , women are dying in Europe due to breast cancer , but also due to the ideological cancer of the European Commission known as budgetary Malthusianism and rampant free-marketism .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , breast cancer kills too many women in the European Union , many of them far too young .
These deaths are unacceptable given that we know that early detection can cure this cancer .
We are all aware of the mental and physical trauma suffered by women diagnosed with this illness : they have to reorganise their family and working life and , quite simply , deal with it .
However , there is absolutely no harmonisation at European level with regard to the way in which we combat the scourge of breast cancer .
Only ten Member States run screening programmes , with varying degrees of success .
European women are therefore faced with a blatantly unfair situation , simply because of which country , or even which town , they live in .
Commissioner , our aim is to eradicate this disease , in the knowledge that , quite apart from the traumatic experience for the patient , it has a cost for our society .
The solution to this blight is early , compulsory screening , organised by the governments of the Member States .
In order to be effective , this screening must be free , and above all must be well run , which requires the availability of up-to-date equipment throughout the European Union .
Digital mammography , which in the past sometimes missed microcalcifications - the most common signs of breast cancer - has made considerable progress , so , Commissioner , when are we going to have digital mammograms throughout the European Union ?
Effective screening also requires all the equipment to be subject to calibration and therefore to quality controls , because there is nothing worse than giving women a false sense of security through a radiological examination that could be of poor quality .
For this screening to be effective , equipment on its own is not enough : the doctors who perform these diagnostic tests must undertake continuing training , as well as regular refresher courses and compulsory testing to evaluate their skills .
Finally , women need information regarding the prevention of breast cancer : they need advice on healthy living and food safety , and must not be afraid of screening .
Research must enable us to make progress in finding the causes of breast cancer .
I am convinced that , if we combine our efforts , we will once again be able to show what the European Union can do to improve the health of European women .
That is certainly a subject that should have unanimous support in the European Union : zero deaths from breast cancer in Europe !
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioners , I should like to start by thanking my fellow Members for their hard work and for the clarity of their comments .
The problem we are discussing today is a serious one : one only needs to look at the alarming statistics on the occurrence of breast cancer in Europe and to see the number of deaths caused by this disease to be convinced of that .
This problem is made all the more serious by the fact that there are major inequalities between countries with regard to both the prevention and the treatment of cancer , and these inequalities have become even more pronounced since the last enlargement .
Although the Treaties state that , in conjunction with the Member States , the European Union shall work to protect and promote the health of European citizens , we nevertheless need to give greater emphasis to the phrase ' in conjunction ' , because the EU 's guidelines and recommendations have not been taken sufficiently into account .
We now need to respond to this state of affairs , and not continue to tolerate it .
The European Union must ensure that its citizens have equal access to the detection and management of the disease , and to the best available treatments .
We can do this by legislative and budgetary means , as well as through the Structural Funds and research programmes .
We must channel all the resources necessary to research all the causes of this disease , be they environmental , social or genetic , and to undertake research into innovative treatments .
The Commission needs to present us with some proposals in this regard , and I really do think that the European Union should make the fight against breast cancer , and against cancer in general , a political priority , because together we will always be stronger .
This is the added value of the European Union that the people of Europe expect .
Studies , diagnostics , evaluations and resolutions are all necessary , but action is absolutely vital .
The Commission and the Council should therefore heed our warning cry and lose no more time .
Madam President , today we are debating an excellent resolution which has implications for all women and indeed for all families in the EU .
As already stated , every six minutes a woman in the EU dies from cancer .
That is a truly shocking statistic and one which should spur us on to immediate action .
Breast screening , which according to the WHO can reduce deaths from breast cancer by up to 35 % , is offered on a nationwide basis in only 11 Member States .
Shame on all of us !
And shame on my own country , Ireland , where we have not yet rolled out breast-check nationwide .
Deaths from breast cancer in the Republic of Ireland are significantly higher than in the north of Ireland , where they have already established breast screening .
But we , like many other European countries , do not yet have nationwide cover .
Finally , two crucial points : every country should have nationwide breast cancer care supported by interdisciplinary breast units at appropriate locations ; and women over 69 or , in Ireland 's case , 65 , must not be excluded from breast screening .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the competent parliamentary committees for their initiative in instigating this joint debate on breast cancer , given that it is a given and constantly increasing risk to women 's and men 's health , at younger and younger ages .
The repercussions which it has on the organisation of personal , family , social and productive life have already been pointed out .
A call is therefore being made today for the Community strategy to respond to both present circumstances and emerging trends and challenges for the health of our citizens and to use all possible means to achieve the objectives of a perceptible reduction which it has set .
Breast cancer is an illness in which proper screening plays a fundamental role , as we know from the statistics at our disposal and as we have heard today during the debate .
However , this means that we need a modern infrastructure in terms of materials and equipment and specialised staff .
The ' Europe against Cancer ' programme , in conjunction with all the other facilities offered by the Structural Funds , research programmes and so forth , must respond to these challenges .
Proper medical and psychological monitoring of patients is also very important , as we have already heard .
The Member States , therefore , together with the regional and local authorities , are obliged to safeguard these conditions of prevention , monitoring and therapy for all citizens in every corner of their region .
This is particularly important for the new Member States , especially as we are about to welcome another two new members to ' our family ' .
I should like to emphasise here the role which civil society plays in informing and supporting patients .
Many interesting initiatives have been developed in various countries and have even been networked at European level .
We need to support their work , especially in the new Member States , and to provide the opportunity for exchanges of best practices and added value for the benefit of the health of our citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to extend my warmest congratulations and thanks to Mrs Jöns , who is not only the main initiator of today 's motion for resolution and of the question , but also works tirelessly to raise awareness of the issue of breast cancer .
That of course means that there will be huge support for this motion for resolution tomorrow .
Breast cancer is the number one cause of death amongst women aged between 35 and 59 , amongst both mothers and women without children .
Every year , 88 000 women and 1 000 men in the European Union die of breast cancer .
Breast screening can considerably reduce mortality from breast cancer amongst women aged between 50 and 69 .
There have been EU guidelines on this subject since 1992 , but so far they have been implemented in only 11 Member States , and there are huge differences in women 's mortality rates .
That is why we are eagerly awaiting the progress report that Commissioner Kyprianou announced for 2007 .
However , today the European Parliament is not just discussing the early detection of breast cancer and the best way to treat it , but also prevention .
The causes of breast cancer need to be investigated in more detail , in particular the role of toxic chemicals , environmental pollution , diet , lifestyle and genetic factors , and also the question of how these factors interact .
In a few weeks , when Parliament votes on the new European chemicals policy , we will have an opportunity to send a clear signal that we take the prevention of cancer seriously .
. - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , today we have been hearing the overwhelming figures that bear witness to the effect that breast cancer has on the lives of both men and women .
It is a matter of pure chance whether treatment is started quickly and efficiently and therefore how high the woman 's chances of survival are .
As the coordinator of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I have been working on this topic for many years , and we have gained a great deal of experience .
We cannot leave it at that , though .
We have had the EU guidelines for quality mammography for over ten years now .
In Belgium , where I have my second home , I am invited for routine screening , while in my homeland of Germany nothing is happening .
The lives of mothers , daughters and wives could be saved , and the trauma reduced .
However , we are still only progressing at a snail 's pace .
The Committee for Women 's Rights and Gender Equality presented an excellent report in 2003 , but very little has happened since .
I think there is a lack of political will in this matter : I can tell that the will is there at European level , but in the Member States much still remains to be done .
The Seventh Research Framework Programme now once again gives us the opportunity to exert pressure so that more money goes into research .
In the case of other women 's diseases , such as migraines , too , there has been little political pressure applied to move forward and take interdisciplinary action .
As over 20 years of experience in the United States have shown , interdisciplinary breast centres can provide very efficient assistance .
We now also have such centres in Europe , but here , too , I do not see any sign of the political will to really implement that .
Let us therefore work together , here in the European Parliament , to fight against the trauma of breast cancer , and do so for everyone , not just those who can afford it .
( PT ) In spite of the progress that has been made in diagnosis and treatment , breast cancer is still the main cause of death among women of between 35 and 55 .
It is estimated that in Europe alone breast cancer kills more than 130 000 women per year .
Every two and a half minutes a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer .
All women must have access to information , prevention and appropriate treatment .
Screening programmes , using mammography , should be mandatory in all Member States .
More information campaigns on how to lead a healthy lifestyle are needed .
The prevention and treatment of breast cancer should also be among the priorities of the Seventh Research Framework Programme , especially at a time when studies show that , as well as genetic factors , environmental and lifestyle factors can also play a part in the development of breast cancer .

( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , breast cancer is the most frequent cause of death of women aged between 35 and 50 , and the number of women who survive the disease varies greatly from country to country .
We must call on the Member States to set up centres to provide information and advice on hereditary breast cancer , and we must call on the Commission to present a progress report on the matter every other year .
It is important for priority to be given to breast cancer research .
The EU 's Seventh Framework Research Programme should , therefore , also appropriate resources for research into breast cancer : not only into its physiological and technical aspects and into alternatives to conventional forms of treatment , but also into its social consequences and , especially , into its causes .
We need to be able to learn from each other , and this is of course precisely the kind of cooperation for which the EU also offers a constructive framework .
The EU should head European campaigns to prevent the disease and to inform women as to how they can examine their breasts . Moreover , the individual governments should introduce national breast-screening programmes in all the Member States , because early detection of breast cancer can significantly reduce mortality rates .
( PL ) Madam President , the statistics on cancer in the European Union are alarming .
Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer after lung cancer .
In the European Union , a new case is diagnosed ever two minutes and a woman dies of breast cancer every six minutes .
The best way of combating breast cancer is through regular screening and promoting effective diagnosis of the tumour .
The widespread use of mammography could reduce the number of deaths by as much as 35 % , providing , of course , that the tests are carried out regularly and are readily accessible to all .
European Union provisions laying down standards in this area have been binding for 15 years .
Nonetheless , about half of the countries in the Union are not implementing regular screening programmes .
This must change .
As the European Parliament , we expect a clear response concerning the actions the European Commission intends to undertake to help Member States reach their targets .
One of these is a 25 % reduction in the average mortality rate by 2008 .
A coordinated strategy at Union level is essential in order to combat breast cancer .
Now is the time for specific action .
Over 100 000 women a year are dying of breast cancer .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate has brought forward the themes of prevention , the quality of health intervention , the urgency of research , and the right to dignity and to work .
These themes form an integral part of the Lisbon Strategy .
Parliament 's political objective is therefore to indicate the urgency of coordinated action , something that the Commission must carry out by assuming a stronger and more visible leading role in relation to the Member States .
It is not enough to set targets for 2008 : we need to monitor them , take corrective action and understand what progress is being made .
There are no prizes for model countries in this field , nor are there penalties for those which do not make progress .
I therefore propose to the Commissioners that they introduce a kind of blacklist for nations that do not make any progress , as we have already done for airlines that do not guarantee safety .
Let us use the strength of public opinion , united with the scientific community , to support Community policies .

author . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that was a very important debate , and a very good one , for we have shown once more that this House really does stand alongside women suffering from breast cancer , and their families too .
We are , by the way , as far as I am aware , the only legislature in the European Union to mark the international month of breast cancer by debating structural improvements in the treatment and early diagnosis of breast cancer .
Today , while I would like to extend thanks to the Commission for having given us an undertaking that it will devise a certification procedure for interdisciplinary breast centres and for specialist nurses in the field , I have to tell the Commissioners that we really would be pleased if they were to put these guidelines on the web , which would not be an over-hasty thing to do in this era of modern communication , and that we have not given up the hope of their putting the existing guidelines on sale in something other than book form alone .

This debate , though , has , for the first time , put the spotlight on a completely new angle , that being the question of how to deal with women with breast cancer in the work environment and their reintegration into the labour market , and calls have been made for a campaign to make employers aware of these issues .
Commissioner Špidla has today - if I understand him rightly - promised us one , and many thanks to him for that .

This highlights how important it is that there should be a charter of rights for people with chronic illnesses at work , and I think that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs will be concerning itself with that issue .

Let me close by observing that the answer , to those who have no idea how to deal with breast cancer patients , is that they should be treated in exactly the same way as those suffering from other cancers ; they should not be stigmatised - which is , unfortunately , something that still happens - but should , quite simply , be treated entirely normally , which will probably do them the most good .
Thank you , Mrs Jöns .
Although I am meant only to be chairing this debate , I shall do what I am not supposed to do and endorse your call for the guidelines to be put on the Web .
The Commission does not need to use the book as a means of recovering its costs .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , I should like to thank Members for a very interesting and helpful debate .
I knew from the beginning that we were on the same side , but it is good to reassure each other whenever possible .
I should like to respond to a few specific points very briefly and then make one general comment , which will cover the issue raised .
We are aware of the issue of breast cancer in men , raised by Mr Bowis .
We have to deal with it as a rare disease , because it is much less common than for women .
We are focusing on it and will raise it with experts very soon to see how we can include it in future guidelines , but as a rare disease , in the same way as we deal with other rare diseases .
On research , I should like to repeat that environmental causes are part of the plan .
The new Seventh Framework Programme will provide an opportunity to open up that area of research .
Gene-environment interaction and cancer development will also cover lifestyle and other major risk factors .
We will then be able to learn more about the causes of the disease .
That is a priority , because prevention is much more important than having to treat the disease afterwards .
The question of other cancers was raised by Mr Adamou .
We are working on those and not just concentrating on one .
Each one is a specific case and needs specific guidelines and a specific approach .
We expect to have guidelines for cervical cancer by next year , for prostate cancer by 2008 and for colorectal cancer by 2009 .
We have to evaluate , we have to have research , we have to put everything together and then come up with guidelines .
We are also working on other areas such as the hepatitis B and C viruses , because we know they cause liver cancer , as well as aspects such as tobacco , obesity and other causes of cancer .
We have issued guidelines and recommendations on how Member States deal with this and the inequalities .
These do not have legal force , so we cannot enforce them on Member States .
They represent best practice .
With your help , we encourage and put pressure on Member States to comply with the guidelines .
I look forward to debating this once we have produced the report .
We shall then be able to discuss the outcome and the commitment of the Member States .
This is a worrying issue .
The numbers are terrifying .
If we have to put pressure on Member States to do their job on this , you can imagine what happens with rare diseases which do not affect so many people .
Putting it cynically and bluntly , there is not so much political pressure .
If we stop to think about it we could panic , but we must not .
Our job is to make sure that Member States fulfil their commitments and follow the recommendations they adopt and the guidelines they agree to .
We shall be working on that , in relation not just to breast cancer but to all the inequalities that unfortunately still exist in the European Union , within Member States as well as between Member States .
This is not the European Union of solidarity that we all aspire to and have all joined .
That applies to the use of structural funds .
The money is there , but unless spending on health is adopted as a priority by Member States , there is nothing we can do .
Again , it is a challenge for us to make Member States adopt the policies .
Unless Member States acknowledge that spending on health is not a cost but an investment - and we have to convince them of that - the situation will not improve .
That is where we have to work together and cooperate .
Member of the Commission . ( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen .
I should like to thank you for the debate , which has been extremely fruitful , and has clarified the issue of breast cancer from a range of perspectives .
I welcome the fact that other issues have come to the fore in the debate , including social issues , showing that the circumstances of this disease extend beyond exclusively medical factors , and touch also on the fight against discrimination in the work place and in society as a whole .
It is also clear that the direct opportunities open to the EU are limited , although we are not making the most of the opportunities that we do have , and in my opinion this is one of the biggest challenges that we face .
I should like to thank Parliament in general , because I firmly believe that if we manage to maintain the same level of determination and political will to resolve this issue , we really can resolve it , directly or indirectly .
Given that social and medical policy is always measured in units , and that those units are individual human beings , any progress , however great or small , can ultimately be converted into human lives , and I am convinced that we can achieve such progress and that the outcome of this will be clear .
A motion for a resolution to wind up the debate has been tabled under Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Programme of support for the European audiovisual sector ( MEDIA 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on Culture and Education on the Council common position for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the implementation of a programme of support for the European audiovisual sector ( MEDIA 2007 ) ( 06233 / 2 / 2006 - C6-0271 / 2006 - 2004 / 0151 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Hieronymi )
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , today finds us debating MEDIA 2007 , the third generation support programme for the European film industry .
I want to extend the warmest thanks to the members of the Committee on Culture and Education and to the advisory committees for their excellent cooperation , and particularly too to Commissioner Reding and her staff , who , together with this House , have tried to do everything they could to help the European audio-visual industry develop further and be a success .
It was exactly a year ago today , on 25 October 2005 , that we in this House adopted this draft programme by a broad majority .
We had wanted to adopt the programme in good time - and by that I mean early - so that it could be available to Europe 's film-makers with effect from 1 January 2007 , but the European Council was not , alas , far-sighted enough to stick to this timetable , and required us , in the first instance , to go through some difficult financial negotiations .
The MEDIA 2007 programme is structured in the same way as its successful predecessors , MEDIA and MEDIA PLUS , covering training , development and sales in the audiovisual sector , but not production , which is a matter for the Member States to deal with .
What makes the MEDIA programme so extraordinarily important is the fact that the audio-visual sector is , as we are all aware , one of the fastest growing economic sectors not only in Europe , but throughout the world .
If Europe wants to keep up , it has to get on the right track .
The MEDIA programme represents a response to two core problems with the European audio-visual market , the first of which is its fragmentation , which is attributable primarily to our cultural , linguistic and national diversity ; while that is a treasure , and one of the most important treasures Europe possesses , it also presents great challenges in terms of market development .
Secondly , the audio-visual market in Europe suffers from chronic under-capitalisation .
The MEDIA programme does a good job of responding to those challenges .
The MEDIA programme helped fund 90 % of all films produced for export within Europe , and every euro invested through it brings another twenty in follow-up investment , and so it was very definitely right that the Commission , and Commissioner Reding in particular , should push as they did for adequate funding for this on the part of the European Union , and proposed that this should amount to the sum of one billion euros .
It is unfortunate that the Council could not , in the course of negotiations , be prevailed upon to accept this sum , which was reduced to EUR 671 million , so we have managed to maintain the status quo without achieving any further development .
The new programme does , nevertheless , incorporate three priorities .
The first is digitisation , the second enhanced cooperation at every level , and the third improved access to financial institutions specialising in the funding of films .
All I can say to all that is that we are speaking out strongly in favour of a quick start for the programme , of its successful implementation and of what we hope will be adequate funding next time round .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know that , like me , everyone in Parliament values the MEDIA programme , a programme that has proven itself and that has supported the European audiovisual sector since it launched .
We are now in the fourth generation of this programme , and the fact that we have stuck with the basic structure , whilst innovating with regard to the precise elements linked to technological progress , shows that the programme has demonstrated its worth , that it is important , that it is unanimously recognised by those in the sector and that it is vital to the future of our audiovisual creativity and heritage .
Mr President , I am delighted at the European Parliament 's unwavering support , and in particular at the constructive and unfailing support of its rapporteur Mrs Hieronymi .
The recommendation for second reading marks a new step towards a speedy entry into force of the programme in 2007 .
Parliament has done its part , and the final decisions now need to be taken by the Council .
I hope that this will enable those working in the audiovisual sector to benefit from next year , smoothly and seamlessly , from this aid that is so vital to them for many reasons : firstly , for European cultural diversity , secondly , for the creation of European productions , and , finally , for the robustness of the content industry .
For my part , I am going to promote , as in the past , the adoption of this decision , which will be a crucial step for the future of the European audiovisual sector .
Mr President , today 's proposal for the adoption by the European Parliament of the common position on the decision to implement a programme of support for the European audiovisual sector is due , I would say , to the personal persistence and systematic work of a great many people , especially the rapporteur , Mrs Ruth Hieronymi , whom I too , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , honestly congratulate , together with the leading person working on the MEDIA series of programmes , Commissioner Reding .
In cooperation with the European Commission and the Council , we have come to the final version of the text of the MEDIA 2007-2013 programme , which gives especial added value to the development of the European audiovisual sector which , apart from its economic benefit and importance and the anticipated contribution to the development of employment in the European Union and of the competitiveness of the audiovisual industry , also has a particular social and cultural value .
The audiovisual sector today has huge potential for combating gender stereotypes and cultivating the attitudes and conduct of European communities on the basis of traditions , unchanged values and respect for the dignity and uniqueness of human beings .
Thanks to the contribution of the European Parliament to the strengthening of the pre-productive and post-productive stage of the majority of European audiovisual producers , the new MEDIA 2007 will continue to highlight their importance for the promotion of cultural dialogue and linguistic and cultural heritage .
We also hope that , within the framework of the globalisation of competitiveness and of the strategic objectives of Lisbon , a European industry will be promoted which is respected , strong and of differentiated content , in order to develop European values and make them accessible , by giving greater attention to the promotion of the lesser spoken languages ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like once again to congratulate Mrs Hieronymi , the rapporteur , who has skilfully made MEDIA 2007 into an excellent document with which to support the European film industry .
I am glad but also concerned ; glad that support for digitalisation has become a central part of the MEDIA 2007 programme , but concerned that , at the present level of funding , the European film industry will not be competitive .
Digitalisation is a challenge that the European audio-visual sector needs in order to develop its ability for innovation .
Digitalisation could become an effective means of overcoming the division of the European market .
I would like to thank the Commission , the Council and all of my colleagues who supported my positions as shadow rapporteur .
As regards the present situation , the proportion of US production on European television stations has once again reached a record level .
Hollywood also rules our cinemas .
There was a time when the cinema belonged to Fassbinder and the French new wave .
More recently it belonged to Kaurismäki and the Dogma group .
Now the intelligent European audience wants to see Asian film production .
I know that the rise of brilliant filmmakers depends largely on chance .
The present underfunding means that the next European film genius may go to work in America or go into another field of work altogether .
The media is not just an industry .
The media is a means for the creation of identity , and it is because the European Union cannot function without European identity that I would like to emphasise once again how essential it is that we support our film industry .
I would like to thank you all for the work you have done , but I must conclude by saying that what has been achieved in the area of financing is below the level it was at when we began work .
For that reason , I feel sorry for Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is already a year since , at first reading , we welcomed the excellent work by the rapporteur , whom I would like to congratulate once again on her more recent work .
Furthermore , last September , Mrs Hieronymi , myself and other MEPs discussed these topics with members of the Italian Government and operators in the sector , during a long and interesting debate on the occasion of the 57th year of the prestigious Venice film festival .
We appreciate that there has been a delay .
The European Parliament has , with a great sense of responsibility , acted extremely swiftly and today brings to the attention of the Chamber the final text of the report on the MEDIA programme , which has of course been much improved , making resources more accessible to potential beneficiaries , strengthening cooperation with other Community programmes in the areas of education , training and research , as well as creating easier access to credit for the audiovisual industry in order to remedy the chronic underinvestment in the sector .
Moreover , the use of new technologies represents an inevitable shift towards rationalising costs and consequent competitiveness .
I therefore propose that the Commission should take it upon themselves to evaluate the pilot projects carried out and to share experiences where they have been successful .
In conclusion , I would like to relaunch the proposal that I made to this House last year , in relation to the report on preserving our film heritage , to create a thematic European film archive to safeguard a careful selection of films on historical events and on events relating to the development of the Community project .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to start with warm thanks to Mrs Hieronymi for her work and to Commissioner Reding for her good cooperation .
What our media policy is in fact about is the further development of the specific aesthetic language of European films .
At the heart of our cultural self-image is the desire to fight against Hollywood 's dominance , to show our own films , characterised as they are by European diversity , and to facilitate their production and distribution .
Although we know that the audio-visual industry is also of enormous importance in terms of the Lisbon Strategy and of Europe 's economic development , this is not just about the economy ; it is also , in a profound sense , about cultural policy and about cultural identity and cultural diversity .
I agree with the previous speakers who have highlighted under-capitalisation and the need for a rapid start to be made , and for our media programme to be better funded .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I also would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , on her work and Commissioner Reding on her work in support of this programme .
I support the continuation of the MEDIA programme for the period 2007-2013 .
We must remember , as Europe integrates more closely , that it is very important that we seek to protect and promote our different cultural and linguistic diversities within the EU itself .
We must always remember that the diversity of Europe is its greatest strength .
In essence , the MEDIA programme will help to develop the audiovisual sector in Europe during the coming six years .
Amendments by the European Parliament have ensured that the importance of European cinema is being recognised under the MEDIA programme for the purpose of intercultural dialogue , linguistic and cultural diversity and non-discrimination .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this proposal has been another plank in the attempts to impose EU ideals and censorship on an unsuspecting public .
It is less about support to industries in the EU , and more about protecting them from outside competition in the real world .
I have to ask : why is this proposal necessary ?
Well , maybe because in implementing such a programme the EU can exploit yet another area where its message can be delivered to folk who will not believe or contemplate that they are being manipulated .
I quote : ' It is to be recalled that ( ... ) the programme MEDIA has now clearer references to the importance of European cinema for intercultural dialogue ' .
But it wholly ignores the bigger intercultural dialogue between the different European cultures and those of the wider world , for instance that of the Indian subcontinent .
Not only that , but each and every aspect of this report duly sets out another attempt to interfere with commercial activity .
We are told that the programme will cost EUR 671 million .
We also know that he who pays the piper calls the tune .
But where is the added value ?
Who benefits ?
It ignores what folk might want to see , given freedom of choice .
However , the EU will benefit by distorting the marketplace in the minds of citizens .
Ah yes , EU citizens , those poor folk who had citizenship forced upon them , from which there is as yet no escape !
( PL ) I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her excellent work .
As we are all aware , the audiovisual sector is a very important element of our economy .
Over a million people are employed in it .
This sector also plays a crucial social and cultural role , because almost every European household boasts a television set .
Unfortunately , and it pains me to say so , films produced in Europe represent only 26 % of the European film market , as opposed to the 71 % accounted for by American productions .
I cannot agree with the previous speaker that some kind of force is involved here .
It is indeed incumbent upon us to provide European audiences with a choice .
This must , however , be a choice involving good quality European productions , because the percentages I mentioned just now certainly do not reflect the quality of the films we are able to watch .
It is therefore to be hoped that the MEDIA 2007 programme will help to redress the balance .
Strengthening European cultural diversity and European cinema production is a noble aim , but it can only be achieved by simultaneously strengthening the competitiveness of the European audiovisual sector .
Obviously , digitalisation is one way to combat fragmentation and under-investment in the European film market , but what is really required is a better distribution system on the European market and also on the international markets .
Nowadays , technological progress in terms of digital services facilitates better dissemination of European audiovisual products .
However , the lack of private sector involvement , especially in the context of financing ventures in the audiovisual sphere , will not allow the MEDIA 2007 programme to be fully implemented .
The current offer concerning credit for audiovisual production is very inadequate , particularly regarding films created by small and medium-sized producers .
The same is true of the grants available to young filmmakers .
I trust the MEDIA 2007 programme will not go to waste .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , today is a particularly important day for the Committee on Culture and Education , with the reports by my honourable friends Mrs Hieronymi , Mr Graça Moura , Mrs Gröner , Mrs Pack and Mr Takkula on the multiannual programmes for the audiovisual sector , culture , youth , education and European nationality tabled for final approval by plenary .
The members of our committee merit congratulations .
Despite the delay in approving the programmes , which was due to difficulties in reaching agreement on the financial perspective , we believe that the resources which will be made available , even though inadequate , will allow these programmes to continue to offer their benefits .
In particular , the MEDIA programme may play an important role in improving the competitiveness of the European cinema industry , by giving financial support to the development of audiovisual works , the training of professionals in the sector and the strengthening of the distribution and circulation of European works .
We also need to highlight here the efforts made by Mrs Reding .
The development and promotion of European films is of decisive importance to the maintenance of cultural diversity and economic development and employment .
Unfortunately , the great wealth of the linguistic and cultural diversity of Europe is also the cause of an even greater structural problem on the audiovisual market .
I refer to the extensive fragmentation of the national markets , which does not allow the European cinema industry to acquire a larger share of the European and global market .
MEDIA 2007 needs to help combat the lack of cross-border circulation of European works .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate and thank Mrs Hieronymi for her excellent work and Commissioner Reding for the positions she has adopted .
I think it is very important to support the audiovisual sector and European cinema in order to ensure diversity and plurality in Europe and to work towards the main aims of the European Union .
I think that it is also very important for endangered cultures , for the languages of stateless nations , for minority languages and so on .
The reference in the report to the regional and local levels is very important , because it focuses on the need for real diversity in the European Union .
That is a great support .
Also , we have to support independent producers in order to enrich audiovisual output and make it more in tune with reality and with European culture .
( EL ) Mr President , if you watch television in any country of the European Union and do not see the news , you think that you are in the United States .
The American culture reigns ; that repulsive culture with violence , crime , rape and so on which enters our homes so easily .
We need to protect the European family from this culture , which does not suit us .
Clearly , therefore , we need to strengthen European cinema ; we need to strengthen the culture and civilisation of this continent , but I greatly fear that the means introduced in the report are powerless .
Television is ' nitro-glycerine ' in the hands of the person controlling it .
It provides the food that person wants .
I would refer to Euro News , which we fund , which a short while ago called all the Italians mafia for something to do with football .
Euro News comes along and makes its own policy , saying ' Macedonia ' , unlike the European Union , which calls this country FYROM .
The point , therefore , is that we need to give financial support and , at the same time , control where our money is going and how some of it is being spent .
This is an important matter , if we want to be successful on a vital issue , because it is opinion-forming .
Of course , the history of the Member States can also be strengthened , if you want .
I do not know the history of Poland , just as Poland does not know the history of Greece .
We are now one family . We should know where everyone comes from .
Who we are and where we want to go .
So this needs to be funded and I hope that such provision is made , but of course it needs daring and not the method with which we are approaching things today .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , I would once again like to thank the European Parliament , and in particular the Committee on Culture and Education and its chairman and rapporteur , for their valuable assistance in the interests of European creativity and cinematographic diversity .
I share the opinions and the concerns of those Members who say that , unfortunately , the funding is not adequate for our ambitions .
We have not received the funding we asked for : it is regrettable but true .
We must therefore act to ensure that the new programme , with less funding , is an opportunity to wipe the slate clean and to concentrate on those actions that have real European added value , while calling on the national governments to take responsibility for the other actions .
As the rapporteur has already explained very well , we will then stick with the actions that have proven themselves over the years .
Having said that , we will also add , for example , support for video on demand , which is becoming a priority .
We will also support digitisation , which is a particular opportunity for the circulation of European productions , and we will increase support for distribution in order to create the necessary synergies for the era of online film .
We are also going to introduce a new action to support the presence of European films on the emerging markets in other continents .
Those are the most important elements of this initiative , which enjoys the almost unanimous support of the European Parliament , the Council of Ministers and those in the sector .
Mr President , thank you for Parliament 's assistance , which will be understood , from the outside , by both viewers and creators of audiovisual productions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Culture programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on Culture and Education on the Council common position for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( 06235 / 3 / 2006 - C6-0269 / 2006 - ( Rapporteur : Mr Graça Moura ) .

rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the process that will culminate in the vote on the Culture Framework Programme 2007-2013 at second reading has been complex and slow : slow essentially because of a series of setbacks regarding the financial perspective , as we all recall , and complex due to the nature of the issue and to the varied range of contributions to the debate from all members of the other committees that issued their opinions with the members of the committee directly concerned .
What ensued from all of these contributions was rich dialogue on the Culture Framework Programme 2007-2013 , which subsequently went from first reading to the current stage of proceedings . This process was marked by formal and informal interventions from both the Commission and the Council , leading to fruitful exchanges of views and consensus positions that can only be viewed as extremely positive .
As a result of all of this , most of the amendments adopted by this Chamber at first reading have been enshrined in the common position .
Of these amendments , I wish to highlight the explicit reference , in the recitals and in the body of Article 3 , to the importance of a common cultural heritage shared by Europeans , an idea that encapsulates the objectives of the programme .
We must accordingly monitor , at all times , the implementation of the specific objectives laid down by the programme relating to this enormously extensive heritage , which has for centuries been ingrained in all fields of human activity . Given that these fields relate to our civilisation and culture , they also reflect our identity .
It has also been possible to agree on satisfactory arrangements for the duration of the actions , scheduled to take between one and five years ; for the intervention of cultural operators , the number of which per country will vary according to the nature of the action ; and for the funds from the budget granted to each of the sectors concerned , in particular the granting of additional resources for cooperation measures , that is to say , for smaller projects , as opposed to larger-scale or multiannual cooperation projects .
This will make it possible to consider actions by small-scale operators , who tend to be closest to the citizens , without neglecting the larger-scale , more visible actions that involve more countries over a longer period of time .
In addition to all of this , I would like to highlight the provision for special actions aimed at raising awareness among Europe 's citizens of cultural diversity in the Member States .
Some of these actions are already provided for , such as the European capitals of culture , and support for European bodies operating in the field of culture , which , very importantly , function as ambassadors for European culture , and many of which have received crucial backing from Parliament in the past .
If the rules change on account of the financial regulations in force and these bodies thus find themselves having to apply for the aid they need under the Culture Programme 2007-2013 , it is vital that they are not overlooked and that they remain able to pursue their actions .
The Commission and the Council expect that the multidisciplinary nature of the programme will make it highly flexible and able to support many innovative proposals .
In spite of some reservations that I expressed during the debate at first reading , I sincerely hope that they are right .
Against this backdrop of the institutions working together and heading in the same direction , there is just one negative point , which is easy to spot .
I refer to what can only be described as the very meagre resources granted to the Culture Programme 2007-2013 .
At first reading , a number of us who contributed to the debate - in other words , not only me , the rapporteur - drew attention to this point .
This is a third generation programme aimed at going further and being more effective than previous ones . It is a programme that encompasses a broader range of actions and boasts a larger number of interested Member States .
It also involves higher management and monitoring costs , and yet the budgetary appropriation falls well short of what it needs to achieve these objectives and well short of what all those responsible - the members of the Commission , the ministers of culture , the cultural agents and operators , and the politicians - feel is absolutely vital .
Even so , I feel that we should express the wish that the Culture Programme 2007-2013 is a great success and that it makes an eloquent contribution to the development of the Europe to which we are all committed .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I am pleased to be here at the end of the second round of negotiations .
I sense a very positive feeling about proceeding with the final vote and decision .
We are now looking at the range of programmes for which I am responsible , including youth , education and the citizenship programme .
We start with culture .
This is highly symbolic and very important because we believe that , as in the past , culture can provide many important answers to the future of Europe .
Let me remind you that in December 2004 President Barroso said that cultural values rank higher than economic ones , because the economy helps us to live , but it is culture that makes life worth living .
I am pleased to say that an excellent climate of cooperation between our institutions characterised the whole legislative process and brought us to a very satisfactory compromise .
I should particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Graça Moura , for his excellent work and , for similar reasons , the whole Committee on Culture and Education , under its chairman Mr Sifunakis .
Its support for this programme is an important contribution to the forthcoming decision .
I am also very pleased that the general line proposed by the Commission in the original proposal has been welcomed by both Parliament and the Council .
The next Culture Programme will thus promote , firstly , the transnational mobility of people working in the cultural sector , secondly , the transnational circulation of works of art , as well as of artistic and cultural products , and , thirdly , intercultural dialogue .
I am equally convinced that the programme will contribute to the flourishing of multilateral cooperation within Europe , as well as to the development of a European identity , thanks to the interactions which we encourage between citizens .
We will have EUR 400 million at our disposal .
I also wish to thank the European Parliament for its support .
We might envisage more support , but we first have to be aware of the limits and , secondly , support is growing and there will be more opportunities to organise cooperation .
However , as Mr Graça Moura has just said , we need to be efficient .
I want to confirm that the Commission is able to accept the three amendments contained in the report ; they correspond to the compromise between our three institutions .
I very much hope that the next Culture Ministers ' Council in November will reach a final decision .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I support the overall aim of this programme , namely strengthening the common European cultural area and reinforcing the sense of European citizenship .
These are very laudable aims .
I was , however , surprised to read , in part of the Council 's common position of June of this year , that the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) contributes to , I quote ' the strengthening of the transversal objectives of the Community , by contributing to the elimination of all discrimination based on sex , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age , or sexual orientation ' .
Transversal Community objectives - what kind of newspeak is that , ladies and gentlemen ?
Are we witnessing a renaissance of Socialist Realism ?
Does this all mean that the key criterion used in the assessment of future projects will be their supposed impact on discrimination ?
Perhaps it would be best to entrust the assessment of the projects to the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna or to the recently established European Institute for Gender Equality .
I would like to point out that I did not find a reference of that nature in the earlier version of the programme , Culture 2000 .
Europe was divided for over 50 years .
Our programme should therefore provide an opportunity for increased awareness and understanding of the cultural diversity of the nations of Europe and the cultures suppressed by Communist totalitarianism in Central and Eastern Europe in particular .
This should be the thinking underpinning the projects in the new version of the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) .
Culture should be perceived as a means of facilitating the cultural integration of 27 Member States , rather than as an integrated world view .
Culture must enjoy complete freedom .
It promotes the cause of freedom most effectively when it is involved in spreading it .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , allow me to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Graça Moura , on the work he has done on the fundamental topic of the Culture 2007 programme and , in particular , on the agreement he has reached on behalf of the European Parliament .
I would like briefly to go over the three points that I championed for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament within the Committee on Culture and Education .
Firstly , with regard to the transversal aspect of the programme , it must be noted that the agreement reached goes in the right direction : nobody can object to increasing the coherence of the programme , which will make it possible to put a stop to the fragmentation that for a long time has characterised the European Union 's cultural activities .
However , intentions are one thing , and the resources proposed are quite another .
I now come to my second point , the issue of the budget , which was also mentioned just now by the rapporteur and by the Commissioner , too .
I would say this , and I will keep saying it for as long as necessary : there is no point in the European Union setting ambitious objectives such as promoting cultural diversity and cooperation if the available budget is not up to it , being no more than 15 cents per citizen per year .
We have called for a substantial increase in the budget allocated to the programme , so that it can play a part in the rise of a European culture and identity , which will enable us to move beyond national self-interest , and hence to escape from the crisis from which the Union has been suffering for a year and a half now .
It has to be said that the 2007-2013 financial perspective , stabilising Community expenditure at 1 % of the European Union 's GDP , will not allow us to achieve the objectives we have set ourselves in this programme or to give culture the role we intend for it in the building of a stronger Europe with greater solidarity .
Therefore , we cannot allow ourselves to punish this programme for a second time by delaying its implementation .
As Aristide Briand said , if we cannot have the means for our policy , we must have the policy for our means .
We therefore need to act quickly to implement this programme soon , so that we do not disadvantage the cultural organisations on the ground , which rely on this funding and which have been waiting for months for a decision to be taken .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to start with I would like to congratulate Mr Graça Moura on the quality of his work and to thank him for the favourable attention he always paid to our proposals .
His report is excellent , which is hardly surprising coming from this Portuguese writer who is such an ardent defender of the Portuguese language .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would urge Parliament to give him its full support .
This programme covers the following objectives : promoting the transnational mobility of people working in the culture sector , encouraging the transnational circulation of works of art and cultural and artistic products , and promoting intercultural dialogue .
That said , one wonders how , with such a limited budget , we will be able to safeguard and promote linguistic diversity and encourage language learning and the teaching of music and performing arts .
One also wonders how this programme will be able to promote and develop the European Union 's external visibility thanks to the promotion of its cultural diversity and of the aspects common to all its cultures .
I am therefore very disappointed that the Commission has not understood the vital role that culture plays in our European identity , and I find it particularly serious that it felt able , on the basis of the interinstitutional agreement containing the financial perspective for 2007-2013 , to approve such a tight budget , amounting to only EUR 354 million , compared to the 600 million called for by the rapporteur and the 408 million proposed by the Commission .
The budget for the ' culture programme 2007 ' for the period 2007-2013 now represents just 0.04 % of the European Union 's budget granted in the financial perspective .
All artists in Europe will be amazed that the European institutions still consider culture to be the icing on the cake , as a luxury that takes second place to necessities .
If promoting culture involves raising awareness levels and curbing obfuscation , this shrunken budget is not the way for Europe to set an example .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to start by thanking Mr Graça Moura for his work on this important aspect of our European policy .
People like to quote , whenever we discuss the significance of cultural policy for Europe , the saying to the effect that ' You do not fall in love with the internal market ' , for Europe adds up to more than just the internal market , even though it is something we cannot do without .
Europe has a great deal to do with the cultural identity and our cultural riches , which we want to preserve and develop .
Culture can divide people from one another , particularly when it emphasises differences , but our cultural policy is aimed at bringing the people of Europe together through culture , establishing contacts between them , making it possible for them to establish contact with , and feel a sense of belonging in , the world , indeed , with different , and in diverse , worlds .
The smoothing away of differences is not something that we should be in fear of ; it is something to be encouraged , something that is at the heart of our European cultural policy .
That is why the three objectives - the encouragement of cultural exchange , the mobility of artists and cultural dialogue - are the right ones , but the amount of money voted earlier will not enable them to be achieved .
If we want to do more for Europe on the cultural front , we will have to muster the courage to set a bigger cultural budget over the coming years .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , a nation 's standard of living is a function of material assets , but its identity is determined by its culture , in the broadest sense of the term .
Culture is a nation 's true wealth , and the driving force behind its existence and development .
Culture also constitutes a platform where nations can reach understanding and integrate .
Culture develops through a historical process .
It does not take kindly to brutal interventions or to being forced to develop along specific lines .
Culture needs freedom .
The Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) we are debating today is intended to organise the aims and restrict their number .
It also aims to support the transnational mobility of people working in the cultural sector , the transnational circulation of works of art , as well as of artistic and cultural products , and also intercultural dialogue .
From the simplistic point of view of European integration , the proposed aims are understandable .
From the point of view of cultural development , and the meaning and multifunctionality of culture , the approach is too narrow to be accepted without further ado .
It is essential to include action for the protection and support of the sources of culture , especially where they are under threat .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the new Italian Socialist Party .
European cultural heritage is a major part of our Union 's wealth and I am therefore grateful to the three institutions for the efforts made so far to safeguard and promote it .
The great value of the Culture programme , which I hope will also be retained in the next programming period , lies not only in promoting the mobility of persons and works in the sector within the Community , but above all in the great opportunity that this represents for small operators and small communities in the EU to keep their own histories and identities alive .
Promoting individual cultures at local level is in fact extremely valuable , as much for the European Union in general , which bases its unity and strength on the diversity within its borders , as for the economy of the social fabric and regional realities at all levels .
I therefore fully support the Council 's proposal to find a balance between small- and large-scale projects , to make it easier for small operators to access the programme , and to allocate half of the available funds to these kinds of measures .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I welcome the very positive responses ; there may be still some pressure for doing more .
We all want to do more for culture , because it is important for the European mentality and European identity ; for living together in one broader and broader house .
I think that the best narrative of Europe is diversity and unity .
Diversity growing means an invitation to promote and deepen unity , and unity based on values is mostly promoted via our cultural programme .
I am sure that some points that were mostly to do with the budget are invitations to do more in future .
If you recall the previous programme , we had seven cents per culture , per year , per citizen - Mr Bono mentioned that now we will have 15 cents .
There were invitations to do ten times more - 70 cents per culture .
I just want to remind people that the budgetary authority in the Union is Parliament .
Your support , but also further support , will help to create more space .
The citizenship programme is also based on the cultural Article 151 of the Treaty .
First of all , this is the competence and basic responsibility of Member States .
We are supporting Member States in their cooperation , not replacing them .
We will have the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue in 2008 and the achievement in negotiating a new convention on cultural diversity protection and promotion under UNESCO shows the success of this Union .
I want to assure Parliament that the implementation of the programme as soon as possible after the final decision will allow us quantitatively and qualitatively to do more for culture via Culture for Europe .
I am sure that we will have many occasions to work together on the implementation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 12 noon .
Annex - Commission statement
The Commission would like to draw the legislative authority 's attention to the need for the financial package mentioned in the basic act establishing the culture programme ( 2007-2013 ) to be expressed at current prices , and for this to be done no later than on its final publication in the Official Journal .
This corresponds to the standard budgetary practice and will help to ensure , with all due transparency , that the legislative authority 's decision is complied with .
For the programme in question , the sum at current prices amounts to EUR 400 million .
1 .
United Nations : approval of category M2 or M3 vehicles with regard to their general construction ( vote )
2 .
Accession of Bulgaria and Romania : recruitment of officials of the European Communities ( vote )
3 .
Amendment of the Statutes of the Galileo Joint Undertaking ( vote )
4 .
Norway and the EMCDDA ( vote )
5 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Bogdan Golik ( vote )
6 .
Defence of immunity of Mario Borghezio ( vote )
7 .
Draft amending budget No 3 / 2006 ( vote )
8 .
Draft amending budget No 5 / 2006 ( vote )
9 .
An EU-South Africa Strategic Partnership ( vote )
10 .
LIFE + ( vote )
11 .
Programme of support for the European audiovisual sector ( MEDIA 2007 ) ( vote )
12 .
Culture programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
13 .
Community civil protection mechanism ( vote )
14 .
Implementing measures ( level 2 ) of the Transparency Directive ( vote )
15 .
Implementing measures ( level 2 ) of the Prospectus Directive ( vote )
16 .
Women 's immigration ( vote )
17 .
Recovery of Community funds ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( FR ) Mr President , my reference to the Rules of Procedure is based on Rule 6 ( 7 ) and Rule 7 of the Rules relating to immunity .
As no debate has taken place , there will be no oral explanations of vote .
With regard to the case in which action is being taken against our fellow Member , Mr Borghezio simply because , following a judgment , he wrote the word ' Shame ' on the pavement , a word that , moreover , it was possible to remove from the pavement , I shall simply say , following that hypocritical decision : shame on the rapporteur , shame on the Commission and shame on this Parliament of hypocrites and dissemblers who apply a variable-geometry case-law in the defence of immunity .
in writing .
I support Mr Chichester 's report .
I believe that the Galileo satellite system serves two vital purposes .
Firstly , it will enable the EU , independent of the United States , in association with its partners , to develop and deploy a global satellite system that will give an autonomous capability in this area .
Secondly , it shows symbolically the EU 's commitment to playing an increasingly global role in world affairs .
Regardless of the technological and material advantages that will accrue , this political dimension is vital in itself .
in writing . ( SV ) I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the position put forward by the June List on 27 September of this year .
I have voted against this report because it rejects the Council of Ministers ' draft amending budget No 3 .
Unlike the majority of the Committee on Budgets , the June List believes that the Council of Ministers is perfectly entitled to redistribute expenditure between the different institutions of the EU in the course of the budget procedure , if it thinks this is the right thing to do .
in writing . ( SV ) The amending budget is made up of three distinct elements covering completely different fields .
I have chosen to vote against the whole package as put forward .
When it comes to the total of EUR 259 million to be provided by way of financial support to encourage economic development within the Turkish Cypriot community , the following question arises : is there yet an overall solution designed to promote peaceful and stable development on Cyprus at a time when the EU is getting involved in this situation and contributing significant financial resources to Cyprus ?
In respect of the appropriation for the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the June List is already on record as being sceptical towards the entire project .
With regard to budgetary adjustments following modernisation of the accounting system , this is more of a technical issue , even if I am sceptical about the overall activities of the European Development Fund .
in writing .
I welcome this report .
It endorses the EU proposal for a Strategic Partnership with South Africa which is comprehensive and which moves towards real political cooperation with the most significant political power in Sub-Saharan Africa and the strongest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa , accounting for 50 % of the region 's GDP .
Whilst praising the considerable progress made in post-apartheid South Africa in consolidating a functioning parliamentary democracy as well as the economic strides made as a middle-income developing country and as a leader of the Southern African Development Community , the report focuses on the need to address the considerable social challenges still facing the country .
These challenges include particularly the high incidence of HIV / AIDS ( with 18.8 % of the population currently infected ) and rates of unemployment of more than 40 % .
I fully support the report 's call for HIV / AIDS to be tackled as a priority for economic development , as well as its emphasis on the Strategic Partnership providing a single framework under which the existing EU cooperation instruments can improve performance in the interests of the South African population and economy .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union is South Africa 's largest trading partner and the biggest provider of development aid to that country .
The South African economy accounts for 50 % of the GDP of Sub-Saharan Africa .
South Africa is an engine of development for Africa and a political power working for peace in those regions of Africa that are in conflict .
That is why I consider it essential , 12 years after the end of apartheid , for the European Parliament to support today the establishment of a Strategic Partnership with South Africa .
The report emphasises the fight against AIDS .
It also cites measures designed to promote economic revival and to combat social inequalities , and refers to integration and support for exchanges , as well as to incentives for foreign investment .
It asks South Africa to use its influence to foster a peaceful solution to the political crisis in Zimbabwe .
A new economic , social , health or political crisis would have a considerable impact on the whole of southern Africa , as well as on Réunion , which maintains many economic and cultural links with South Africa .
If this agreement is important for Europe , it is vital to Réunion , as we have everything to gain from the stability of our South African neighbour and partner .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with reference to Mrs Isler Béguin 's report on the Financial Instrument for the Environment , I would like to express my extreme concern for the environment regarding pensioners in Italy .
I voted in favour of the report , but I would have voted for it much more willingly if this directive , as well as protecting the environment , had also protected Italian pensioners .
I take this opportunity to protest against President Prodi 's centre-left government , which has tabled an amendment to Article 85 ( 6 ) of the budget law , deducting from the pensions of the 500 000 Italians who have worked in Switzerland a good three-quarters of the amount to which they are entitled in accordance with the judgment of the Court of Cassation .
An environment in which pensioners are deprived of their right to a fair pension is not healthy .
in writing . LIFE has proved to be an invaluable EU environmental policy since 1992 .
Now we have an opportunity for LIFE + to become even more valuable , in particular to the smaller and newer Member States , which could receive a more equal spread of budget over the period 2007-2013 of € 2 billion .
I fully support the Council proposal to delegate the implementation of 80-85 % of the budget to national agencies and so I have voted against this Report .
For example , the overall amount indicated for Ireland from the programme is € 25m .
This funding could then be doubled through co-financing instruments up to € 50m .
Environmental Projects in Ireland which could benefit under the seven- year programme include waste prevention , waste reduction and recycling initiatives , development of innovative technologies with positive environmental benefits , local and regional environmental awareness campaigns and the development of special conservation areas .
in writing . ( PT ) The Council common position , to which this report relates , is substantially different from the Commission 's original proposal in 2004 .
I wish to highlight the inclusion of the ' Nature and Biodiversity ' component , the objectives of which include supporting the further development and implementation of the Natura 2000 network , including in relation to coastal and marine habitats and species , and , most importantly , stemming the loss of biodiversity in the Community by 2010 .
The inclusion of this component in the Life + Programme tallies with the position adopted by Parliament at first reading in July 2005 , and this is something we welcome .
Despite the fact that we voted in favour of the programme and its objectives , we are compelled to express our disappointment that the budgetary resources earmarked for the Life + Programme , covering the period from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2013 , are woefully inadequate , as a result of the disappointing agreement on the Budgetary Framework for 2007-2013 .
They fall short of the assessment made by the Commission itself , which , let us not forget , put the needs of the Natura 2000 network at EUR 6.1 billion per year , that is , EUR 3 billion under cofinancing . They also fall short of the amount proposed by the Commission in 2004 .
The guarantee of cofinancing the Natura 2000 network via the structural funds will not enable it to meet all of its needs .
The LIFE + Programme and its predecessors are the main funding instrument for the EU 's environmental projects .
The Council has acted wrongly and insensitively in substantially reducing the budgeted amount .
Parliament has reintroduced the amount originally agreed upon , in line with the financial perspective , for funding the Natura 2000 network , which is aimed at preserving nature and biodiversity .
An amendment has been incorporated aimed at ensuring that the European funds earmarked for the environment are not used for other purposes relating to the LIFE + Programme , such as spending on human resources , because the Member States are to have a project management team , rather than the usual management by seconded staff .
There is also a compromise amendment laying down that if no agreement is reached at second reading steps will be taken to ensure that funding of ongoing projects will continue .
For Portugal , this report is very important because a large proportion of the mainland and the outlying areas forms part of the Natura 2000 network , funding for which is set out in this report .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs therefore support the Isler Béguin report .
in writing . Though I believe LIFE funding has done good work , the problem has been the excess of demand over supply and the difficulty of supervising what is going on because it involves fairly small payments to a large number of projects and this report does not address these issues .
In 2003 the Court of Auditors looked at the LIFE scheme and found that financial beneficiaries failed to keep sufficiently transparent and detailed accounts .
LIFE money was also found to be involved in substantial land purchases where there were insufficient guarantees that this land would continue to be used for nature conservation purposes once the implementation period for the actions was over .
The Court asked whether the Commission had set up an adequate system of management .
The answer is that , as the fund is currently organised , the Commission cannot do so .
It is therefore perfectly acceptable and sensible for the management role to be devolved to the Member States .
This does not mean that environmental schemes will suffer from the withdrawal of LIFE money , but that money may be better spent and more transparently supervised .
in writing . I voted for the amendments to the common position on LIFE + .
I am particularly concerned with the requirement for a 55 % allocation of funds for nature and biodiversity .
Important as these areas are , such a requirement would limit Member States ' ability to allocate funds for projects addressing their own environmental priorities such as climate change .
in writing . ( SV ) I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the June List 's rejection at first reading in September 2005 .
The question we should ask ourselves is as follows : should the EU be dealing with political issues of this nature or do they fall within the area of competence of the Member States ?
The June List 's answer is clear : this is a matter for the Member States .
If the Member States wish to pour extra resources into promoting their national film industries , they are obviously entirely in their rights so to do .
The EU , on the other hand , should not be running special programmes to promote the European film industry .
If a large number of EU countries believe it necessary to cooperate within this policy area , they can do so without the interference of the EU .
Intergovernmental agreements or cooperation between film companies can take place outside the framework of the EU .
The EU does not need further sweeping and expensive projects .
The EU should instead strive for targeted cooperation on significant and truly cross-border issues .

( DE ) Mr President , I have voted against the Graça Moura report on the grounds that , firstly , the approach underlying the 2007-2013 cultural programme , namely that cultural networks need subsidy only at their outset and become self-financing thereafter , goes against their non-commercial character and runs counter to the sustainability of support grants intended by the EU .
This cultural programme also formulates intercultural dialogue in abstract terms , so that this objective might well refer to anything or nothing , and transparency is therefore out of the question ; that is another reason why I have voted against this report .


( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Romagnoli for his technical support , which has enabled me to explain my vote on the report by Mr Graça Moura establishing the Culture Programme .
I voted in favour as I am hopeful about the future of this European Union , but I should like to stress that there is no such thing as culture when , in Italy , Mr Prodi 's Socialist-Communist government has decided , in accordance with Article 85 ( 6 ) of the budget law , to deduct part of the pensions of the 500 000 Italian pensioners who have worked in Switzerland , thus ignoring the judgment of the Court of Cassation , which ruled that these very pensioners were entitled to draw four times their current pension .
This is not fair , and I hope that ' culture ' will also signify respect for pensioners ' rights .
in writing . ( SV ) Cultural issues are , of course , very important .
The June List is of the opinion that cultural policy should , in principle , be handled by the Member States .
As far as European cultural heritage is concerned , however , it may be justified for certain matters to be dealt with at Community level .
Nevertheless , we believe that the appropriations given to this Culture Programme have been much too liberal , given that this is an activity that should essentially be the responsibility of the Member States .
I have therefore voted against the amendments in this report .
in writing . ( PT ) I should like to congratulate Mr Graça Moura on the position he put forward at second reading on the Council common position for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) .
I wish to express my support in particular for the amendment to the common position as regards financial support for the actions mentioned in Article 8 ( 2 ) ( d ) of the decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Papadimoulis 's report is slightly different to the previous ones , because it talks about the establishment of the Community civil protection mechanism .
I voted in favour , even though I would have preferred this report to have provided not only for civil protection , but also for the protection of pensioners .
I am referring to Italian pensioners , who should be protected by the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Prodi , and by his Socialist-Communist majority .
They have decided , in accordance with Article 85 ( 6 ) of the budget law , to deduct a good three-quarters from the pensions of the 500 000 Italian pensioners who have worked in Switzerland .
This decision is in breach of the Court of Cassation rulings , which oblige the Italian Government to pay these pensioners the pensions that they deserve .
in writing . ( PT ) The civil protection mechanism was set up five years ago to facilitate the mobilisation and coordination of civil protection resources in the event of emergencies inside or outside the EU .
In 2005 , more than ten countries activated this emergency response mechanism .
The purpose of this proposal is to strengthen the mechanism on the basis of the experience acquired since 2001 , to lay down a legal basis for future Community action in the area of civil protection and to strengthen the rapid response and preparedness instrument for emergencies .
This report includes the ' public health ' dimension in civil protection .
It also stresses the importance of solidarity among the Member States and of a more effective European monitoring system .
Furthermore , it addresses the issue of effective land management and use in disaster prevention and the use of military assets to prevent and combat emergencies .
This mechanism is vitally important for Europe as a whole , but in particular for Portugal , a country that is devastated every year by droughts and fires , which fall under the proposed mechanism .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs therefore support the Papadimoulis report .
in writing . ( PT ) The report adopted today , which is aimed at making the emergency response by the EU and the Member States more consistent and effective , is one that we broadly welcome , despite a few reservations .
We know that the primary objective of civil protection is to prevent collective risks and the serious accidents or disasters arising from them . Hence the need to minimise these collective risks and to offset the impact should an emergency arise , to rescue and provide assistance to people and other living things , to protect cultural and environmental assets of major public interest , and to help the people affected to return to a normal life .
Accordingly , we welcome the possibility of investing in studies , training , prevention and monitoring , and in fostering an exchange of experiences in order to learn from past experience - positive and negative - and to rectify any shortcomings .
We also support the creation of a targeted , appropriate emergency communications network , the launch of extensive information campaigns , and the adoption of educational and awareness-raising initiatives aimed at the public and in particular the youngest members of society .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report .
Prevention is a basic factor in reducing risks , but not every disaster can be prevented .
Faced with emergencies , the European Union must no longer , therefore , rely on improvisation .
' Man 's habitual shortcoming is not to anticipate the storm during fine weather ' , said Machiavelli .
The European Union must show that he was mistaken .
Before implementing any action plan , it is important to draw up a list of existing resources , both material and human .
It is on the basis of such information that vital coordination between the Member States will take shape with a view not only to tackling the disaster but also to ensuring that European action is more visible on the ground .
It is just as crucial , moreover , to lose no time in arranging for new facilities to be installed in areas that we well know are at risk , particularly from fire and flood .
The protection of the individual and solidarity between Member States are fundamental principles of the European Union .
I do not , therefore , understand the Council 's resistance to developing these civil protection actions , not to mention creating a special Community force .
Yes , the initial responsibility for civil protection falls to the Member States , but that does not mean carrying on regardless .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . ( SV ) We welcome the Commission 's proposal to improve the civil protection mechanism introduced in 2001 .
Europe , like the rest of the world , is hit by all kinds of disasters and crises , and it is clearly desirable to institute intensive coordination in order to respond to such events .
Unfortunately , we have been forced to note that both the Commission 's proposal and Mr Papadimoulis ' report make explicit reference to military resources having to be available for civil protection activities .
We are strongly opposed to all forms of initiative relating to military cooperation within the European Union .
We therefore chose to abstain in the final vote on Mr Papadimoulis ' report today and to vote against the Commission 's proposal .
The development of strong and adequate mechanisms to prevent and deal with natural disasters is fundamental for the protection , assistance and relief of the victims of natural disasters and for dealing with environmental disasters .
In Greece , the inadequacy of such mechanisms was revealed again during the recent floods in several areas .
In particular in the strategy for preventing and restoring disasters ( anti-flood protection , reinforcement against earthquakes ) and relieving victims , the policy of the Greek Government presents criminal shortcomings .
One transnational civil protection mechanism may help in dealing with natural disasters .
However , it cannot and must not replace the extension and reinforcement of independent mechanisms in the Member States .
Similarly , civil protection mechanisms cannot operate to cover up responsibilities for deliberately causing environmental disasters .
The creation of mechanisms which undertake to deal with disasters due to deliberate action or negligence ( as proposed ) gives an even larger margin for unaccountable action by companies , with disastrous consequences for the environment and public health .
Primarily , however , the establishment of mechanisms to respond to ' terrorist action ' cannot be accepted .
Practice over recent years confirms that the fight against ' terrorism ' is designed to stifle and direct the grassroots movement , the class , trade-union movement .
The ' prevention of terrorism ' through the monitoring mechanisms which it is proposed to strengthen is leading to more restrictions on fundamental democratic rights .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report because I believe given the cost of ' disasters ' on Member States in terms of human lives , economic losses and injuries , it makes sense to pool resources and thus pursue economies of scale in areas such as logistics and transport .
It is well known that , in Europe , civil protection in relation to natural disasters falls within the competence of the Member States .
Unfortunately , in some of these countries , there are worrying delays and a sense of indifference , due to a lack of coordination .
It is precisely for this reason that , for years now , I have been proposing the establishment of a European Civil Protection Agency that would have the task of bringing the various national laws in line with each other and that would be responsible not only for preventing and anticipating risks , but also for managing emergencies .
Strangely enough , in fact , neither the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a rapid response and preparedness instrument for major emergencies nor the proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community civil protection mechanism take into full and due consideration all of the activities aimed at studying and determining the causes of disasters , at identifying the risks and at singling out the more vulnerable regions subject to such risks - in other words , the ' anticipation ' of risks - even though they are crucial when it comes to tackling natural disasters effectively .
This Agency , created on the model of the US Federal Emergency Management Agency , should not only repair the damage caused by natural disasters , but also , and above all , fund preventative actions aimed at eliminating or reducing the causes of such disasters .
in writing . ( SV ) I am opposed to the Commission 's proposal that the Member States should make use of each other 's military capabilities .
A coordination centre able to assist in directing fire-fighting helicopters to where they are most needed at the time is , however , a sensible and cost-effective idea .
Moreover , when major disasters strike , there is a great lack of highly advanced fire-damage prevention , and it would therefore be a very good thing if we were able to get help to each other quickly in such situations .
This is precisely the kind of cooperation that the EU should be undertaking .
I am voting in favour of the report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , how can there be any transparency in Europe when , in one of the 25 Member States - namely Italy - 500 000 pensioners who have worked in Switzerland and returned to Italy are paid pensions equal to 25 % of the amount paid to Italian workers who work in Italy ?
It is true that Switzerland is not yet part of the European Union , but it is part of the European Economic Area .
It would be good if a Member State of the European Union behaved properly towards those of its own citizens who have worked abroad and who are entitled to the same pension as citizens residing in Italy .
( DE ) Mr President , speaking also on behalf of the Austrian People 's Party delegation , let me say that there are several reasons why I voted against this report .
One is the demand contained in it for persons who have entered the European Union illegally to be accorded equal rights with - or , indeed , more rights than - legal immigrants as regards such things as the right to accommodation , family benefits , health care and access to educational institutions .
The report also presses for new grounds for the grant of asylum , for example to a person who has been forced into marriage or has agreed to what is termed an arranged marriage .
Giving in to these demands will do nothing to solve problems , but will instead create new ones , for measures like these do in fact exert a suction effect , attracting even more illegal immigrants .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , voted against the Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report , and I shall now proceed to explain why .
If one is talking solely in terms of women who have migrated legally , then one must certainly help them to become familiar with our system of standards and values , to become integrated and also to help their families to do so .
It is particularly when one comes to the second or third generation of immigrants that conflicts can arise , which - as we have had to learn from the French experience - can result in acts of violence that may even be unavoidable .
We must , however , come what may , prevent culturally and religiously motivated problems such as forced marriages , honour killings and genital mutilation from occurring in the first place .
Family reunifications involving second , third or fourth wives - which go against the prohibition , customary in Europe , of bigamy - must be brought to an end without delay .
It is because the report makes no such requirement that I have voted against it .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , voted against the Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report , since I take the view that it blurs the dividing line between legal and illegal immigration , fails to draw an adequate distinction between our positions on the two and thereby , ultimately , constitutes a positive incitement to illegal immigration .
I see that as politically misguided and as sending the wrong message .
Legal immigration needs to be better organised and regulated , while every form of the illegal variety needs to be combated .
At the end of the day , I take the view that we should solve the problems that exist on the ground in developing countries and should get much more directly involved in this than we have been to date if we are to get human , economic , social and religious problems out of the way .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you enjoy your lunch , since I believe that this is today 's last explanation of vote .
I voted in favour of the Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report on the role and place of women immigrants in the European Union .
In this instance , too , I would have preferred the report to have included something in relation to the position of the 260 000 or so Italian women who have emigrated to Switzerland in order to work and support their families and who , once back in Italy , have drawn a pension equal to 25 % of the amount that they would have received if they had worked under the same conditions in Italy , and this despite the mutual agreement between Italy and Switzerland .
I do not think it right to behave in this manner towards women in general , and especially not towards those women who are old-age pensioners .
Long live pensioners !
in writing . Although we all agree that the plight of irregular immigrants is something that we have to work hard on , and that these unfortunate people should be treated with all the dignity a human being deserves , we must not forget that the influx of irregular foreigners into our countries is causing a big headache to the authorities , especially in Mediterranean countries .
I therefore think it would be wiser to amend the Dublin II regulations prior to committing ourselves to something that may prove to be too big for us .
We are obliged to do so , not only when considering the state our detention centres are in and the pressure that they are causing in our countries , but also out of respect for the immigrants themselves .
We should not give them false hopes .
I think we should get our house in order prior to offering something which at present I am sure we cannot guarantee .
I urge all concerned for the umpteenth time to grab the bull by the horns and make a genuine effort to have Dublin II amended
The Swedish Conservatives have today voted in favour of the report on women 's immigration .
The fundamental rights of immigrants must be respected and should not be dependent on gender or on belonging to a specific group within society .
We support joint management of migration policy , which is a natural extension of cooperation under the Schengen Agreement .
We are , on the other hand , opposed to a common integration policy because this area is best dealt with by the Member States themselves .
We are also against the introduction of registers of female genital mutilation as this would represent an intrusion into privacy that we cannot support .
in writing . ( PT ) Female immigration is known to be rising steadily in the EU , currently accounting for some 54 % of the total number of immigrants .
The reasons for it fall into a number of categories , including economic migration , family reunification , and seeking refuge and asylum .
Women often face a large number of difficulties and forms of discrimination . Public support mechanisms , particularly social structures and services , must therefore be strengthened .
It is particularly important that international conventions are implemented , especially the one on family reunification . The human rights of immigrant women - including access to education for their children , the right to family benefits and the right to healthcare - must also be guaranteed , whether or not their situation is legal .
In any event , we believe that immigrant women entering an EU Member State for the purposes of family reunification must be given the opportunity to obtain their own legal status independently of their spouse as quickly as possible .
We also feel that immigrant women and young people should be allowed to reside in a Member State and should be accorded all the support they need , especially those who have suffered physical and mental violence , including the practice of forced or arranged marriages .
in writing . - ( FR ) The report devoted to immigrant women is alarming .
Indeed , the situations it depicts ( absence of personal status , exploitation , mutilation , crimes of honour etc ... ) point to the terrible failure of policies on immigration and integration .
The report seems to demonstrate that immigrant populations intend to carry on with their practices and customs in the European Union , regardless of the fact that some of these are in flagrant violation of our laws and values .
It neglects to mention that immigrant women themselves , or those of immigrant descent , sometimes attach more value to respect for their traditions than to respect for the law and that they are , then , very far from being , as the rapporteur naïvely imagines , instrumental in promoting their children 's integration .
It also overlooks the fact that marriage of a national of non-European origin with someone from their country of origin has - in France and certainly in other EU countries - become the mean reason for immigration , ahead of family reunification .
When they are marriages of convenience , such marriages are a source of illegal immigration .
When they are not , the fact is that , despite his or her nationality on paper , one of the spouses is not integrated and is not about to be , either .
If we continue down this road , we shall only promote further ghettoisation in our societies and increase the risk of confrontation between communities .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List has previously stated that the EU is a union of values .
In the light of this , I have chosen to support those wordings which make clear that all groups in society should have equal rights .
The June List supports constructive measures designed to attain greater integration of vulnerable groups in society .
We are nonetheless of the opinion that it is the national parliaments and the regional authorities that should , essentially , be dealing with this pressing issue .
I am critical of the general trend whereby the institutions of the EU seek to extend their influence and competence within more and more areas .
It is important to draw a clear dividing line between what is to be decided by the EU and what is to be decided at national and local level .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report has completely lost the plot , combining as it does all the fantasies of the Left and the Greens .
Here are just a few examples .
Paragraph 7 calls on Member States to grant immigrant women whose status is irregular and whose children are attending school the right to family benefits and allowances .
Paragraph 10 calls for the procedures for granting a residence permit to be simplified .
Finally , paragraph 17 calls for women immigrants to be encouraged to participate more actively in the social and political life of host countries .
Obviously , everything is being done to transform , as if by magic , something that is a problem - namely illegal immigration - into something that is all very fine , moral and humanistic , namely legal immigration .
There is not a single word about putting policies in place for returning illegal immigrants to their countries of origin .
Nor is there anything about the possibility of implementing a coherent and effective codevelopment aid policy in these countries in order to put a stop to the growing exodus from , in particular , African countries .
There is nothing but the desire , expressed from the beginning to the end of this report , to welcome ever more immigrants and to give them ever more rights .
Reports like this one do not help build Europe .
Rather , they destroy Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this report in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality because I consider paragraphs 6 and 7 to be unacceptable and inadmissible .
Indeed , I am of the view that access to family benefits and health care for anyone whose situation is irregular would be an incitement to mass immigration , something that is unacceptable , given the immigration problems with which we are already faced .
Moreover , an increase in illegal immigration would further exacerbate the conditions confronting migrants .
The European Union cannot adopt a report that further encourages the work of people smugglers and that leads a lot of women to risk their lives in order to emigrate illegally to Europe in the sole hope of being able to receive social benefits .
I should like , however , to emphasise that I am very committed to protecting women 's rights .
I consider that the efforts made to guarantee immigrant women 's fundamental rights by means of this report are commendable , but everything must be avoided that might have harmful effects that would , in fact , make the situation of these women even more difficult .
in writing . - ( FR ) Studies , statistics , reports , assessments ...
With Parliament 's support , the European Commission has , for some months now , been busily analysing the social , professional , political , economic and family situations of immigrant women in host countries .
That is all well and good , as there is at present little reliable information that can be used in this area , even though we all know that women , and in particular Muslim women , suffer all kinds of discrimination .
What , however , concerns me about this report is the fact that it highlights the rights of immigrant women who have entered Europe illegally .
The right to vote , the right to family allowances and housing benefits , the right to remain in the host country ...
The report calls for , and lists , a whole package of rights but , bizarrely , it has not a word to say about a policy of returning illegal immigrants to their countries of origin or , again , about a co-development aid policy for all those countries , very often African ones , which are suppliers of immigration to Europe .
Europe keeps on welcoming people left , right and centre .
In reality , Europe is transforming something that it deems unacceptable , namely illegal immigration , into something that it deems to be humanitarian and moral , namely legal immigration for population purposes .
in writing . This is an important report , much of which deserves to be implemented .
Urgent action is required to improve recovery rates .
However , my British Conservative colleagues and I are unable to support the report overall because we do not accept in principle that the long-term solution to many of the problems in this field is the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor , an idea which is reiterated in this report ( paragraphs 43-45 ) .
Such a Public Prosecutor would be an unacceptable interference in the constitutional responsibility of Member States for their judicial systems .
Furthermore , as there is rightly widespread opposition to its introduction , emphasising its necessity is a dangerous diversion from tackling the real problems at hand .
For this reason we are obliged to abstain on the final vote .
in writing . ( PT ) The recovery of inappropriately used Community funds must be investigated on a case-by-case basis and requires greater attention , not least from the Member States .
In this regard , I wish to highlight the example of the relocation of companies that have enjoyed the use of Community funding for years , and situations in which public health is put at risk in one or more Member States .
Cooperation between the different Member States and bodies should facilitate and improve the swift recovery of the amounts concerned and prevent the companies or organisations involved from continuing to enjoy Community funding .
This is a valid cause , but we object to it being used to launch a further drive towards federalism ; the report proposes the creation of an EU-level public prosecutor 's office and public prosecutor , which would be a further step in the scaling back of the Member States ' sovereignty .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Welcome
I am told that we have a distinguished visitor in the official gallery .
It is Mr Akbar Ganji , renowned writer and journalist , who was released in March following a six-year jail sentence for his activities in support of democracy and press freedom in Iran .
Mr Ganji , we welcome you most warmly to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
The European Parliament actively supported Mr Ganji during his long spell in prison and his hunger strike and called for his release on several occasions , particularly in its Resolution on Iran of 13 October 2005 and also by means of several letters and interventions by the President of Parliament and by the chairpeople of the Delegation for relations with Iran and of the Human Rights Sub-Committee
In fact , Mr Ganji has taken part in a joint meeting of those bodies this afternoon , and I have no doubt that they will have gained much from his knowledge and experiences .
Draft general budget for 2007 ( Section III ) - Draft general budget for 2007 ( Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII and VIII )
rapporteur . - Mr President , thank you for introducing us to this first budgetary debate for 2007 .
At the outset I should like to thank all those who brought us to this stage , particularly those in the secretariat of Parliament 's Committee on Budgets and those associated with it .
Without them it would have been impossible to get ourselves to this state of preparedness .
In setting out the guidelines for the 2007 budget - one that is different from others in the sense that it has been the first budget in the new financial perspective - much of the first part of the year was spent in negotiating the result of the financial perspectives .
Indeed it is a rare budget when we find that we do not yet have some of the programmes in place , because the multiannual programmes are in the process now of being completed as , let us hope , the Financial Regulation will be in place for the beginning of next year to be the basis for our operation .
In terms of general considerations , there are three that I should like to set out , which have shaped our strategic thinking in the Budgets Committee in presenting this budget to Parliament .
Firstly , as we noted in the annual policy strategy ( APS ) discussions in May , which form the basis for our preparation for this budget , the speed of globalisation outside Europe is shaping our policies .
I believe we have rightly criticised the Commission for taking a laid-back and complacent view on this .
We need to be able to take account in our budgetary policies of the effects of what is happening elsewhere in the world .
Secondly , we are acutely aware that the results of the financial perspective discussions have left us with fewer resources than we might otherwise have hoped , and therefore lead to the need for prioritisation in the way in which we shape our policies .
Thirdly , we must communicate better with our citizens and give them the confidence that we are capable of running the budget effectively .
That being said , what has the process now led to in what we voted for ?
First is the general outlook .
In terms of commitments I believe we have been very prudent in allowing significant margins in the various parts of the budget , well under the ceilings provided for in the IIA ; and for the first time since 2000 we are not requesting the flexibility instrument .
On the question of payments , we have taken a horizontal approach that reflects the approach taken by Reimer Böge , as our rapporteur on the financial perspectives - whose report Parliament adopted - in outlining a number of priority areas ; and this is what we have reflected in taking payments on first reading to 1.04 % , yet again well beneath the ceiling allowed for 2007 of 1.06 % .
This is also keeping a ratio between commitments and payments below 80 % in most cases .
In terms of the pilot projects and preparatory actions , we have a range of different possibilities ; in terms of internal policies , where we are wanting to underpin innovation , and where we are looking in terms of security at a major initiative on migration management , thanks to our friend and colleague Mr Deprez from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs ; and , last but not least , on external policy , to see what we can do to build up linkages with China and India , because , as reflected from the outset , in the present globalising world we do not have the right kind of networks which link our business and scientists with those of China and India .
We are putting these in as preparatory actions to be approved under the 2007 budget .
Lastly in terms of payments , I have mentioned the common foreign and security policy , the CFSP .
There are some in the Council who think that we are not being particularly generous in leaving it at a cut of 50 % .
There were those who wanted 100 % , but we reached 50 % as a good compromise because there are a range of people , particularly in the Committee on Foreign Affairs but also elsewhere in this Parliament , who would like to see the commitment entered into by the Council fulfilled for the way in which we handle the common foreign and security policy between Parliament and Council .
Equally , in terms of the special representatives , where we are recommending that the whole sum be transferred to the EU delegations , the point we are making on first reading is that we want to have , if not special treatment , at least clarity in the way in which these people are appointed .
As the amendment says , we would like to adopt guidelines for the decision to establish , select and appoint EU special representatives and for the regular assessment of their work .
Turning now to the second aspect , which is value for money , this is an innovative concept where what we want to do is to stop throwing good money after bad .
I do not think there is anybody in this House who has opposed this particular kind of concept , which is involved in identifying those lines where we know from the different reports available to us that the policies are being implemented poorly , either quantitatively or qualitatively .
Thanks to the work of the Committee on Budgets - though it would have been nice if the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgetary Control could have contributed more to this process - by looking at our own cost benefit analyses , at the Court of Auditors ' reports , at the budget forecast alert and at the synthesis reports provided by the Commission , we have been able to identity a number of lines which we unanimously have voted into reserve at 30 % on first reading in the Committee on Budgets .
The intent is to be able to release these sums by the end of the year on second reading , so long as we can have a satisfactory explanation from the Commission on 15 November , when we will have a joint Committee on Budgets-Committee on Budgetary Control meeting to examine these lines and to see whether they are now operating positively .
The whole idea behind this is that we can purge the budget of those lines which are operating ineffectively , and move towards what we are looking for , which is a positive statement of assurance .
Where the Council has suggested that this might be against the Financial Regulation , I think Article 43 ( 1 ) ( b ) makes it quite clear that where there are sufficient grounds for us to put monies in the reserve , then we are entitled to do so .
It would be nice if , by the end of our process - maybe on the margins of our conciliation meeting with the Council on 21 November , or in our vote in December - we could come to a common statement by Parliament , the Council and the Commission on how we handle this concept of value for money on a regular basis , so that we can make it a part of our process , rather than something treated in an arbitrary manner .
There are a few last comments on other aspects - budget control and value for money .
The first of these is shared management : the problems about which we heard from the President of the Court of Auditors in the Budgetary Control Committee yesterday evening , when , much to my surprise and that of other colleagues , he said he was not particularly interested in shared management because the Council pays and it is the Commission that takes responsibility for signing off the budget .
I do not think it is possible to have a statement of assurance unless the Member States sign up to their responsibilities under the budget for the funds that they pay , which amount to 75 or 80 % of the budget .
Therefore , shared management is something we think is important to have implementation of the IIA provision .
Secondly , as regards work on the agency - which Mrs Haug has so ably coordinated for us - we are putting sums of money of the increases in reserves so that we can hear views from the agencies as to what they will be doing with their money and their work programmes in order to get value for money once again .
Last but not least is the question on the administration , where the Council actions on first reading to effectively diminish the number of Commission posts by some 2000 in the next few years are something we have not been able to sign up to .
We believe that we need a screening exercise of the Commission by 30 April 2007 so that we can understand what the mid-term demands of the Commission are before taking radical action to cut back .
In addition to that , we would not only like a state of play from the Commission as to which of the outstanding regulations we could have withdrawn , but above all what we would like is to be sure that we have clarity between what we have here in the budget process and the legislative process of the work programme which is decided on by the Commission today ; so that when we have a final decision on this budget , hopefully in December , and the resolution from Parliament on the legislative work programme , then both of these can be bound together and we can have the Commission President come to Parliament in February 2007 and tell us what the final work programme of the Union is .
Otherwise it is unclear to citizens .

Therefore , I would conclude by saying that this is a budget which in terms of priorities is what I would call a budget which is consistent and forward-looking ; in value-for-money terms , it is a budget which can be said to be coherent and prudent ; and lastly , that in taking these two building blocks together , we will be able to look forward to the review which will be coming by 2008 / 2009 and have a very clear position for the European Parliament in order to ensure that where we need increases in particular policies or different actions to be taken on policy matters , we will be well prepared for that debate .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( MT ) The budgetary increase given to the other sections in 2007 , when compared to that given in 2006 , was only marginal and much less than that requested in the preliminary draft .
The increase agreed upon reflects the rate of inflation and the amounts related to each institution 's specific priorities .
The Committee on Budgets decided to restore more than EUR 10 million out of the reductions of around EUR 29 million made by the Council to the other sections , excluding Parliament and the Council .
The 2007 budget was based on the institutions ' essential priorities , while ensuring their unhindered operational and functional efficiency .
Globally , the increase for institutions amounts to EUR 31 million compared to the EUR 48 million requested .
Over the years , Mr President , exaggerated margins have become common features of some institutions ' estimates .
This practice , or rather bad practice , brought with it an awkward system of last-minute transfers or the cancellation of certain appropriations .
This situation will be difficult to manage when , in a few years ' time , the property-acquisition process will start to decline .
In this regard , we believe that an increasingly activity-based approach would be more effective .
Moreover , the presentation of budget estimates should be more standardised , motivations should provide clearer justifications and estimates should be more accurate .
With regard to Parliament , the Committee on Budgets agreed that the final amount of the 2007 budget should be of EUR 0.1397 billion , that is to say a margin of EUR 25 million below the maximum of 20 % .
This level corresponds to 19.65 % of the administrative expenditure under Chapter V. In this regard , however , Parliament is not renouncing its traditional 20 % share .
In fact , the committee extends its support to the appropriation of unused funds for unexpected , but justified , expenses by means of ' amending budgets ' .
The creation of an efficient structure , together with the implementation of a redeployment exercise should be the main objectives in the strategic planning for the 2007 Establishment Plan .
Moreover , the filling of vacancies resulting from retirement will not be considered an automatic process .
With regard to support and services for Members , we agree with the Secretary-General that the main objectives relating to the ' raising the game ' exercise were , broadly , achieved .
However , there is a recurrent complaint that there is insufficient information about the support services available for MEPs .
The administration should address this shortcoming and corrrect it by no later than the end of this year .
Mr President , due to lack of time I am unable to to talk in detail about all the priorities addressed in the budget and in my report for 2007 .
These priorities relate to the EUR 48 million allocated for expenses connected with enlargment involving Bulgaria and Romania ; the measures taken for the simplification and upgrading of legislation ; the scrutiny of the cost-efficiency of translation services , especially with regard to the length of texts ; the authorisation of EUR 9.5 million in supplemetary funds for the improvement of the visitors ' programme ; the decision to keep EUR 6.7 million in the reserve for Web TV , a final decision about which will be taken after a presentation of the prototype in CoBu ; and the need for greater control of the administration of multinlingualism , for which we put EUR 3 million in reserve .
The misuse of this service by some , including political parties , should attract sanctions .
EUR 50 million have been reserved for buildings , and we must ensure that buildings policy is periodically reviewed .
I must conclude by saying that budget implementation requires better management if objectives are to be achieved .
There is also a need for annual reports based on more detailed information about the work carried out by the institutions .
These reports should be used to justify requests for additional funds so that Parliament might arrive at a more rational decision about fund allocation .
This way , budgets financed by European taxpayers will provide real added-value to their everday lives .
Finally , I would like to thank all those who contributed towards the drawing up of this report .
I would especially like to thank the Secretary General , who has handed in his resignation .
We will miss him ; whether he will miss us is another matter .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to be here at Parliament 's debate on the 2007 budget .
I can assure you that we will note with interest the issues raised during the discussion and pass them on to all our colleagues .
The budget 's drafting process is a long one .
I appreciate the frank atmosphere of debate that has reigned all year long between Members of the Council and Parliament .
We last discussed the issue at the budget trilogue on 18 October .
I had an opportunity then to give a few tentative reactions to the draft amendments by the Committee on Budgets , to be voted on in plenary on Thursday .
Before I present certain important matters to the Council , I would like to deal with certain issues of quality , which are of importance for the work of the Union as a whole .
It is my intention now to speak frankly and call a spade a spade .
I believe that the Committee on Budgets , under the leadership of Mr Elles and Mr Grech , has worked without bias , by also focusing on what can be accomplished using our citizens ' and taxpayers ' money .
Hopefully , the Commission too will become involved in this work .
The value for money from Union taxes must be made a regular process .
The value for money concept must become something that pervades the entire budgetary procedure .
In my opinion , the first reading of the budget should concentrate on facts and figures .
I do not think that the budgetary authorities should make political statements at first reading .
I said at the Council presentation of the draft budget on 5 September 2006 that the EU 's budgetary procedure is in need of innovation .
Without innovative budgetary solutions we cannot promote the Union 's competitiveness or make the institutions ' administration more efficient . The budgetary authorities must take concrete action to achieve their objectives in this 2007 budget .
From the Council 's viewpoint , Parliament 's intention to increase payment appropriations significantly , when there is no proven need to do so , is not the right way to build a bridge between the EU and the general public .
An increase on this scale would only result in an enormous surplus in the first year .
The 2007 budget should be based on realistic and justified appropriation needs .
Halving the common foreign and security policy budget is simply not acceptable .
In the interinstitutional agreement concluded five months ago , Parliament approved an average sum of EUR 250 million per annum .
That being the case , I believe that the EUR 159 million advocated by the Commission and the Council is a reasonable figure .
I would therefore ask how Parliament 's suggestion of EUR 73 million can be justified .
I would hope that the plenary session will act responsibly with regard to these two whole areas .
The budgetary authorities need to develop a procedure for the use of reserves in the very near future .
Appropriations should not be set aside merely for tactical reasons .
Here too , the provisions of the Financial Regulation must be complied with to the letter .
As we all know well , the 2007 budget is the first to be covered by the new interinstitutional agreement .
It is very important that all of its old familiar aspects , such as ceilings and adequate margins , are respected right from the start .
The new agreement also has new provisions on , for example , pilot projects and preparatory operations .
I would highlight the importance of these provisions , which clearly state that pilot projects and preparatory operations are not the exclusive right of one budgetary authority .
Both Parliament and the Council must also respect this aspect of the content of the new interinstitutional agreement .
The 2007 budget is a package .
It is important that the budgetary authorities establish the jointly agreed package within the framework of the budgetary procedure .
The crucial elements of the overall package are interlinked .
Finally , I would like to return to the revision of the Financial Regulation .
This is a subject that Parliament and the Commission have been anxious about , and they have been urging the Council to make haste .
President Borrel last raised the matter in his discussions with Prime Minister Vanhanen on 17 October .
It is with pleasure that I can now state that the Council adopted a common position on the revision of the Financial Regulation on 19 October .
We can therefore hold negotiations with Parliament on the Financial Regulation on 21 November .
I am sorry that we have not been able to keep to the timetable proposed by the Commissioner responsible for the budget in her letter in June .
The Commission had hoped that the meeting would be held last week .
I believe , however , that the timetable that I have referred to will give everyone sufficient time to formulate a comprehensive overall solution .
I hope that these brief comments of mine have done something to clarify the Council 's opinions .
I earnestly believe that Parliament and the Council can reach a good common solution on the budget for 2007 in the discussions in the weeks ahead .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to express the Commission 's appreciation for the work that was done by the Committee on Budgets and its rapporteur , tackling more than 1200 proposals from other committees in the process of the preparations for first reading .
We know what that means and how it was done .
In general , the Commission has had a positive reaction to the proposal that has been placed on the table by Parliament for tomorrow 's vote .
However , I should like to mention three sensitive points , which we would like to solve , together with Parliament , before second reading .
The first point is about the horizontal reserves on 30 % of budget lines on value-added programmes .
We are a bit concerned about the first application of the programme - not as a political idea , which we supported from the very beginning , but the first application of it on the amount in general and some conditionalities that are coming together .
However , the Commission and its secretariat are ready to come in the middle of November for the hearings , to which Parliament has invited us , to explain as much as we can , to allow Parliament to lift as much as it will be able to before the second reading .
The second element is on agencies , especially three new ones .
They are supposed to come into being in 2007 .
The Committee on Budgets was removing preparations for them .
We understand that it concerns point 47 in our new interinstitutional agreement .
The relationship between two budgetary authorities needs to be clarified and the new procedures defined -that is why we will in the near future be asking for technical meetings between the three institutions to clarify the situation in order to allow those three agencies to come into being as of January 2007 .
The third element is a reserve of EUR 50 million on Commission staff salaries in heading 5 .
We would like to thank Parliament for restoring the cuts which have been performed by the Council , but reserves are still of concern to us because conditionalities are wide and there are a lot of them .
But as I said in the beginning , we will strive to make as much information as possible available before 15 November and before the final conciliation with both arms of the budgetary authority , so as to be able to lift as much as we can .
If a reserve is not lifted at least partially from 1 January , we are not able to start recruitment at all for anybody , including from new Member States and the replacement of retired staff .
In general we are positive .
We are ready to work closely with Parliament on lifting and fulfilling all conditions provided at first reading as a proposal for us .
We hope that by 21 November we will be able to come to an agreement that will be good for all three institutions and acceptable .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( HU ) The foreign affairs chapter was perhaps the greatest loser in the seven-year budget , which immediately calls into question whether the European Union will be capable of fulfilling its role as a global player .
It is especially unfortunate that in the annual budget process , the Council has made even further significant cuts to its foreign affairs budget .
It was for this reason that the Committee on Foreign Affairs decided to restore the preliminary draft budget on numerous points , and thus to allocate the original amounts .
We set up the European Parliament 's foreign affairs priorities as that we deemed it necessary to devote more resources to the candidate countries and potential candidate countries , to spend more on those countries on the eastern side of our European Neighbourhood Policy , and to provide more humanitarian aid to Palestine .
The Committee on Budgets did not agree with all of our proposals , and therefore we are submitting these proposals once again on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
In the interest of a responsible and consistent foreign policy , we call on you to accept the proposal of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , perhaps I might be permitted to start by congratulating my colleague Mr Elles on his strategic thinking , particularly with regard to China and India .
This is a new thing and something we should take very seriously .
We in the Committee on Development have managed to get the funds from the preliminary draft budget reinstated , to keep the budget transparent , and to produce a report that is already in line with our colleague Mr Mitchell 's on development cooperation instruments , but I have nevertheless tabled two amendments in the plenary , which were not , however , adopted by the Committee on Budgets .

One of these was Amendment 250 , which was intended to set up a pilot project for small and medium-sized enterprises in developing countries , which were , I would remind the House , the subject of a report we adopted earlier this year .
If we want to build up the self-employed and small business sector in developing countries , we need to give SMEs an enhanced role .
It really would be vexatious if we were to fail to put in place a pilot project that underlined our own call for stronger SMEs in developing countries .
The other amendment to which I referred was Amendment 253 , which has to do with exchanges with other parliaments .
It refers to our own House 's Budget and to the possibility of maintaining links with other legislatures , such as the Pan-African Parliament or the Parliament of Afghanistan , which would enable this House to have a real and positive influence on the democratisation process around the world , and so I urge you , on Thursday , to vote to adopt this amendment too .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( LT ) The budget is essential in implementing projects that are important and beneficial to the Community and its citizens .
One such project is the Globalisation Adjustment Fund of EUR 500 million .
I suggested assigning the funds to the reserve of the following year 's budget of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We will vote on this in December .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to draw your attention , and especially the attention of the Commission , to the rules established for the use of the funds .
The question is whether the money will actually reach a particular unemployed person ?
The money cannot be misappropriated as it had often been the case with donor aid to undertakings in the process of restructuring .
I foresee a considerable risk of misusing the Commission 's funds .
It is against this that we , the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , have voted .
We cannot accept the rules unless they are substantially amended .
I therefore call upon you to take a firm stand and demand that the Commission guarantee the transparent and effective use of funds .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the start of the first financial year of the Financial Perspective that we negotiated in April and adopted in May is almost upon us ; the financial framework is a tight one , and presents us with a number of problems as regards the achievement of our policy objectives .

The Commission took a very cautious approach to drawing up the preliminary draft budget for 2007 , and the Council - as always unperturbed by what the experts might say - cut it even further down to size .
The Committee on the Environment tried to save what could be saved by reinstating the figures from the preliminary draft budget and making responsible increases in a few lines .
The Committee on Budgets took on board all the Committee on the Environment 's amendments , and for that I am very grateful to my fellow-Members who sit on it .
We cannot , however , regard the overall situation as satisfactory , since the financial year 2007 will present us with as yet unresolved problems with LIFE + and the action programme on health .
Agencies are the only area in which we can look forward to the future with optimism on the grounds that they are being properly developed and funded , and by that I mean not only those agencies for which the Committee on the Environment is the competent specialised committee , but all of them , cooperation with which has undergone a marked improvement over the last two years ; indeed , the personnel and personnel development plans for them will be in our hands by the end of the year , and I take a positive view of all of them .


It has to be said , though , that there are persistent difficulties with the new ones - the Gender Institute , the Human Rights Agency , and the Chemicals Agency - and , contrary to what the Commissioner has just said , these are not of a merely technical nature , for there is as yet no legal basis for any of them .
We in this House are still waiting for the start of negotiations with the Council pursuant to Article 47 of the Interinstitutional Agreement - negotiations , that is , on where the money for the three new agencies is to come from .
Perhaps the Presidency of the Council might be so good as to move this process along a bit .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , I should like to make three points .
Firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteur for increasing payment appropriations for priority programmes linked to the Lisbon Agenda , like the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
These are key initiatives that not only provide work for Europe 's valuable and highly skilled scientists but also prepare the EU to face future challenges as a global leader .
We should not overlook the significant and positive impact that they have on our regions and their populations .
Secondly , I commend this report for the concern it expresses for the Galileo Programme , which has been under-funded in the 2007 draft general budget .
This showcase EU programme is a major technological , economic and political challenge and we really need to be sure about it .
I do not understand why we are prepared to cut funding in this area .
It would be an embarrassment for the EU if this project were to stall or fail due to lack of financial backing .
Thirdly , since many areas , such as the ones I have just mentioned , require increased funding , I do not understand why , when the ITRE Committee 's request is for a smaller budget , this does not come from the Security and Space Research programme , where we should reduce payments and not increase them .
Turning to more general non-ITRE issues , on the structural funds I support the call in this report for an increase in payments .
This is the one area where ordinary citizens see the difference EU policies make to their everyday lives .
My own region , the West Midlands , is a case in point .
EU funds have acted as a catalyst in re-energising the potential and development of local communities .
On external affairs , Asia is one of the largest and most populous regions in the world .
It contains 60 % of the world 's population .
So I am amazed that the Commission has cut funding .
Last year money for the tsunami disaster was taken from other Asian programmes without any increase and this year , because the tsunami funding has decreased , the Commission has cut the funding again .
Has the Commission forgotten that the money is desperately needed by the Asian programmes which were sacrificed , where the EU is committed to meeting Millennium Development Goals ?
I ask the Commission to justify this .
I welcome this report 's call for transparency in the allocation of funding for information and communication .
We need full transparency across the board , so EU taxpayers ' money spent on EU policies should be totally traceable and published on the Internet .
Then we can see exactly how much money goes to whom .
This applies equally to the Members of this House and especially to agriculture .
Finally , I should like to congratulate both the rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , on producing excellent reports .
I thank them for their hard work .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - Mr President : one minute , two points .
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has quite simply voted for the maintenance of the Commission 's proposed spending on consumer protection , not the deep cuts proposed by the Council .
So we are voting for the status quo as proposed by the Commission .
Secondly , I should like to mention Parliament 's budget for communicating with our citizens .
Each year American congressmen are allowed to send four four-sided newspapers to every single one of their voters to tell them of their glorious achievements .
I propose an amendment that would allow each of us here to send one free four-sided newspaper to each of our voters every year to tell them what we are doing .
I hope colleagues will support the amendment , which would help make up the communication deficit .
We have a few voters here in the visitors ' gallery , but there are millions out there who do not know what we are doing and we need to communicate with them .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , in the financial perspective , the amount for the trans-European networks - the 30 top-priority transport projects - has been cut back to a third of the amount that the Commission originally found necessary .
We still do not have the legal basis for the funding in order . Nor do we know how the reduced amount is to be distributed over the next few years .
We have therefore chosen to put the whole of the amount for 2007 - almost EUR 800 million - into reserves until everything has been clarified .
We cannot , of course , make use of the first year 's budget without having a clear idea of what is to happen over the next few years .
You do not build half a bridge . It is a question of ' either / or ' .
In the case of the three agencies for maritime , aviation and railway safety , we want to see the Commission 's figures reinstated in the budget .
These are new agencies in the course of being set up , and they need space in which to work .
Last but not least , I would draw attention to the pilot project for safe lay-bys along European motorways .
With more stringent rules governing drivers ' rest and driving periods , it is important for European drivers to have proper and safe conditions in which to rest .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - Mr President , I should like to say ' well done ' to the rapporteur : he has certainly shown a steady hand .
On an overall level , payments in the 2007 budget must reach 1.04 % of EU GNI if we are to deliver effective programmes to our citizens .
It is also crucial that we adopt a qualitative , value-for-money approach with the resources that we have .
Somebody made the comment that the Council pays .
In fact , it does not .
The citizens pay .
We are dealing with taxpayers ' money ; they have entrusted their money to us and they rightly expect to see positive results within the context of overall value for money .
As rapporteur on the REGI Committee , I strongly urge that the appropriations in the preliminary draft budget be restored and that cohesion be considered one of the policy priorities of the EU .
Finally , I call on the Commission to clarify the legal base of the peace programme and enable resources to be allocated to the International Fund for Ireland .
As an Irish MEP , I am pleased to have the opportunity to thank the EU for its continuing support for peace and IFI funding .
Well in excess of EUR 1 billion has been given to promote peace-building , understanding and tolerance .
You have supported communities and shown faith with ordinary people in the border regions of Ireland .
You have played your role and you can take credit for that .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Elles , ladies and gentlemen , with a few exceptions , all the amendments by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have been accepted by the Committee on Budgets .
First of all , I am delighted that the amendments concerning the restoration of the Preliminary Draft Budget have been adopted , and I am even more delighted that the amendments concerning the increase in aid to the poorest people have been adopted : food aid , refunds for milk , free distribution of fruit and vegetables , promotion activities , the distribution of milk to schoolchildren and aid for bee-keeping .
We should have liked more account to have been taken of , in particular , suckler-cow premiums - vital in disadvantaged areas - aid for energy crops and pilot projects on energy efficiency .
We shall take the liberty of re-tabling amendments along those lines in plenary .
Overall , we consider that the Committee on Budgets has been attentive beyond our expectations to the amendments that we were proposing , and we would thank you , Mr President , Mr Elles , ladies and gentlemen , for the constructive spirit in which your decisions were taken .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( ES ) Mr President , our committee has drawn up certain observations with regard to the cuts introduced by the Council in relation to the European Commission 's proposals .
The most significant of these cuts is the EUR 10 million cut in the reserve in international agreements , which is being taken away - is disappearing - both for commitments and for payments .
The Committee on Fisheries believes that this could even create problems with regard to the Union 's legal obligations in this field , and we are therefore calling for the initial sums to be restored .
The Council 's other reductions relate to the payments of the European Fisheries Fund : EUR 23 million for the convergence regions and EUR 7 million for those that are not included in this category .
The Committee on Fisheries believes that these cuts would make it impossible to pay the advance of 7 % , as stipulated in the Fund 's own Regulation .
Ladies and gentleman , the general contribution allocated to fisheries is already modest enough , and we therefore find these cuts unacceptable .
As well as being arbitrary and unjustified , they send a very negative message at a critical time for the sector , and we in the Committee on Fisheries are therefore asking for the figures proposed by the Commission in the preliminary draft budget to be restored .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , believe in principle that we should go after value for money , for the effective and economic use of funds is what matters .
On the other hand , though - and this is where we have different ends in mind - Europe needs money if we are to be able to enthuse people and move the European project forward , which is what we want to do , and that will not be possible unless proper funding is made available .
Let me remind the House of this morning 's debates on the culture programme and on Europe 's culture policy , and of the debates we are going to have this evening on lifelong learning , on youth policy over the coming years and on ' Europe for the Citizens ' .
This morning , it was lamented - as it will be this evening too - that we do not spend enough money in this field , in an area that really does have an impact on people , on Europe 's citizens , and builds a link between them and Europe .
We share together the great problem of how we get people not only to accept Europe , but also to be enthusiastic about it , and that is why , far from cutting back on these programmes , we should be investing more in Europe 's future .
That is also why the Committee on Culture and Education has been highly consistent in rejecting the cuts the Council wanted to make to these programmes .
Mr President , Mrs Wideroos , Mrs Grybauskaitė , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I want first of all to say a well-deserved thank you to the general rapporteur , our fellow Member and friend Mr Elles , as well as to the Committee on Budgets as a whole , for the way in which it has taken account of the priorities of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .

Among these priorities , there are two that obviously deserved a very special effort when it came to the budget .
The first priority was better control of the EU 's external borders , which are now subject to permanent and considerable migratory pressures , with the whole of the southern border under particular pressure .
Anyone who needs convincing of this need only watch television and read the newspapers every day .
In this connection , it was essential to strengthen the operational resources of the FRONTEX Agency , which we established for the purposes of external border control .
Happily , the Agency 's resources were , indeed , strengthened , with the support , in particular , of our general rapporteur and Spanish fellow Members who helped us correct - I do not know , Mrs Wideroos , whether to use the word ' stupidity ' or ' incoherence ' ; I shall opt for ' stupidity ' - the stupidity of the Council , which had , for its part , reduced the resources of the FRONTEX Agency in spite of current circumstances .
We had a second priority , this too recognised by the whole of Parliament and enthusiastically supported by Europeans , if all the available polls are to be believed , which was to increase the resources earmarked for the fight against terrorism and organised crime which , as you well know , make a mockery of the EU 's internal borders .
On this subject too , our message has been heard by the Committee on Budgets which has , in particular , increased the resources set aside for Eurojust .
These too had been reduced in the Council 's draft budget .
Mrs Wideroos , I shall leave it to you to choose a suitable adverb to characterise this reduction .
I make no bones about the fact that , where the ' freedom , security and justice ' sector is concerned , the Council is equal neither to what is at stake nor to Europeans ' expectations , and our Parliament will be able to take pride in using its vote to correct the inconsistencies in the position of the Council , whose members delight in making all the right noises but balk at acting together to confront serious problems they have in common .
It is a terrible shame .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , it is often said that knowledge does not take up any space , but in this case I believe that the debate and the reflection on the future of Europe should have a space in the budget .
When we met with the general rapporteur in July , I told him , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , that this may appear to be the least important thing in this debate , but that in reality that was not the case .
We are debating the way we want Europe to be in the future and , in order to realise our dreams , we need funds and resources , above all so that we can inform the citizens , strengthen the institutions responsible for relations between civil society and the European institutions and promote the debate .
Are we going to achieve that with the budget we have ?
The amendments presented by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs have been taken up to a certain extent by the Committee on Budgets .
In that way we will be able to promote proper reflection on these matters and also ensure that the citizens understand some - if just a little - of this debate that we are holding here and know what the Union 's budget is .


draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - Mr President , I should like thank my colleagues , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , who have done considerable work on the EU budget for 2007 .
In general , although I support the approach of our rapporteurs , in the final analysis we must guarantee sufficient funding for common foreign and security policy and we must find a solution to the funding of the agencies .
However , the ongoing negotiations can only be based on a mutual understanding that all sides abide by their earlier commitments .
I address this to the Council in particular , which has repeatedly proposed extensive budget cuts in areas of great importance to the European Parliament .
On behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I should like to raise a few points that unfortunately have to be raised every year .
The principle of gender mainstreaming is enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty , which requires a gender equality perspective not only to be applied to measures designed specifically to promote equal opportunities , but also to be incorporated into all policies at all levels of the budgetary process by means of gender budgeting .
Since 2003 , when this House adopted a resolution on gender budgeting - that is , building public budgets from a gender perspective - the fact that public budgets , including the EU budget , are not gender-neutral and have a different impact on women and men has been taken into account .
A gender budgeting approach should be used to assess and restructure all pertinent budget programmes , measures and policies , as well as to determine to what extent resources are allocated in gender-equal or -unequal ways and ultimately achieve gender neutrality , where equal consideration is given regardless of gender .
When the Finnish Minister for Social Affairs and Health , Tuula Haatainen , addressed our committee in early October , she highlighted the mainstreaming of equality policies in budgetary planning and evoked the Finnish example of seeking to ensure that all items , not only in the national , but also in the EU budget , take gender equality policies into account .
I certainly hope that the Finnish Presidency will succeed in this respect .
draftsman for the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - ( HU ) I wish to speak on behalf of the Committee on Petitions about the budget for the European Ombudsman .
We often speak of bringing Europe closer to its citizens , of helping the citizens to gain a better understanding of what the European Union really is .
The office of the European Ombudsman is a small institution , one that does a considerable amount of work in this area .
It is therefore very important for the Ombudsman to have sufficient budgetary resources available to be able to perform his duties successfully and effectively .
In April of this year , we spoke very positively about the European Ombudsman during the discharge process .
I would like to remind everyone that we spoke of this office as a model ( for other institutions , with clearly defined competencies ) and a well-administered budget .
The European Ombudsman is sparing with translation charges and does not wish to add new items , and it is precisely for this reason that , on behalf of my committee , I request that , because we have to take account of the forthcoming enlargement , we support a moderate increase in the budget requested by the European Ombudsman , while emphasising the need for budgetary discipline and for citizens to be provided high levels of services .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Grech , the rapporteur for Parliament 's budget .
It was a pleasure to work with him and to reach joint compromises in my role as shadow rapporteur .
I congratulate him on the excellent end result that we achieved .
Above all , we have to remember the principles upon which the budget is drawn up .
Firstly , we have to be precise about how we intend to spend taxpayers ' money .
Another principle is that we spend money on what is necessary .
We should not be doing all sorts of nice and interesting things , but what is really necessary .
The 20 % increase principle is hopelessly outdated .
It sometimes leads to madness , such as the proposal for Internet television .
The idea behind Internet television is for Parliament to have its own TV channel .
The money for that cannot really be justified to taxpayers .
As an example , I might mention the speech given in Brussels by Finland 's second Minister of Finance at the beginning of the Finnish presidential term .
The speech was broadcast via Internet TV to everyone in Europe , but in the whole of Europe there were just 14 interested viewers , half of whom were the Minister 's own advisers .
If we are to make an investment of tens of millions for just a handful of people , the money is certainly going to be in the wrong place .
It would be more cost-effective to spend the money , for example , on bringing journalists from small local and regional newspapers here , after which they would write articles on Parliament and what happens here .
People read these sorts of newspapers carefully , but they will not really follow these Internet TV broadcasts .
We need all budget headings to be closely evaluated and monitored , and this applies especially to building policy .
I am happy that we have found a common view , because the building in Strasbourg became a scandal , and we no longer need publicity like that .
We therefore need to be a lot more careful about how we spend money .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Wideroos , Mrs Grybauskaitė , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank our two rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , who , through the work they have done and the tenacity they have shown , have been able to give direction to our work on this first reading of the budget .
This budget , the first of the 2007-2013 programme , is a very modest one , representing only 1.04 % of GDP .
Not only is it very modest , but it is probably not up to the challenges facing the European Union : the energy crisis , the crisis of confidence , world conflicts and the increase in poverty and job insecurity , all coming at a time when Europeans are expressing ever more expectations of the European Union .
The restricted framework forces very modest ambitions on us .
Quality , and not just quantity , characterises the approach to this 2007 budget , therefore .
The budget has also compelled us to adopt a hybrid strategy .
Indeed , not only are our legal bases for the new policies not ready , but we are not ready , either , to champion and implement all the policies wished for by Europeans .
We want to be ambitious , as people expect us to be , but we must also be realistic , as we do not know whether we shall be able to implement these policies .
For the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the minimum consisted in reinstating the preliminary draft budget for all the policies to which we are attached and , in particular , for the Lisbon objectives and the Gothenburg policies , not forgetting employment , solidarity , the environment and rural development .
2007 should be the year in which our communication policy is overhauled , given that Europeans have been very much forgotten up until now .
Where external policy is concerned , I would also appeal for us to adopt a balanced approach to administration , particularly where the EU 's borders are concerned , as we cannot be satisfied with a unilateral approach that concentrates on law and order .
I should like , if I may , to emphasise two important points : first of all , the role to be played under the heading of the EU budget by cofinancing involving the European Investment Bank , and this with a view to relaunching the Lisbon and Gothenburg strategies ; and , secondly , the role of pilot projects and preparatory actions , which have always favoured the birth of new ideas and which should be implemented .
In reality , I am mostly concerned about the implementation of this budget .
Our rapporteur has opted for spending with a qualitative focus . This amounts to championing the way in which our priorities have traditionally been financed , but it also constitutes an appeal to the Commission to respect fully the political choices made by Parliament .
If , moreover , Parliament can make criticisms of the way in which policies are administered by the other institutions , it is because such criticism is authorised by the Treaty , the institutional agreements and actual practice .
Parliament is one of the branches of the budgetary authority , and we do not wish to be dispossessed of our power as a result of abandoning all authority regarding the way in which our votes are brought into play .
Is it fair , however , for us , in the name of that power , to make it more difficult for these same institutions to exercise their prerogatives ?
No .
It would be dangerous , and even counter-productive , to try to intervene too much in administrative practice .
I would also say to the Council that the Commission could not do better if , at the same time , we were to agree to freeze recruitment by that institution .
However , we have little room for manoeuvre if - as we have cause to fear , given the latest line proposed - all our priorities are adjusted in accordance with the European Commission 's shortcomings in implementing policy .
Finally , and in conclusion , I wanted to tell you , Mr President , that the Council must remember that it cannot impose its point of view , because we need together to comply with the priorities of the European political project and because , if we reduce the budget by too much , we shall no longer be able to develop any of these policies of which Europeans expect so much .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the budget we are presenting today is a responsible and sensible budget .
We have not accepted the Council 's indiscriminate cuts to administrative expenditure but we have , on the other hand , put EUR 50 million from the Commission 's administrative budget into the reserves and demanded a clearer explanation of trends in certain areas of expenditure .
We must not close our eyes to the facts when we establish the budget , but go into details and ensure that precisely those resources that are necessary are available .
In that connection , I wish to thank our rapporteur , Mr Elles , for the approach he has chosen to adopt in this year 's work on the budget .
I am thinking of the idea of ' value for money ' , following on from criticism by the Court of Auditors and in cost-benefit studies and other reports .
In particular , I would draw attention to the cost-benefit studies as a constructive innovation , offering us a far better survey of , for example , trends in the Commission 's information and communication policy and the development of the common foreign and security policy .
Specifically on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would emphasise the need for adequate resources for the legal and asylum policy and for the foreign policy .
There is a sharp contrast between the fine words uttered by EU Heads of Government in formal speeches and the resources that their finance ministers are prepared to make available .
At the same time as Heads of Government emphasise that the EU should present a united front in refugee policy and strengthen the common border management agency , FRONTEX , finance ministers make a point of cutting back on appropriations to the agency .
Clearly , this is inconsistent .
I am pleased , moreover , that we have had to reach agreement to sort these matters out .
In connection with the financial perspective , it is quite clear that the EU 's foreign policy was badly handled .
That the budget we are presenting today is clearly a responsible one is shown , however , by the fact that Parliament has not tried to challenge the interinstitutional agreement .
We have established a budget within the framework of the agreement .
Foreign policy is an area that will demand close attention over the next few years , however .
I think that , especially in regard to our close neighbours in Central and Eastern Europe , we in the EU have an obligation to promote stronger economic development and to encourage a view of democratic development as something hopeful and positive .
The money needs to be used well , and we therefore ask that the Commission ensure that the new programmes take account of the Court of Auditors ' criticism of the aid to Russia .
With regard to Parliament 's and other institutions ' budget , my group has adopted the approach of our rapporteur , Mr Grech , whom I should also like to thank for a constructive and substantial piece of work .
It means that the budget is somewhat below the level originally announced by the institutions but , after thorough analysis of each individual institution , a position has been adopted on what is in reality needed and a suitable margin thus created .
We have had a number of debates about whether Parliament needs 20 % of the total administrative expenditure , and we have ended up with a figure that is rather on the small side .
My group supports the policy of recent years to the effect that Parliament should purchase the buildings it uses , but we must ensure that we have a clearer overall view of what resources are needed for buildings over the next few years .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this House 's budget debates may well not be renowned for being sexy , but they are very important , for we , in the 2007 budget as in all the others , are setting out the priorities for our work over the coming year .
You will be aware that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance did not vote to approve the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective on the grounds that we see this financial plan as resolving too few problems .
We take the same view of the 2007 budget , and ask ourselves whether it will enable us to do those things that have to be done .
For example , we do not agree with our agricultural policy or with the excessive subsidies paid out for agricultural exports .
Our deep-frozen chickens sell in African markets for half the price of those that the Africans produce themselves , and then we end up complaining about how we get too many refugees from Africa , when it is we ourselves , with our own agricultural policy , who are helping to create the problem .

There is also fisheries policy , where our fishing quotas are still too high , and we are endangering our fish stocks .
This is another policy that the European Union should change .
Not to mention our policy on tobacco , for we are still subsidising tobacco growers while at the same time banning tobacco advertisements .
That , too , strikes me as inconsistent and not a smart policy for Europe to adopt .
Now that many European countries have the globalisation blues - remember the referendum in France ? - our globalisation policy ought to be a more just one , with us speaking out more emphatically in favour of fair trade and getting more serious about our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals , in which respect we are lagging behind the rest of the world when it comes to funding the war on poverty .

Europe , though , must also do more towards a forward-looking energy policy ; we need to invest more in research into renewable energies that would make us less dependent on Mr Putin and enable us to be more forthright in our criticisms of his autocratic regime .


What do we have to do instead ?
We have to invest more in education , research , culture , the media and in the cultural industry , which is an important pillar of the Lisbon Strategy , and that would enable us to make that strategy more precise and more forward-looking .
What we in Europe need is to be more of one mind where policy is concerned ; that is the only way in which we will develop a responsible common foreign policy that is pro-active , that spreads civilisation , that reinforces civil society through the neighbourhood policy , but also intervenes when absolutely necessary .
If that is what we want , we are not spending enough money .
Much as I would love to see us take ' value for money ' as our yardstick , we also have to work on the basis of ' good money for Europe ' .
If each of our Member States is spending only one per cent of its gross national income on Europe , then not enough money is being made available for European policies that are both important and the right ones to pursue .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I was going to say Madam Minister , but I will not .
The reading contains a kind of virtual version of the EU budget .
After the Council 's reading , the level of payment appropriations was 1 % of the Member States ' combined GNP .
Parliament in its first reading is raising this to 1.04 % .
This is being done by increasing appropriations for the draft budget , which could be called virtual because Parliament has not been in the habit of holding on to its increases right to the last .
The Council has regularly been the winner in negotiations .
Parliament 's credibility will suffer if that happens again .
Our group demands that Parliament keep to its priorities .
The rapporteur , James Elles , has been innovative in looking for appropriations where the Commission has not implemented the budgetary requirements of previous years .
We support his approach , where some funds are set aside in reserves and only released after the proper statements have been produced .
Our group supports the right of the new Member States to seek staff positions in the Commission for their own citizens .
Consequently , we cannot support the cuts in Commission personnel as proposed by the Council .
Public authorities , including the European Union , may act as catalysts in various economic processes .
On the other hand , the same money may also be spent on administrative projects led by Eurocrats , which in fact erode people 's confidence in the Union .
An example has been the PRINCE programme .
Another will be the 3DGENOME project , plan D. There is a danger that Parliament 's own Internet television channel will be another .
Our group does not support the use of Commission and Parliament appropriations to produce Euro-propaganda , and we do not want the militarisation of the EU using money for the common foreign and security policy .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I should like to begin by congratulating both rapporteurs and thanking them for all their work .
This year , we are faced with a rather curious situation .
The meagre Commission budget was cut only slightly by the Council , whereas Parliament 's Committee on Budgets is proposing an increase in spending and financial commitments above the limits proposed by the Commission .
This stance is obviously worth supporting , as the Union cannot rise to the challenges it faces without a larger budget .
I refer to the forthcoming enlargement and increasing competition at world level .
We can but hope that a suitable compromise will be reached in November and that the European budget will be closer to Parliament 's proposal than to the Council 's .
Given that the Council wishes to cut expenditure , as it is wont to do , it was entirely appropriate for Mr Elles to suggest a value for money approach .
This method involves working more efficiently to attain our aims .
Bearing in mind that the 2007 budget is the first budget within the new financial framework , it is to be hoped that it will augur well for subsequent years .
I should like to take advantage of this opportunity to reiterate my appeal to all those who care about human rights to support the amendments tabled by the UEN , in which we call for an end to Union financial support for programmes promoting compulsory abortion in third countries .
Allow me to stress that the issue at stake here is compulsory abortion , not abortion as such .
Rejection of these amendments will amount to supporting practices that infringe fundamental human rights .
It will reveal the hypocrisy of all those who constantly advocate human rights whilst simultaneously trampling all over them .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I must begin by thanking the rapporteurs .
Nonetheless , the 2007 budget is a bad one .
Most Members are aware of this , but only a small minority venture to say so openly .
It is a bad budget because it fails to deal with , or even to tackle , any of the European Union 's major problems .
These include the sluggish economy and the increasing differences between the levels of development in the countries of the old and the new Union .
The 2007 budget is also bad because it does not respond to the new challenges facing society and the economies of the Member States .
There is the destabilisation of the market for raw materials , and in particular the steep increase in the price of sources of energy .
There is also the important issue of economic migration from the new Member States to the countries of the old Union and the consequent rapidly rising social and economic costs in the poor countries .
If the amendments tabled by the Independence and Democracy Group had been adopted , the 2007 budget could have served to introduce a new approach to funding for the agricultural sector .
In view of the strong resistance to these amendments expressed at meetings of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgets , we expect them to be rejected by Parliament .
This is a testament to the power of agribusiness and the large landowners .
It also reveals where Parliament 's true allegiance lies , as the House is quite prepared to defend the interests of a rich minority against the large majority of farmers who are poor .
It should be pointed out that the resources saved could be devoted to supporting entrepreneurship , research and development and investment in infrastructure .
The 2007 budget increases expenditure on administration , and provides for the creation of new offices and agencies .
We are strongly opposed to all that .
In conclusion , the IND / DEM Group will vote against the 2007 budget and we trust that other Members of the House will do likewise .
- ( SK ) On the liabilities side , the draft budget of the European Union submitted by the European Council is fully consistent with the ratio parameters of the approved long-term financial perspective for 2007 - 2013 .
Appropriations for competitiveness and cohesion have increased significantly in the area of growth and employment as well as in the area of freedom , security , justice , civil society and the status of the European Union as a global partner .
In compliance with the financial perspective , the share of spending on direct payments in agriculture has decreased ; by contrast , the share of spending on rural development has grown .
Unfortunately , as a result of the Council 's efforts to significantly reduce the overall volume of funding , the positive trend in respect of payments has to a large extent dwindled away .
The Council 's reservations concerning the beneficiaries ' ability to draw down budgeted expenses have had some negative implications .
As the Council holds the key to the successful use of funds , I see this as the Council 's reservations towards itself .
However , Parliament 's conviction that the available funds will be used well and efficiently exceeds the Council 's expectations .
Therefore , I will vote in favour of those amendments that bring payment parameters more in line with the long-term financial perspective .
( PL ) Mr President , at this crucial stage of work on the 2007 budget , it seems to me that the European Parliament is taking more account than the Council of the priorities , figures and principles of interinstitutional cooperation agreed for the period of the 2007-2013 multiannual Financial Perspective .
As people elected by the people , we have a good understanding of the concern felt in the Member States .
There is concern that the new generation of multiannual programmes might not begin on time .
That will be one of the main criteria against which the year 2007 will be assessed .
We also share a common desire for a new financial regulation , hence our pressure on the Finnish Presidency to ensure that we can work on the basis of the new financial regulation in 2007 .
The oft-repeated refrain that we are striving to rationalise the budget will become more than mere words this year .
Mr Elles , our rapporteur , has proposed , and obtained Parliament 's support for , a very consistent position .
This entails giving strong financial support to the priority lines , whilst applying a 30 % reserve to budget lines that seem unlikely to be used in full .
We should all sing from the same hymn sheet in this matter .
There is certain to be a difference of opinion , however , on the issue of posts and salaries in administration .
We believe that the European Union 's new functions require motivation , a stable administrative staff and recruitment from the new Member States .
There is bound to be disagreement amongst us on this issue during the conciliation procedure in November .
Personally , I am not fully satisfied with the geographical focus , as our main commitment is to the continent of Europe .
The larger the European Union , the greater its responsibility for Europe .
This should be reflected in the geographical focus applied to the distribution of funds .
Nonetheless , the margins are retained and the flexibility instrument remains unused .
It should also be possible to reach a compromise this year , and our argument should be the strength of Thursday 's vote in the European Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , and I welcome the Commissioner and all of my fellow Members .

I should like to make two very brief remarks .
The first relates to what was said by Mrs Guy-Quint .
Those who wanted proof of the inadequacy of the 2007-2013 financial perspective now have it .
The first budget of the new financial framework clearly demonstrates that the funds are overstretched .
The rapporteur has made some leaps of faith , some of which have been rightly corrected by the political groups , but nothing has been able to address the tight constraints of the multiannual financial framework .
After this first piece of evidence it should be obvious , even to those who argue that 1 % of gross national income is enough to sustain the Community budget , that what is instead required is a change , a mid-term review .
I therefore call on Parliament to start preparing for this challenge right now .
My second remark will be brief .
Mr Elles has done well to propose an operation for controlling spending , which has our support and backing .
It is right to be as transparent as possible , but it is also right not to undermine the fundamental policies of the European Union .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I wish to thank the general rapporteur on the budget , Mr Elles , for his excellent preparatory work .
He has demonstrated intimate knowledge of the work of the EU and the administration of its funds .
His approach has been well-argued and bold .
At the same time I want to thank Mr Grech for the excellent and responsible job that he has done , and Mr Lewandowski for his skilful leadership of the Committee on Budgets .
The 2007 budget is the first to be drafted within the framework of the new financial perspectives .
It is , moreover , an initial source of financing for new programmes and a final one for old commitments .
The draft budget is moderate .
It remains within the framework of the financial perspectives , and it does not even propose the use of the flexibility instrument .
Nevertheless , it has clear priorities .
In my opinion , it is quite right that appropriations for training , research and development have been increased .
We must build more than just a pile of paper round the Lisbon Strategy .
For that reason , we still need to make it easier for enterprise to flourish , which will mean competitiveness under the CIP Programme and a clear boost for innovation .
All these have been among our group 's objectives .
The Northern Dimension and cooperation in the Baltic Sea region have been on the agenda for a long time , and it has been considered important to develop them .
My group has tabled two draft amendments , Amendments 492 and 493 , in which there is an addition to the explanatory statement for the budget headings on pan-European road and gas networks , which states that funds could also be used for financing projects which implement the strategies referred to .
I hope that there is support for these draft amendments .
( FR ) Mr President , I shall concentrate on the European Parliament 's budget .
The Grech report is the definitive word on the European Parliament 's budget , and I should like sincerely to thank Mr Grech for the quality of his work and , especially , for the climate of dialogue that he has been able to create .
For the period of a year - and a year is a long time - he will have to administer all the releases of funds , as well as the reserves . Make no mistake : we shall have someone open , coherent and fair to engage with .
For the second time in its history , Parliament will not achieve the mythical 20 % mark .
It is useful to think in terms of an operational budget , but it is necessary to be very attentive and very much on the ball if , as proposed by the Grech report , we wish , as the need arises , to mobilise more money in order to acquire buildings , given that acquisition procedures are extremely protracted , what with the Bureau being required to give a decision , the Committee on Budgets needing to offer an opinion and the Council having to give us the go-ahead .
If , for example , I were to purchase a building in London or Paris over the next few days , I am not sure that we could , in a few weeks , release the funds for which we had , however , made provision the previous year .
It is therefore a very good idea to stay below the 20 % mark whilst , however , remaining very much on the alert in case an opportunity should present itself .
The second very important feature of the Grech report is that it has placed the individual at the heart of our objectives .
Next year , and for the first time , we are going to embark on a new process through the setting up of the parliamentary web-TV channel project , the beginning of the work in our visitors ' centre and the meeting of the first citizen ' agora ' , which will involve people in our legislative work .
I think that we have made a lot of effort to put the citizen centre stage , and I should not like to conclude without emphasising - since we learned yesterday evening that he was to be leaving - that Mr Priestley , our Secretary-General , has , during the ten years that he has headed the administration , worked hard to modernise our budgetary procedure and to make it more rigorous and transparent .
( EL ) Mr President , the draft budget serves in an absolute manner the anti-grassroots , reactionary policy of the European Union .
It is within the framework of the new financial framework for 2007-2013 , cut and sewn to the measures to strengthen European capital .
The 2007 budget promotes the anti-labour Lisbon Strategy and the united market , while at the same time cutting resources for many regions , such as Greece , strengthening inequalities and unequal measures with prospects of it not even being included in the poor Cohesion Fund .
It drastically cuts spending in the agricultural sector , completing the application of the anti-farming reformed CAP , thereby wiping out more small and medium-sized farms and , at the same time , cutting hundreds of jobs .

This is the modern spirit of the European Union : intensification of work , mass unemployment , poverty-level wages and pensions and , of course , drastic cutbacks and further privatisation both in public health and in social insurance systems .
Nonetheless , resources are increased by 98 % for competitiveness , industrial innovation policy and entrepreneurship , as is the funding for measures for employability , temporary work and class cooperation .
They call it social dialogue .
It is a class budget , which is unfair and should be condemned by the grassroots classes , because it brings inequality , injustice , poverty and greater exploitation for the workers and greater profits for capital .
That is why it should be rejected .
( PL ) Mr President , not only is the 2007 budget the first budget in the new 2007-2013 Financial Perspective , but it is also the first budget relating to 27 Member States , including Bulgaria and Romania .
For those two reasons alone , it ought to be as high as possible in terms of expenditure .
The 2007-2013 financial framework indicates that payments may amount , at most , to 1.06 % of the Union 's GNP .
Unfortunately , in its draft payments plan , the European Commission proposed payments totalling barely EUR 116 billion , which amounts to only 0.99 % of the Union 's GNP .
For its part , the Council of the European Union proposed a further cut of EUR 1.75 billion .
Against this background , we should welcome the stance of Parliament 's Committee on Budgets .
It proposed payments at a level of EUR 121.9 billion , which amounts to 1.04 % of GNP and is around EUR 5.1 billion more than the Commission 's proposal .
Therefore , I very much hope that the House will endorse the proposals made by the Committee on Budgets and that they will be successfully defended throughout the course of our negotiations with the European Commission and the Council .

Mr President , in his report Mr Elles says that it is essential for policymakers to focus on what the real challenges will be for the EU in the years ahead .
When David Cameron was campaigning for the leadership of Mr Elles ' party last year , he told the Daily Telegraph , ' we must challenge the culture of the EU , leaving it to focus on its real job , making the single market work properly and championing free trade ' .
However , Mr Elles ' policy priorities include common foreign and security policy , the European Neighbourhood Policy , terrorist threats , border controls on immigration , environment and communication .
This is the Tory hidden agenda and it is very different from the one Mr Cameron put forward when he needed the votes from the more Eurosceptic party members .
But of course this is the same Mr Cameron who was pretending he would leave the PPE-DE .
One year on , Mr Elles is free to carry on promoting the PPE-DE agenda .
His real leader , Mr Poettering , is no doubt delighted .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Finnish Presidency for at last being so bold as to do something , even if only in a small way , about the sacred cow of appointments in the EU .
I think it extremely regrettable that the attempt at doing away with at least 200 posts before moving on to doing more of the same sort of thing should be repulsed in the way in which it has been in paragraph 29 of the Elles report .
That really is the wrong way to go about it .
To show just why it is so very wrong , let me quote Mrs Guy-Quint , the lady who tabled the amendment , and who said : ' I have never yet heard any rational justification for these cutbacks .
They are about nothing more than settling personal scores , about offended vanity , intrigues and aggression . '
That is what she said in committee .
Of course , the opposite is the case .
The EU has done the sensible thing by getting rid of plenty of jobs already , and it would send the right message if we were , for once , to make a few cuts of our own .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , colleagues , This budget for 2007 follows on seamlessly from that for 2005 , and the rapporteur deserves thanks for accomplishing something so unprecedented .
What we have to do in managing the budget is to do more to combat the waste of EU funds in the shape of displacement effects and lack of efficiency .
The job cuts in the Commission remain highly controversial ; we say ' no ' to them , albeit with reservations , and the acid test we apply is what gains in efficiency is the Council prepared to concede that the Commission - in its field offices in Luxembourg , for example - has achieved ?
How well equipped is the Commission itself to perform its future functions , which will have less to do with making laws and more with the monitoring of how Community law is implemented ?
There are no more than two posts for monitoring Community environmental law , which accounts for 40 % of the laws we adopt .
Something else that we have to make provision for in the parliamentary budget is the means for dealing with a further loss of credibility on the part of Europe .
In 2007 , we will be appointing nine translators and interpreters of the Irish language , even though eight of the thirteen Irish MEPs do not speak Irish .
Sixty Members are travelling around with the new EUROLAT parliamentary assembly , adhering , in so doing , to none of the customary practices of parliamentary assemblies , such as intergovernmental agreements , for example .
This Parliament of ours is having building work carried out at all three of its sites in 2007 , and this is something I find difficult to explain to groups of visitors or to the voters back home .
These are all good issues that we can use to demonstrate that we are taking the Court of Auditors ' criticisms seriously and also that we are serious about managing the EU 's budget better .
( PL ) Mr President , 2007 will be the first year of a new seven-year Financial Perspective .
It is therefore particularly important , at this point , for the institutions of the European Union to clearly define the real needs and priorities for the coming years .
Working on the basis of budgetary discipline and increased efficiency , we should , at the same time , depart from the practice of accepting very high margins of expenditure .
In the past , this often led to resources being wasted .
It also seems appropriate to retain the present strategy of purchasing the buildings we use .
This will result in savings in the long term and make funds available for other activities .
It also seems essential to review the policy on staff management , particularly regarding outsourcing the implementation of activities , which has a detrimental effect on continuity and stability and could therefore have a negative impact on the functioning of the institutions .
As far as employment policy is concerned , the posts resulting from enlargement must be our priority at present .
This process must include information on accommodation for new staff .
The cuts in the budgets of individual institutions proposed by the Council should not be an aim in themselves .
Taking into account the enlargement in 2004 and the next one , which is almost upon us , the overriding aim must first and foremost be to ensure the effective operation of all the Union 's institutions .
In conclusion , I should like to warmly congratulate both rapporteurs on a very well prepared document and us on a sound compromise and an ambitious budget .


( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I too should like to congratulate our rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , on their painstaking work , and to thank and congratulate all of my colleagues on the tremendous work put in on this occasion by the Committee on Budgets when examining the 1 200 amendments , with the aim of meeting the expectations of the 450 million people in Europe .
Firstly , I , for my part , should like once again to point out that I regret the poor contribution made to the European budget by the Member States within the context of the financial perspective .
This contribution is clearly not enough to implement the policies that it now falls to the European Union to translate into something that Europeans want .
Our Parliament therefore has relatively little room for manoeuvre in this area .
If our ambition must be realistic - indeed modest - then let us at least make it as clear as possible .
That was the proposal made by the Committee on Budgets , and that is what we must examine today and in the weeks to come , by prioritising the most effective policies for attaining these objectives and thus for achieving the world 's most powerful knowledge-based economy .
That is why I welcome the efforts that specifically focused , via the proposals , on research , innovation and development policies ; on aid for SMEs ; on pilot projects ; and on the appropriations earmarked for cultural policies which , according to the recommendations made by our colleague , Mrs de Sarnez , are regarded by Europeans as a fundamental part of our common project .
Finally , and in keeping with the humanist and realistic image of our European integration process , I welcome the substantial increase in the appropriations dedicated to the policy in favour of the most impoverished people in Europe .
To conclude , I am pleased that , where external policy is concerned , a balance has been struck that takes account of the peace process in Palestine , even though the reservations voiced will enable us , in my view , to send out a strong signal to the Council in the weeks to come , since we are at first reading .
( PT ) Although it improves upon the Commission 's proposal of 0.99 % of Community GNI , and that of the Council at 0.98 % , in terms of volume of payments , it comes as no surprise that Parliament 's proposal for the Community budget for 2007 , at 1.04 % , falls short in the very first year of what was agreed in the financial perspective , namely 1.06 % , which in our view is itself inadequate if we are to promote genuine economic and social cohesion , particularly given the needs of an enlarged EU .
Given that this is part of the negotiation process , we hope that , unlike what has happened in the past , Parliament will at least seek to ensure that the minimum amounts provided for in the financial perspective for 2007 are adhered to as far as possible , and that these funds are used for the purpose of pursuing an effective economic and social cohesion policy and a genuine policy of cooperation and development .

Although we welcome the adoption in the Committee on Budgets of specific amendments that we tabled , we are very disappointed that other important proposals that we tabled were rejected , which were as follows : the creation of compensation packages to offset fuel price rises in the fishing industry ; the creation of a Community programme to support small-scale traditional coastal fishing as a response to the specific problems experienced in the sector , in accordance with positions previously adopted by Parliament ; and an increase in the funds earmarked for convergence in the European Regional Development Fund to compensate fully the ' regions affected by the statistical effect ' , such as the Algarve , since they have been cut by some 20 % this year .


Mr President , I should like to refer to one particular budgetary matter .
The Commission is presently finalising its public health programme for 2007-2013 .
We all know that in the recent past the Commission has had very effective information campaigns , highlighting the dangers of tobacco and AIDS within the European Union .
The Commission has a budget of EUR 56 million per year to highlight public health threats and to implement public information campaigns throughout Europe .
I believe the time has now come for the Commission to implement an information-awareness campaign to highlight the problem and dangers of , and the cures for , depression within the Union .
I have also written to many governments of Europe seeking their support for this political initiative .
One in four people in Europe experience at least one significant episode of mental difficulties during their lives and up to 18 million people in the European Union , aged between 16 and 25 , suffer from major depression .
Depression and anxiety disorders are the most common mental health problems experienced in Europe .
Studies have estimated that by 2020 depression will become the highest-ranking disease in the developed world .
In fact , there are even higher levels of depression in Eastern and Central Europe .
We have identified the problem ; we have the financial resources to highlight it ; so let us go forward and meet this challenge now .
( SV ) Mr President , first of all , the June List believes that the European Union 's common agricultural policy needs to be scrapped .
As I have pointed out on so many occasions in this House , EU agricultural policy is reprehensible because the money is given to the wrong recipients , and often to recipients who are very rich .
What is more , it denies the world 's poor countries an honest opportunity to sell their agricultural produce on the EU market because we subsidise non-competitive agriculture .
Secondly , the June List believes that structural policy should be returned to the national competence .
The EU resources that come back to Sweden come with a very large number of conditions attached and are in most cases not adapted to Swedish needs .
Next year , Sweden 's contribution to the EU budget will rise to a good EUR 3 billion .
We shall get back approximately EUR 1 billion .
Thirdly , then , the June List believes that Sweden 's membership fee should be halved in the light of how distorting and unjust the EU 's agricultural and trade policy is .
( FR ) Mr President , the European budget is like the theatre of Bertolt Brecht .
While ' Waiting for Godot ' - while waiting for 2014 and own resources - we are managing the most modest of appropriations : EUR 116 billion in payment appropriations , which is not even 1 % of gross national income .
A game is being played here .
For example , the nomenclature has been changed , with a shift from eight headings to six .
An attempt has been made at humour : the Europe of 17 million unemployed is referred to under Heading 1 as ' growth and employment ' .
The CAP budget , which is destroying farming and fruit and vegetable growing and uprooting 400 000 hectares of land , is referred to under Heading 2 as ' confirmation of resources ' .
These changes in form apart , this is a classic budget in every respect .
Firstly , it includes a financial framework for 2007-2013 , which is contained within an interinstitutional agreement - the fourth of its kind - signed on 17 May .
It includes Malthusian sums , for example for agriculture : indeed , market expenditure is going to be wilfully reduced by more than EUR 500 million .
It also includes the great classics : EUR 7 billion with which to toy with external policy in the world ; EUR 5 billion for a research framework programme that will not research much ; and EUR 850 million for the trans-European networks .
All of that , while we await the 2008-2009 review during which every issue will be discussed - not only the UK rebate but also , and above all , agriculture and the agricultural budget .
The great budget debate will therefore take place between 2010 and 2014 .
While we wait to discuss the fisheries sector , Erasmus and the citizens , and if we cannot take tea - since it is almost 5 p.m. - we prefer , during this afternoon 's budget debate , to exchange the little budgetary titbits with which our rapporteur has embellished his magnificent report , which is , all the same , very pleasing .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Union is the most ambitious endeavour in history .
Yet we are funding this endeavour with a minimum 1 % of GDP .
It is not only that we are giving so little ; it is that the Commission and the Council do not even want the minimum amounts committed to be taken up .
The Commission made provision in the preliminary draft for just 1 % .
The Council reduced it still further to 0.98 % and we increased it to 1.04 % .
The Council is doing its best to reduce funding for the Union , the Commission is not doing its best to defend it and thus this role falls to the European Parliament alone .
Many also proposed that we should put spending on agriculture in reserve .
We rejected that proposal .
The destruction of European farmers is not a development policy or a unification policy of Europe ; it is - quite simply - a disastrous policy .
Now to a sensitive political issue : we reinstated the amendment for the restoration of Christian churches in northern Cyprus .
A vote in favour of this amendment will demonstrate Europe 's respect for its cultural heritage and will strengthen the application of European principles for peaceful coexistence between different religious and ethnic groups .
Lastly , so far we have been informed after the event about the Council 's decisions on the CFSP .
This cannot continue .
We need to debate in advance with the Council all the basic options , before the decisions are taken which we are then called on to fund .
In order to send our message to the Council , we reduced spending on the CFSP in 2007 by 50 % .
I should like at this point to say , while agreeing that Mr Elles was obviously right , that the Minister will be making a mistake if he truly believes that what we did was what she herself called ' tactical words ' .
I hope that the Council will now rethink its stand to date .
( SK ) Energy security is one of the political priorities of the new financial perspective and the 2007 budget of the European Union .
It is part of the Competitiveness and Innovations Programme , and there is also a separate research programme within the Seventh Framework Programme .

Our goals in this area are ambitious : we would like to transform the unsustainable , fossil fuel-based energy system into a sustainable one that draws on a variety of energy sources ; we must improve energy efficiency , secure energy supplies , prevent climate change , and increase the competitiveness of European enterprises , first in the energy sector and then elsewhere .
The strategy of the European Union and the European budget are important factors in helping to tackle the bleak outlook for European citizens as regards the provision of sustainable , stable and affordable energy .
Undoubtedly , the budget for 2007 , that is to say , the first year of a new programming period , is of strategic significance .
However , it is necessary to emphasise that resources are limited and much will depend on how efficiently they are used .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , 2007 is going to be a very exciting financial year , for in it , that which the Heads of State or Government , in December last year , adopted as their political priority , and was agreed on by this House and the Council this May , is , for the first time , to become a living reality .
There are a few aspects of this that I am already getting seriously worried about .
This very week , we will be adopting a number of legal bases for multiannual programmes intended to run with effect from 1 January next year .
The stage we are currently at is that the Member States are putting together their framework plans for the conduct of structural policy and submitting them to the Commission .
My very real concern is that the 2007 budget will become an austerity budget as a consequence of many programmes not even being able to get started , even though they are urgently needed .
What I will say , in quite specific terms , and speaking as someone from a country that has the honour of providing the EU with one-fifth of its funding , is that our concern is that , when so much money is called for - despite the lack of any increase over the past in terms of percentages of gross national income , although I will mention in passing that gross national income has increased as a consequence of enlargement - there must of course be some value given in return for this money .
It is for that reason that I am very glad that our rapporteur , Mr Elles , has said that we want to fund more programmes and less administration , although what the Commission still has to do is to demonstrate that it can run the programmes in a proper manner and that all this will not be absorbed by administration costs .
The agencies are another issue that we really have to sort out , since there are apparently going to be three more of them .
What I also want to say with regard to this House 's budget is that we have to reap the benefit of what we have achieved through the success of our building policy .
It is intolerable that we should , just because the money is available , keep on inflating the parliamentary budget and funding things that may well not actually be needed , such as WebTV , for example .
What we need , then , is value for money , and that is what matters most of all .
The report from the Court of Auditors that was presented this morning gives me reason to believe that there is a great potential there for more to be achieved .

( HU ) I would like to join Mr Ferber , in stating that the 2007 budget does indeed have particular significance for all of Europe and specifically for the new Member States , including Hungary .
This is the first year of the 2007-2013 financial perspective which we have been involved in drawing up , and which thus fully applies to us .
Consequently , especially given the lengthy and not always smooth process of its development , it is very important that 2007 should constitute a good starting point for the subsequent years .
This presents us all with both an exceptional opportunity and a responsibility .
It is an opportunity in the sense that by making use of the resources approved in the financial perspective , we can begin not only our own process of catching up , but also the structural and cohesion policies that serve as the foundation for Europe 's future and its competitiveness .
At the same time , we must take responsibility for overcoming the national self-interest that has , regrettably , become commonplace in both the old and the new Member States when it comes to preparing the budget .
Let us not neglect the common values of Europe as a whole and the international role of the EU .
( MT ) The budget that this Parliament will be approving next year will , for the first time , allocate money to a new fund known as the External Borders Fund , purposely created to help Member States strengthen their borders with a view to curtailing the uninterrupted flow of illegal immigration .
Given the seriousness of the illegal immigration emergency , it is almost unbelievable that this is only the first time that the European Union is establishing a fund specifically for external borders , but we have succeeded .
Thanks to this Parliament , the budget for this Fund will be greater than that requested by the Commission itself .
I am talking about a budget amounting to EUR 170 million and designed to protect our frontiers more effectively and thus reduce the influx .
My second point is about FRONTEX , the European Agency for External Borders .
Up to now , this Agency , which has only been in operation for one year , has not been allocated enough resources to do its work .
Suffice it to say that while , up to last week , FRONTEX was coordinating patrols in the Mediterranean , yesterday I saw an advert in the papers announcing that FRONTEX wanted to recruit a director responsible for its sea patrols .
This shows that we must not leave this Agency to its own devices in the belief that it will solve everything .
Therefore , even in this regard , it is gratifying that this Parliament will vote a bigger budget than the Commission requested , almost EUR 35 million , to strengthen this Agency and help it to carry out its duties more effectively .
It is a pity , Mr President , that , rather than follow suit , some European governments have , in a most miserly manner , tried to cut the FRONTEX budget .
We would like them to know that the European Parliament will be doing its utmost to ensure that FRONTEX is given all the means necessary to carry out its duties .
( EL ) Mr President , the priorities of this budget should have been clear and adequate in terms of funding , so as to promote the integration of the new Member States .
Instead , in the Council an accounting attitude prevailed in order to reduce appropriations and in the Commission its fearful stand .
How will the Lisbon Strategy be accomplished ?
How will the Structural Fund programmes be completed ?
With EUR 425 million less ?
How will the rural development policy be implemented ?
With the fictional transfer from the first pillar though the voluntary modulation mechanism or - as proposed - by putting rural development funds in reserve until the Commission decides and gives guarantees for voluntary modulation ?
How will the role of the Union be strengthened in its foreign actions , in the Balkans , in Palestine , in immigration ?
By reducing the CFSP by 50 % ?
How will Europe compete with America in the field of research and competitiveness ?
We cannot set political priorities and not provide the necessary financial tools to implement them .
We are losing credibility and this is undermining the future of the European Union .
( HU ) I would like to share four thoughts with you and comment on one problem .
The Commission 's proposals for next year 's budget are well below of the resources provided for in the financial perspective .
The EU 's competitiveness is deteriorating rather than improving .
Secondly , it is a nightmare that the Council has tried to cut back even this moderate proposal .
Thirdly , in its current form this will not allow for any development , but simply represents an unsuccessful attempt at survival .
Fourthly : it is good news for the new Member States that the great rush to cut back does not affect support for the cohesion funds , or has a minimal effect .
The problem , undoubtedly a significant one , is that while one of the characteristics of the Union is expressed as ' unity in diversity ' , we are at present far from satisfying this requirement .
The translations of the proposals are either not prepared in time or are done so only at the last minute , and sometimes only in rough form .
We are obliged to participate in many meetings at which only some MEPs have native language interpreters available .
The enlargement of the Union in January will further increase justified demands in this area .
Linguistic diversity is a value that we can under no circumstances renounce .
( DE ) Mr President , as a number of speakers have already said , what we have here before us is the first budget of the new financial period , and one that is described as a budget for savings , even though the only savings have been in terms of the interests of the European public .
What we are dealing with here is a misconceived budget policy on the part of the European Union 's Member States .
Over the next seven years , then , the Trans-European Networks will have to get along with only EUR 8 billion instead of the EUR 20 billion that they actually need .
Once more , the Council of Ministers has recourse to the old coercive trick of telling us , in this House , that if we do not pass the budget promptly , the programmes due to start in 2007 will not be able to do so on time .
The Council can , and will , make scapegoats of Parliament and other bodies , even though it sometimes drags out its own decision-making processes over many months , and this is something we have to be on our guard against .
While I am on this subject , let me remind the Commission that it is this House , rather than the Council , that is constantly defending the Commission 's line , and it would have a salutary effect if the Commission were sometimes to be aware of that rather than constantly bowing down and taking dictation from the Council .
Also this week , we have to come to a decision on a quite unacceptable proposal that has been made for plugging a hole in the budget in the second pillar , in agriculture and rural affairs , which involves the Member States being allowed to shift up to 20 % of the funds from the first pillar into the second , into rural areas , and that has been inadequately thought out .
It runs counter to the prerogatives of this House , and it should be rejected .
What do these two things - the trans-European networks and rural areas - have in common ?
Firstly , they have both fallen victim to the Council 's irresponsible austerity policy ; secondly , in both cases , the Commission has distanced itself from its original position and quietly gone back to taking dictation from the Council , and thirdly , in both cases we have to try to put funds in reserve as a means towards bringing pressure to bear on both the Council and the Commission , in order to eventually save whatever can yet be saved .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs , Mr Elles and Mr Grech , who have shown prudence in their respective draft budgets .
Prudence does not necessarily mean an agreement with the Council , because it does not necessarily mean agreeing with the indiscriminate reductions that the Council has established in those budget lines that were not of interest to it , in other words all those that do not relate to common foreign and security policy , a field in which Parliament has made a reduction .
We very much agree with the principle of value for money which our rapporteur advocates for the general budget , particularly at a time like this , a time of extreme financial restriction .
Given the European Union 's prevailing ideology , which some of us do not share , of applying 1 % to the budget , a careful analysis of the budget lines , of their level of execution and of European added value is essential .
Perhaps we do not see the notion of ' value for money ' in the same way as the Council , but , in any event , it is good that it should be accepted as a budgetary principle .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for being here for the majority of the budgetary debate ; that does not normally happen and I therefore thank her .
Issues such as the fight against terrorism , the funding of a genuine common immigration policy and implementation of the policies linked to the Lisbon Strategy are treated as a priority by the European Parliament at its first reading .
We agree with the strategy on payments proposed by our rapporteur , as well as with the proposed focus on the funding of the common foreign and security policy .
Finally , Mr President , we see the budgetary reserves as a very useful instrument , not just for negotiation and good financial management , but also so that , as budgetary authority , we can acquire the information that the Commission often finds it difficult to provide us with for practical reasons .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.05 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Commission Question Time
Mr President , the Commission currently receives fewer complaints about overbooking than before the compensation levels were raised by Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 .
At the present time , only 8 % of the complaints received by the Commission concerning air passengers ' rights relate to instances of overbooking or denied boarding , while 60 % refer to delays or cancellations .
This trend is due , among other things , to the development of low-cost carriers and to the increasingly frequent use of charter companies , which do not tend to integrate overbooking into their working methods .
Since this regulation entered into force , the airlines have demonstrated more flexibility in looking for volunteers who will agree to give up their seats in return for certain agreed benefits .
This practice encourages the airlines to resolve the problem there and then .
That being said , I should like to point out to Mr Evans that , in accordance with Article 17 of the regulation , the Commission is going to present a report on the functioning and application of this regulation to Parliament and the Council at the start of 2007 .
This communication will be based on a study carried out by an external consultant .
An invitation to tender has been published for the purposes of recruiting this external consultant .
Overbooking is one of the items that will be dealt with in this study , and the Commission will obviously wait to learn the results of the study before it decides whether or not there are grounds to adapt the legislation .
The fact is , Mr Evans , while these new regulations have indeed had a noticeable effect on passengers ' rights , it is the decline in overbooking that has become , in certain cases - it must be said - a trend that is very detrimental to passengers .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for that very thorough and clear answer .
However , it is a fact that people still complain about over-booking .
My other concern is that there are still airline companies which are ignoring this Regulation on Air Passengers ' Rights and are telling their customers that it does not apply to them .
Is the Commission going to get tough on some of these operators who seem to think they can operate outside the law and outside EU regulations ?
Mr Titley , it is absolutely vital that we ensure that these passengers ' rights are applied .
I must also say that , at the moment , I am trying to call on all of the airports to display passengers ' rights , so that it is quite clear that all passengers must be informed of the fact that they cannot be made the subject of an overbooking without being offered significant compensation in return , as the regulation stipulates .
There are three key words in relation to this issue : information , investigation and audit , as I pointed out to you .
Next , we shall see whether there are grounds to impose penalties or , at any rate , to bring before the Court of Justice those Member States that have not really monitored the application of these passengers ' rights .
There you have it , Mr Titley .
I thank you for your question , which highlights the importance of applying European law .
( DE ) Mr President , the Vice-President of the Commission was right to point out that we , together , have managed to solve the problem of over-bookings or , at any rate , to improve the situation .
In adopting this directive back in 2004 , we had set the standard for delays very low after the airlines told us that the 9 / 11 disaster meant that stringent rules would make life virtually impossible for them .
They make a practice of simply letting delays pile up , so that , with several landing and takeoff manoeuvres in the course of a day , these delays eventually add up to many hours , for which no financial compensation is paid .
We have put stringent rules in place for the benefit of railway passengers , who can be entitled to full reimbursement of their fares , yet airline passengers ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

I just briefly want to say to Mr Rack that we receive numerous complaints about excessive delays and that we specifically wanted to carry out this audit in order to determine how exactly we can ensure that the new passengers ' rights are applied more effectively .
You are right : as European citizens , we have a right to demand to be treated decently as air passengers and , in the future , as rail passengers .
Therefore , rest assured , Mr Rack , that it is indeed the aim of the Commissioner for Transport to ensure that passengers ' rights are applied more and more rigorously .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , I am glad that the number of complaints appears to be relatively low , but I have myself had the experience - for we are relatively frequent flyers - of the last three flights I was on being overbooked .
I would now be interested to know whether this is a more frequent occurrence on any airlines in particular .
Can it be said that there are certain airlines that make overbooking a matter of professional practice ?
Might it not , under certain circumstances , be possible to consider taking action - quite apart from proceedings for breach of contract - against these companies , not only in order to obtain compensation , but against those companies themselves .
What is the likelihood of an improved public relations effort to make passengers aware of the possibility of compensation payments ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication that the European Commission adopted in July , at my suggestion , addresses the general theme of a European strategy on the protection of children 's rights .
It is clear that special attention is paid in this European strategy to the risk of children and young people falling victim to the actions of criminal paedophiles who use the Internet .
We support very strong preventative action .
In particular , we are in favour of the creation of an international database that can gather together all of the principal data relating to criminals and to those who operate via the Internet for paedophilic purposes , mainly so that we can stop the spread of images that , obviously for reasons to do with sexual exploitation , affect children and young people , and so that we can root out and clamp down on the culprits , namely those who use the Internet for these purposes .
We have also decided to fund a programme called ' Safer Internet plus ' , which consists of a European network of telephone lines and , above all , of Internet communications aimed at allowing Internet users to cooperate with the police .
Through this system of safer Internet use , which is called Safer Internet plus , Internet users will be able to inform the police authorities or Internet providers of any potentially dangerous ' hits ' , and thus the presence of those who use the Internet for pornographic purposes .
Furthermore , we have recently adopted a communication on the trafficking of human beings that includes a chapter specifically dedicated to children and to violence against children .
I am looking into the application of the framework decision on the fight against the sexual exploitation of minors and children and against the use of children in pornography .
In conjunction with the application of this framework decision , I believe that we will be able to come up with measures to further enhance the legislative framework and to clamp down even more harshly on Internet-based sexual exploitation that harms children .
I will report on this issue before the end of the year in a Commission communication .
Finally , the general theme of computer crime will be addressed at the start of next year with a strategic document that will contain a chapter specifically dedicated to child protection .
Mr Ebner will be aware that we have refinanced the Daphne programme .
The Daphne II programme is dedicated to European initiatives combating violence not only against children but also against women and will have a budget of EUR 50 million for the new operating period .
Through this system , we plan to promote best practice in preventing violence against children and to launch information campaigns aimed at promoting more responsible Internet use on the part of children and young people .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mr Frattini for his very thorough reply .
I must acknowledge the fact that he has done some very extensive work in this area , and I believe that he will succeed in bringing about the security and the protection that we want for our children .
I hope that this programme and its activities bear fruit and I , for my part , hope that Parliament will firmly support its work .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am truly grateful to Mr Ebner .
We are currently at the implementation stage .
The European strategic plan will , however , include other important advances .
We are thinking about launching a European emergency helpline in the near future for children who are in difficulty .
It will have the same three numbers for the whole of Europe - 116 - followed by a national number for each country , and will help children who have been kidnapped , who are lost or who are in difficulty .
Together with the major international credit card companies , I am also looking into the possibility of blocking the credit cards of those who access paedophile websites for the purposes of buying pornographic material involving children .
Everyone will recognise that a threat such as this is already in itself a signal designed to strongly discourage this type of criminal .
I am asking my question as the father of Emily , who turns five on Friday , and Oliver , who will be two and a half .
Oliver is not yet surfing the net , but Emily already is .
I fully share the views put forward by the Commissioner and the previous speakers about protecting youth , but can the Commissioner guarantee that we are not starting to impose restrictions on our general use of the internet , because the last thing we want is a headline to the effect that the European Union is preventing us from using the internet freely ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously , no one is thinking about restricting people 's use of the Internet , which is one of the most extraordinary means of communication , insofar as it puts children and young people throughout the world in touch with each other .
However , it is quite clear that we must make sure that we root out and clamp down on criminals who use the Internet in order to establish closer contact with young people , who must obviously be protected .
It is therefore not by restricting Internet use , but by doing more in terms of prevention and control , that we can help children to use the Internet in complete safety .
Subject : Stoning of seven women in Iran
According to Amnesty International news release MDE 13 / 111 / 2006 , seven Iranian women , Parisa Akbari , Iran Eskandari , Khayrieh Valania , Shamameh Ghorbani , Kobra Najjar , Soghra Mola 'i and Fatemeh , face imminent stoning in Iran .
Despite repeated assurances from the Iranian regime frequently transmitted by the Community authorities promising moratoria or the suspension of this barbaric practice , reports of the sentencing and execution of women have continued to mount since the European Union embarked on its ' human rights dialogue ' with the regime .
Can the Commission explain the reasons for the total failure of the human rights objectives that it outlined for its policy of dialogue with the Iranian regime ?
Can it say what specific action it has taken to prevent the murder of these Iranian women ?
Member of the Commission .
The Commission remains deeply concerned by the human rights situation in Iran and views the practice of execution by lapidation as particularly abhorrent .
It is fully aware of the reports by Amnesty International covering sentences of stoning , referred to by the honourable Members .
Stoning is a cruel , inhuman and degrading form of punishment , which the Commission finds totally unacceptable .
The EU has repeatedly called on Iran progressively to restrict the use of the death penalty and insisted that it be carried out according to UN minimum standards , including the requirement that capital punishment may be imposed only for the most serious crimes .
In December 2002 , the EU started a human rights dialogue with the Iranian authorities , with the participation of civil society representatives .
One of the practical results at the time was confirmation by the Iranian side of a moratorium on stoning .
Regrettably that dialogue has not taken place since the summer of 2004 because of the reluctance of the Iranian authorities .
However , tentative dates for a new round of human rights discussions have been fixed for mid-December .
- ( PT ) Mr President , so the Iranian authorities have promised a moratorium and have failed to keep to it ; no surprise there .
What I should like to ask you , Commissioner , is why the Commission insists on talking with a fanatical clique that is tyrannising Iran , rather than with the vast majority of Iranians , who think differently .
I should like to recommend a book to you , written in your language , entitled We are Iran , a collection of writings by a large number of Iranians who think differently and with whom the Commission ought to speak .
Member of the Commission .
We talk to all elements of civil society in Iran .
It is difficult for the honourable Member on the one hand to ask us to make representations ; to make a case to the Iranian authorities ; to make a stand for human rights and against this abhorrent practice ; and , at the same time , to criticise us for engaging in a dialogue .
If you do not have a dialogue , then it is harder , if not impossible , to communicate your view .
In my view , the European approach is right .
In close collaboration with EU embassies in Tehran , the Commission monitors the situation on the ground very closely , in particular as far as the death penalty is concerned .
Whenever it learns of a death sentence passed on juveniles or on women at risk of stoning , the EU undertakes immediate démarches with the judiciary and other competent authorities .
So the EU is not relying on dialogue alone .
It makes its views very directly and clearly known whenever such a case arises , and will continue to do so .
Commissioner , when you say that the European Commission takes the human rights situation in Iran seriously , when is this issue discussed in other dialogues with Iran ?
We now have a dialogue about the nuclear programme in Iran .
Is this issue addressed in those negotiations , or in the negotiations on trade issues ?
This is a serious matter and I do not think it is enough to say that we are trying to get back to the negotiating table on human rights .
This has to be put on the agenda in all dialogues with Iran .
When do you intend to do that ?
Member of the Commission .
The Commission follows up human rights cases through several channels .
It does not simply rely on the dialogue , the last session of which was held in June 2004 , and another session of which is due to take place shortly .
We make diplomatic representations through a variety of different channels , in addition to the set-piece dialogue that is in place , and we shall continue to do so .
( PT ) Following the remarks of previous speakers , I should like to know the Commission 's position on the rape of pregnant women and young children , as a means of silencing the opposition in Iran .
This is a violation of women 's rights and human rights , and I should like to know if the Commission is aware that this occurs and what its position is on the matter .
I am grateful to the honourable Member for asking the question .
This gives me the opportunity to give an answer which I know is very important to Parliament , because Parliament has given much prominence to the topic of international roaming in recent years .
As you know , for citizens there are two problems : first , the high prices they have to pay for crossing the borders ; and then the problem of inadvertent roaming on a foreign network when they have not yet crossed the border but are living in a border area .
In competitive markets one expects to see convergence of prices and costs , but when it comes to roaming there has been for many years now no evidence of a real relationship between prices and underlying costs .
This point was also made very clearly in the impact assessment which accompanied the regulation which I have put on the table .
The question is very simple .
Why should a French customer who just crosses the border to Italy and makes a local call be charged from 50 cents to over EUR 1 per minute , when an Italian customer who is doing exactly the same will be charged between 10 and 13 cents per minute ?
All right , there are some additional costs if you take your phone into a neighbouring country , but there is very little justification for such high differences in price .
In every other area of telecoms - fixed and broadband - European consumers are seeing significant improvements in price , choice and quality ; only for international roaming has this not been the case .
There are millions of citizens who have been very frustrated at these high prices for many years .
We estimate that there are roughly 99 million European citizens living in regions located within 50 km of the borders and 11 million citizens within 5 km of the borders .
They are those most affected by the extraordinarily high roaming prices .
The regulation I have proposed , which is under discussion in Parliament and the Council , proposes substantial reductions in the roaming charges for all Europeans , consumers and business travellers .
It is clear that when that is put in place , those living and roaming in internal border regions will be among the biggest beneficiaries of the regulation .
From a technical point of view , because of the nature of mobile networks , consumers who live in such areas will have to pay some roaming charges , but there will be guarantees , if the regulation is passed , that the prices will be far more reasonable than they are today .
There is also the question of inadvertent roaming , which is a possibility wherever mobile services are available and national borders exist .
That is also why it is very important for those people that the charges will be closer to the cost .
I very often criticise the operators for charging high prices .
On the other hand , I must also say that when operators make the right moves in the right direction , I have to give credit where it is due .
I am pleased to note , for example , that operators in Ireland and the United Kingdom have started to offer all-island rates .
That means , for instance , that citizens in Ireland and in Northern Ireland now pay only one single rate , irrespective of where they are .
That is a good example of best practice .
I would like to see such initiatives encouraged and followed in other areas across Europe .


( NL ) Mr President , roaming costs , particularly those in border regions , account for some EUR 5 billion annually in unacceptable and , in fact , unnecessary expense for businesses and residents alike .
I am therefore indebted to Commissioner Reding for her very emphatic intervention in recent months and also today , but a voluntary solution between businesses in the border regions for this problem of roaming , of which one is hardly aware , where one is moved from one network to another several times a day , is a major problem ; I therefore fear that things will not get solved sufficiently promptly if they are done on a voluntary basis .
So I would ask the Commissioner , and the whole of the Commission , whether it is prepared to draft progress report on this subject .
I think that we need to step up our efforts , for I know that the border regions would like to have a say too .
Unfortunately the national regulators do not have explicit powers to prevent or reduce the possibility of inadvertent roaming .
As the international roaming problem has shown , we do not yet have an internal market in this area .
That is why we have to follow this very closely in order to find good examples and underline them .
In Ireland , for instance , Comreg and Ofcom have agreed to set up a joint working group to investigate the extent of the problem of inadvertent roaming by mobile users and we welcome and encourage that approach .
But it is not yet possible to address the problem on a wider scale through the normal regulatory process .

( DE ) Commissioner , the foreign surcharges on the new UMTS technology are even more pricey than on conventional mobiles ; if you surf abroad , even if only over a partner network , you lose a lot of money fast , and the bill does not generally show whether it has been calculated by the minute or by volume .

Is the Commission planning to ensure greater transparency in this area by way of the Roaming Regulation ?
Member of the Commission .
I was asked specifically by Parliament , among others , to address the question of international roaming charges for mobile phones .
At the time I examined this matter , there was no specific demand for action on data services , such as SMS , and when the national regulatory authorities called on the Commission to do something , they were only concerned about the high level of international roaming charges for voice telephony .
I know from the many discussions I have held , particularly with Members of Parliament and with citizens , that there is also a problem with data .
Parliament , which is examining the regulation , now has the opportunity to go a step further than the Commission did .
Let me also appeal to businesses , since industry is always complaining that we intervene in price regulation .
Operators now have a chance to show that they themselves are capable of bringing prices down , so that the regulators or politicians do not need to intervene .
Commissioner , you have given convincing examples of the absurd situation as regards roaming prices in different countries , but you did not mention the new Member States of the EU , where the situation is even worse .
Will the Commission pay special attention to the new Member States of the European Union with a view to eliminating the very big differences in general mobile telephone and roaming charges ?
Member of the Commission .
The honourable Member is correct : the Greek electronic communications market has unfortunately suffered from a very long delay in the transposition of the regulatory framework .
It should have been in force in 2003 . It was only completed in Greece in June 2006 .
We have seen very clearly that where the framework is not in place there is no competition .
Where there is no competition there is less investment .
That is one of the problems in Greece .
On a more positive note , EU structural assistance in Greece provides substantial co-funding for investments aimed at promoting speedier adoption of ICT in Greece and , in particular , for broadband internet in schools and public organisations in remote , island or mountainous areas . Cohesion funds in Greece also permit projects for the acquisition of informatics equipment in schools or public organisations in the regions , including remote , island or mountainous areas .
As you also know , Greece has started the implementation of a major project aimed at extending broadband access to those Greek regions outside Athens and Thessaloniki which do not yet have that connection and , under normal commercial circumstances , would not get it .
The Greek Government has also launched the DIODOS project , which established a high-capacity Greek internet educational network through which a number of internet providers are offering advanced internet services to research , academic and education communities at prices that are expected to be 50 % below current retail prices .
You will also be aware that the Commission is working very hard on bridging the digital divide .
That is why the Commission recently published a communication on bridging the broadband gap , which gives a strong commitment to achieve broadband for all Europeans through policy , budget aid and regulatory instruments .
Included in that are the structural funds , but also - and this is new - the rural funds , in full respect of state aid rules .
The communication proposes action that aims at strengthening current policies , national broadband strategies and reinforcing the exchange of best practices through a website .
We believe it is very important for the regions to understand what other regions have done and to see what they might be able to copy or adapt to their specific needs .
In that sense we hope that the many problems that persist in some regions , and especially in Greece , can gradually be overcome .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her reply , which fully satisfied me .
I should also like to extend my special thanks to her for visiting Cyprus and for visiting the ENISA , thereby helping to resolve numerous problems for the benefit of this organisation .
We extend our special thanks to you , both Greece and Cyprus , for your visit to Heraklion .
Member of the Commission .
Besides being a beautiful island , Crete is also a region striving to overcome the broadband gap it faces and I know that the honourable Member is helping to pursue that goal in his capacity as a representative of Crete .
Any help we can give , of course , must come through the Greek Government , because , in the case of structural or rural development funds , it is the government which must take the initiative .
The Commission is willing to provide help , so that the large gap which still exists in the non-urban areas of Greece can be narrowed .
I should like to thank the Commissioner .
In Ireland the schools fare better and students are fine while they are at school .
When they are at home , however , the situation is very poor ; 25 % of the population cannot get broadband .
Has the Commission given serious consideration to filling the gap by new technologies , such as WiMAX , although these need spectrum and frequency access ?
Have you considered this and do you have a response to it ?
Many of my constituents cannot get access to broadband and students are deprived of the technology when they go home .
Member of the Commission .
It is clear that there are many techniques and technologies that can bridge the broadband gap .
The Commission has always been very consistent in saying that we need technological neutrality .
We cannot favour one technology over another and sometimes a mix of technologies is the right approach .
Fibre is not always the answer ; sometimes satellites can be more efficient .
In the Nordic states , for example , where there are a lot of geographical problems and problems of distance , this mix of technologies has provided a solution .
I know from the statistics for schools with broadband internet access that Ireland is not doing wonderfully well .
That is astonishing , because I know that education on the new technologies in Ireland is very advanced .
I therefore hope that the broadband gap in Ireland can be filled and that in future all schools will be able to reach the world through the new technologies .
I was glad that the Commissioner , in her first answer , reinforced the importance of sustaining competition and the access obligations in the framework of broadband delivery .
I wonder if she would like to confirm to the House that she will be resisting the calls from certain operators and even regulators for a regulatory holiday for certain levels of investment in broadband ?
Secondly , bearing in mind that she and I will be at the global forum on internet governance next week , can she confirm that she will be joining us in promoting the virtues of competition on a global scale , in order to raise the level of broadband connection globally and reduce costs ?
Member of the Commission .
My answer to the honourable Member is that , according to information from the registry , the number of applications submitted during the sunrise period was 346 218 , of which 181 306 were filed during the first phase and 164 912 during the second .
The current rate of rejection for applications from Ireland is 46 % , compared to an overall EU rejection rate of 34 % .
The complete table with a breakdown of all applications per prior right and country of applicant can be found on the registry 's website .
The kind of documentary evidence to be provided by an applicant depends on the national law of the Member State in which the prior right is established .
There are huge differences between the legal systems of the Member States , which are reflected in the more or less complicated means needed to prove the existence of a prior right .
This results in a higher or lower rate of rejection of applications in certain countries , such as Ireland .
As to the question of whether the registry provided Irish registrars with the necessary means to comply fully with the application process , the Commission is not aware of any specific discrimination in this respect .
From October 2005 - that is , two months before the launch of the sunrise period - the registry published on its website and in all the official languages a detailed description of all technical and administrative measures concerning the registration procedures .
This information , by the way , is still available online to any interested party .
During that same period , the registry also set up a call centre , where applicants could obtain quick responses to their questions in 20 official languages .
As to the alternative dispute resolution procedure , its purpose is promptly to resolve disputes between domain name holders on matters such as cyber-squatting or intellectual property rights , as well as in relation to individual decisions by the registry .
Should an Irish applicant consider that he or she falls within either of these two categories , the Commission is of the opinion that the alternative dispute resolution procedure is indeed a fair method for remedying the problem .
In conclusion , the Commission considers that the information made available by the public registry is sufficient for applicants and for registrars to proceed with the registration of domain names during the registration period and afterwards .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner .
Despite our performance on broadband , it is nice to hear the Commission acknowledge what has happened in Northern Ireland and Ireland as regards roaming , which I hope will serve as a model for other countries .
In her answer , the Commissioner firmly placed the blame on national governments for their inadequate legislation .
This is true not only of Ireland but also of the United Kingdom .
Mr Patrik Lindén , the communications manager of EURid , has put it very bluntly indeed .
I will take your message back and will certainly point out that at national and local level much of the responsibility for the fact that we are way behind the rest of Europe effectively rests with our own government and our own legislation .
Fair Trade has made enormous progress in getting labelled products onto supermarket shelves and into mainstream buying habits and practices .
The same cannot yet be claimed for crafts and garments .
The Commission will consider , as part of the follow-up to Parliament 's report , whether there is scope for action in this area .
When I said in Parliament in July that ' what is required to tackle poverty and to enhance development is a fair and coherent policy framework ' , this was not limited to Fair Trade - though I acknowledged the helpful role that the report on Fair Trade and development would play .
So whilst the Commission is considering how to capitalise further on the role of the Fair Trade movement , there are a number of other wider actions that it can undertake .
In cooperation with developing countries , we can promote decent work and international labour standards , as well as the interaction between decent work and other policies .
The new thematic programme on investing in people , which comprises awareness-raising , training , information-sharing and the development of a set of indicators to monitor progress , will be an important tool .
The close link between decent work and poverty reduction is increasingly well understood in the EU .
In the ' European Consensus on Development ' - a document published in 2005 - employment and social cohesion are recognised as one of the nine areas of Community action .
Employment , decent work and social cohesion are also central in the EU-Africa strategy .
In May 2006 , the Commission adopted a communication on decent work for all , which will be presented at the Commission Conference on Decent Work and Globalisation in December , where the issues will be tackled in a comprehensive framework .
We are also contributing to the adoption of international norms and standards for all products , including textiles , through ongoing trade-related activities at bilateral and regional level .
One example is a quality support programme in Bangladesh , which focuses on the improvement of the quality standards , metrology and accreditation systems in the country to help national laboratories ensure regional and multilateral recognition and acceptability of the conformity assessment certificates .
The Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institute will also be strengthened in its basic capacity as a standards-setting body and in the area of metrology .
The programme will help to enable Bangladesh to address multilateral requirements , as well as to increase the competitiveness of its export industry .
The project aims to create public-private partnerships and promote in particular awareness of quality and environmental managements systems and social standards - ISO 14000 and SA 8000 certified companies have increased in number - as well as strengthening the Consumer Association , through which pressure for change and control will be built up .
Thank you for that answer , Commissioner .
I entirely accept that there are wider issues in trade and development than Fair Trade alone .
However , I should still like to hear from the Commission that you will give specific support to developing clear criteria for assessing Fair Trade assurance schemes .
I should also like you to reflect on ways to boost transparency in pricing , so that consumers can see if the Fair Trade premium is passed back by supermarkets , as well as seeing that if they buy their ten-pound or fifteen-euro dress , their bargain may be at the expense of a decent living for textile workers .
Member of the Commission .
I sympathise with what the honourable Member is suggesting .
I think that consumer information , consumer power in this context , is indeed the key .
Fair Trade relies on consumers who have heard about the difficulties faced by poor producers and want to do something about it .
We can help mainly by helping consumers to be clear about what is on offer , but we are looking for opportunities to support the Fair Trade movement when it comes up with targeted requests .
I look forward to considering those as we reflect on what further action to take to support the Fair Trade movement in the weeks and months ahead .
( DE ) Mr President , fair trade is an issue not only in textiles , but also in energy .
Russia 's energy-intensive industries are currently being supplied with oil at 8 dollars per barrel , and gas is available at a very competitive price .
With this in mind , how do you rate the chances for survival of our own energy-intensive industries , and what effect do you think this will have on Russia 's accession to the WTO ?
Member of the Commission .
That is an intriguing question , one which certainly goes far wider than , and indeed probably almost entirely steps outside , the scope of the original question put to me .
Nonetheless it is fascinating .
I believe that the best way of improving , strengthening , deepening , making more satisfactory the energy demand and supply relationship between Europe and Russia is , first of all , to press Russia to adopt other , more transparent policies of free transit that are governed by global trade rules .
I see no reason why energy goods should not be subject to global trade rules like any other good .
But I also believe that the best way to strengthen the energy relationship between Russia and the EU is by anchoring that energy relationship in a wider set of trade negotiations and agreements , the object of which would be to bring about integration of the Russian and European economies governed by fair and transparent market rules and agreed norms and standards .
It is in that context that I look forward to pursuing this subject as part of the wider trade negotiations that I hope will open up following Russia 's accession to the WTO .
Commissioner , one of the many obstacles to the development of Fair Trade is the occasional attempt by other countries to dump products within Europe on a below-cost basis , of which shoes was but the latest example .
My question is not about how right or wrong the shoes decision is ; it is about the process by which that decision is taken .
I understand that 12 countries voted against , 9 voted in favour and there were 4 abstentions .
Could you please comment on the logic of that process , Commissioner ?
Member of the Commission .
On 5 September 2006 , I gave a full and comprehensive statement to Parliament on the state of play of the Doha Development Agenda .
I am sorry to say that no major progress has been achieved since then ; the negotiations remain suspended .
However , it is important to note that since then , be it at the G-20 meeting in Rio , which I attended , or the Cairns Group meeting in Australia , where I was represented - both in September - all key players in the talks have reiterated their commitment to the Round and their willingness to resume negotiations as soon as the political circumstances allow .
However , it will take more than that to get the DDA back on track .
All sides will have to show flexibility and realism and make offers that represent real efforts in all areas of the negotiations .
There is a narrow window of opportunity for resuming the talks between the United States mid-term elections on 7 November and early in the spring of 2007 , when the US Congress starts working on a new farm bill .
I visited Washington at the end of September to explore the US position on the DDA , to probe US congressional politics on the subject and to explain our position .
I met with policymakers in the Administration , with a number of key law-makers on the Hill , and with constituencies like the National Farm Bureau and the National Association of Manufacturers .
The political situation in the United States is difficult .
However , I was encouraged by my contacts with the Administration , where I sensed a genuine willingness to conclude the Round during President Bush 's tenure , although this will require the use of considerable political capital , even to get Congressional extension of the President 's Trade Promotion Authority .
So in the coming weeks our strategy must be to clarify the political conditions for renewing the talks and prepare the ground for movement - short of new offers .
Our sights also remain firmly set on preserving the development issues , at this stage in the context of the Single Undertaking .
If the DDA fails , or if the suspension is extended for too long a period of time , my firm judgement is that we run serious economic and political risks .
There remains a lot on offer in the DDA in terms of agricultural subsidy reduction , tariff reductions for agricultural and industrial products , improved rules and development ; and hence a great deal to lose if the talks fail .
We should not underestimate the broader systemic implications of failure for the multilateral system at large .
The DDA should therefore remain our main focus of attention - as it will - and the EU is willing and prepared to go back to the WTO negotiating table as soon as realistically possible .
I have often said to you in this House that 5 % of world trade is agricultural trade and the 95 % is being blocked by the 5 % at fair trade talks .
Is it not time to remove the blockage ?
Is it not time , Commissioner , to get on with the vast bulk of world trade and deal with agriculture on a separate level ?
If you concede more on European agriculture , you will have broken the agreement that the Member States have made on agricultural subsidies and agricultural support .
So is it not time to deal with the vast bulk of world trade and leave agriculture aside ?
Member of the Commission .
I do not accept that point of view , because I believe that we have a clear obligation , for objective reasons and because it was in the original Doha mandate , to bring about a negotiated and agreed restructuring of agricultural trade .
We are obliged to do that because reform of agriculture has lagged behind the progressive changes that have swept through the rest of the international trading system , with that benign and beneficial impact on industrial tariffs .
But in the case of agriculture you have , exceptionally , a system of agricultural support and in some cases export subsidies which has been very trade-distorting .
As a result of our reforms in Europe we are curing ourselves of the trade-distorting impact of our agricultural support mechanisms .
That is not the case , notably , in the United States .
I believe it is important that we do not say goodbye to this round without exhausting every possibility of bringing about the progressive reform in agricultural support and trade that will be of great benefit to developing countries .
Commissioner , are you concerned that the plethora of bilateral trade agreements - and I do not just mean EU bilateral trade agreements - that is growing up at the moment is a threat to getting the WTO talks back on track ?
Member of the Commission .
I do not think it is a threat , but I acknowledge the risk of a diversion of energy and negotiating capacity .
There are always choices to be made by different countries and negotiators as to what form of negotiation they prioritise - the multilateral or the bilateral .
But I am entirely satisfied that , given the long-term nature of the negotiations we are entering into and the clear sequencing of the initiatives we intend to take , there are no circumstances in which I would permit our own negotiating effort and commitment to the WTO to be diminished or jeopardised by any pursuit of bilateral free trade agreements .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to make a comment and ask a question .
The insistence of third trading partners on agricultural negotiations continues to cause surprise , given the small volume of agricultural products traded globally .
Does the Commissioner think that the emerging economies are truly prepared to contribute to this round of negotiations with fundamental commitments to industrial products and services or do they simply envisage unilateral disarmament on the part of the developed countries ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Sweden is currently one of the eleven Member States with derogations in relation to adopting the single currency .
The Member States with derogations are obliged to adopt the euro as their currency , and to that end they must work towards meeting the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty .
Nevertheless , the Treaty does not set explicit time limits for the Member States to comply with that obligation .
In the 2004 convergence report , the Commission concluded that Sweden met the price stability criterion , the criterion relating to the public budget situation and the criterion on the convergence of long-term interest rates .
Nevertheless , in that same convergence report , the Commission concluded that Sweden did not meet the exchange rate criterion , which requires the country in question to have remained within the normal margins of fluctuation laid down in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System without any serious tensions and for at least two years prior to the assessment .
Furthermore , in the 2004 convergence report , the Commission pointed out that the Swedish legislation was not fully compatible with Articles 108 and 109 of the Treaty .
In view of this assessment , the Commission concluded that there was no need to modify Sweden 's status as a Member State with a derogation in this area .
In accordance with the Treaty , the Commission and the European Central Bank will publish the next convergence report before the end of this year .
The new Member States have committed themselves to adopting the euro as soon as they comply with the criteria laid down in the Treaty .
In this regard , Slovenia will enter the euro zone on 1 January 2007 . Cyprus and Malta wish to join on 1 January 2008 and Slovakia on 1 January 2009 , and other Member States , which had previously set specific targets , are in the process of revising them .
In any event , as I said again at the beginning of my reply , with the exception of the two States with an opt-out clause - the United Kingdom and Denmark - the other Members of the European Union that have yet to adopt the single currency , and for which the derogation is in place , are obliged to adopt it and to work towards complying with the criteria , but there is no date by which they are obliged to have complied with them .
( DE ) Mr President , there are two more , and quite specific , items of information that I would welcome .
The first is that I should like to know whether the Commission , when a Member State such as Sweden , without any arrangement being made for it in the Treaties , fails , for a period of years , to introduce the euro , will take legal action against it by , for example , taking it to the ECJ , or whether it will let the matter rest for another twenty years .
Secondly , I would like to know what is happening about Poland , the Czech Republic , and Hungary .
Is there any sign of any of them - Hungary in particular - actually doing anything ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Posselt , we must not confuse the Member States ' obligation to prepare for adoption of the single currency with the actions that the Commission and the Council may take - and are taking in fact - in relation to Member States that are not complying with the provisions of the Treaty , in the field of budgetary discipline , for example , as in the case of Hungary and other Member States .

Preparations for adoption of the single currency relate to budgetary discipline , but also the stability of exchange rates and the development of interest rates , which is something decided upon by the markets according to the economic situation of the Member States .
They also involve legal reforms , bringing the status of the Central Bank of the Member State in question into line with the rules laid down in the Treaty for the European System of Central Banks , and they also relate to the development of inflation .
The factors for complying with the criteria for adoption of the single currency therefore depend partly on political decisions to be directly adopted by the governments or parliaments of the Member States , and partly on factors that are not always under the Member States ' control .
Consequently , although it will theoretically be possible in the future to apply infringement procedures to States that are not making preparations , we do not currently believe it to be necessary or even desirable .
- ( LT ) Commissioner , if a wealthy and economically stable nation such as Sweden is unable to introduce the euro , I cannot but question the future of the euro zone project .
It is evident that most of the current euro zone members are failing to meet one or more of the Maastricht criteria .
For example , Lithuania has failed to meet the inflation criterion by 0.07 % .
How do you think the euro zone will develop in the future ?
According to some forecasts , the euro will disappear in 15 years .
What preventive measures should be taken ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mrs Budreikaitė , I do not believe that the future of the euro is in question . Not at all .
A few years after its launch , in 1999 , and five years after more than 300 million were able to carry it in their pockets for the first time in the form of coins and notes , the euro is now a reality which those who use it consider to be a success .
In my view , therefore , the issue is not whether the euro has a future ; the question is whether the countries that are not preparing properly for the adoption of the euro are going to suffer the consequences in the future .
That is the real question .
Each time I have contact with the authorities of the countries that are to adopt the euro in the future but which do not yet comply with the criteria laid down in the Treaty , I urge them to adopt a credible and effective strategy for complying with those criteria and adopting the single currency .
For some years we have been enjoying abundant liquidity in the financial markets , interest rates are low and memories of monetary crises and volatile exchange rates are fading in Europe . There is no guarantee , however , that those situations that we saw in the past , before the existence of the euro , are not going to re-emerge in the future .
Let us pray that they do not , but it could happen .
We have seen 311 million Europeans enjoy the advantages of having a common currency , and we have also seen all of the Member States of the European Union enjoy the advantages of the fact that twelve of them have adopted the single currency .
There are therefore more than enough reasons for the Member States that have yet to adopt the euro to be convinced that they must prepare and adopt economic policy decisions aimed at fulfilling these criteria and strengthening a currency which , seven years after its birth , is already the world 's second largest currency .
( SV ) In a referendum , the people of Sweden rejected participation in economic and monetary union by a broad majority .
Mr Posselt wants to ride roughshod over the result of a referendum .
To do so is incompatible with a democratic view of the world .
The Swedish economy has not been harmed by the fact that we are outside the single currency .
I call on the Commissioner to state that he fully supports the result of the Swedish referendum and to distance himself from Mr Posselt 's deplorable and undemocratic view of the world .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Paleckis , on signing the Accession Treaty , the ten Member States that joined the Union in May 2004 agreed to adopt the euro as soon as they complied with the necessary conditions .
These countries , and Sweden - which we have just discussed - are expected to implement policies in order to ensure compliance with those conditions .
Nevertheless , as I said in my previous reply , the Accession Treaty does not set any time limit for achieving this .
Many of the new Member States have adopted target dates and strategies for adopting the euro , thereby giving concrete form to their political commitment through firm convergence policies .
Responsibility for implementing those policies lies with the Member States , for which the application of stability policies contributes to a broader objective than simply compliance with the convergence criteria for adoption of the single currency .
Those policies are also necessary in order to guarantee high and sustained growth , as well as medium-term financial stability .
Although the Commission supports the efforts of the Member States with derogations with regard to joining the euro zone , it is not possible to predict the pace at which that enlargement of that zone will take place .
The Commission believes that achieving a high degree of sustainable convergence , in accordance with the Treaty , is a necessary condition in order to make the adoption of the euro a success , both for the current members of the zone , and for future members .
I thank the Commissioner for his comprehensive answer .
You have recently been to Lithuania , which had an unhappy experience in its attempt to introduce the euro because its inflation was 0.07 % above the target level .
In your opinion , would it be better for Lithuania in future to think about joining the euro alone or in the company of the two other Baltic States - Latvia and Estonia ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Paleckis , when , during the first half of this year , Lithuania , at the same time as Slovenia , asked the Commission and the European Central Bank to issue an opinion on their degree of compliance with the criteria laid down in the Treaty for membership of the Monetary Union , the Commission 's response , which was subsequently backed by the Council , was unfortunately negative in the case of Lithuania and positive in the case of Slovenia .
It was negative in the case of Lithuania because , at that time , that country did not comply with the inflation criterion .
You have talked about the difference that existed at a particular time between Lithuania 's average inflation over the last twelve months and the reference value , calculated in accordance with the Protocol to the Maastricht Treaty , with regard to the maximum inflation permissible for acceptance as a new member of the eurozone .
It is true that the difference at that time was very small , less than 0.1 % .
Now , unfortunately , a few months later , with the latest data available , which has been published by Eurostat for September 's inflation , Lithuania 's average inflation over the last twelve months differs from the reference value by 0.7 % ; over just a few months it has multiplied by seven .
As I was able to say to the Italian authorities on my recent visit to that country , the important thing now is not to discuss the small difference in the past ; in my view , it is not even important to discuss firstly the date or conditions for entry .
The important thing at the moment for Lithuania , and for the other Member States that wish to join the euro as soon as possible , is to decide what economic strategy and what measures , within a coherent economic policy strategy , must be adopted and implemented in order to comply with the Treaty 's criteria .
In view of the fact that average inflation in Lithuania has increasingly diverged from the maximum reference value , which currently stands at 2.8 % , I urged the Lithuanian authorities to define that strategy and I once again offered the European Commission 's cooperation in working jointly with the authorities of that Member State in the search for the best strategy , the most effective strategy , for bringing inflation under control without jeopardising Lithuania 's excellent economic growth or the wonderful results that the Lithuanian economy has been achieving in many other respects .
I believe that that is not just the attitude of the European Commission , but also of all of the Member States that want Lithuania to comply with the conditions as soon as possible and become a new member of the euro zone , as Slovenia will on 1 January .
If Lithuania is accompanied by other Member States , the other Baltic States , then all the better .
We cannot change the conditions for assessing whether or not the Treaty 's conditions are met , however , regardless of how much we want our assessment of compliance with those criteria to be positive .
Commissioner , you mentioned that Slovenia will be joining the eurozone on 1 January 2007 , Malta and Cyprus in 2008 , and Slovakia in 2009 .
During your recent visit to Lithuania , did you propose a clear date when Lithuania might join the eurozone ?
And have you already received an action plan from the Government , including the fight against corruption ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) The only definite date is 1 January 2007 for Slovenia , although it is the case that , in June , the European Council supported the Commission 's proposal and the Ecofin Council confirmed that Lithuania complies with almost all of the conditions for joining the euro zone .
I said in my reply that Cyprus and Malta want to be members of the euro zone from 1 January 2008 , but the analysis and assessment of compliance with the criteria has yet to be made .
I also said in my reply that Slovakia wants to be a member of the euro zone from 1 January 2009 , and at the appropriate time we will have to assess whether or not it meets the conditions .
In our next convergence report , which will be adopted by the Commission and presented to this Parliament in December , we shall assess the extent to which , at this precise moment , the derogation countries comply with the conditions .
Nevertheless , the Member State in question must comply with the conditions prior to the date on which it wishes to join the euro zone .
The Lithuanian authorities had a target date and they must now set a new date .
When I visited Lithuania in September , that date had not been decided upon .
As far as I know , they have not set a date since my visit .
I have insisted to the Lithuanian authorities , and to the authorities of other States in a similar position , that they have the strategy before the date , because , without a strategy , the dates decided upon will have to be modified over time , since the decision on the date , in itself , is not sufficient to satisfy the criteria that are going to be required .
Commissioner , I fully support what you say about candidate countries meeting the convergence criteria .
But do you accept that it is very frustrating for them to be struggling to meet those criteria and , at the same time , to see existing Member States of the eurozone systematically breaching their obligations ?
I know you have raised this issue with the Council .
But what efforts will you continue to make to ensure that existing eurozone Member States meet their legal requirements ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Mitchell , the Commission does not expect the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union to have immediate effects on the composition of the euro zone .
Following their accession , on 1 January , both countries will take part in the Economic and Monetary Union as Member States , with derogations , and they will participate fully in the multilateral supervision of economic policies , as laid down in the Treaty , just like the Member States of the Union that do not belong to the euro zone .
From the date of their accession to the European Union , and since they will not be members of the euro zone and will not have an opt-out clause , Bulgaria and Romania will have to work towards complying with the convergence criteria with a view to being able to adopt the euro in the future .
For the other Member States of the euro zone , however , I cannot see any immediate effect whatsoever apart from the very positive fact that the Union will have two new Member States .
Thank you for taking the question .
I agree with the Commissioner that the euro has guaranteed transparency in pricing and facilitated travel and above all , having one currency has created a greater unity of purpose for Europeans than anything else we have done together .
All that is to be welcomed .
I understand that the European economy seems to be cooling , but is still expected to grow by 2.5 % in 2006 , its biggest growth since 2000 .
That is to be applauded , but slowing global growth and increased interest rates mean that European economic growth might be hindered .
Can the Commissioner tell the House if he anticipates any more changes in economic growth after the impending enlargement and indicate what effect that will have ?
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr Mitchell , it is true that the euro zone , and the European Union as a whole , is also showing growth in 2006 , and we are seeing the beginning of clear economic recovery .
Despite this economic recovery , however , we are still seeing growth figures that are lower than those expected when the economic and monetary union entered the third phase and , to a certain degree , some people are trying to establish a relationship between that low growth , compared to other areas of the world economy , and the existence of the single currency or the existence of the economic and monetary union itself .
I believe that the most rigorous analyses , not just those by the Commission , but also those by other institutions outside of the European Union , come to the conclusion , like us , that the obstacles to growth in Europe and , in particular , in the most significant economies of the eurozone , are basically , fundamentally , of a structural nature .
Hence , we must place the emphasis not only on respect for the operating rules and the rules on budgetary discipline or on the independence of the European Central Bank in the shaping of the economic and monetary union , but also on growth policies of a structural nature , which are what we call , in our jargon , the Lisbon Strategy policies .
It appears that what our economies need is a combination of healthy macroeconomic policies , geared toward stability , and ambitious structural reform policies .
From that point of view , enlargement , the arrival of ten new Members in May 2004 , has been a spur , an incentive and a positive stimulus for the European economies as a whole .
A few months ago , in May 2006 , coinciding with the second anniversary of the arrival of ten new Member States , the Commission published , under my responsibility , a communication on the economic consequences of enlargement .
Our assessment of the economic consequences of enlargement has been very positive ; very positive for the new Member States and also for the old ones , for the European Union of fifteen , because , amongst other things , the new Member States are , generally speaking , showing a greater capacity for implementing structural reforms and making the necessary structural changes .
It is true that they are starting from a less advanced situation .
They have also introduced dynamism , positive pressure , which is also encouraging economies of the former European Union of fifteen to speed up the implementation of structural policies .
In fact , I believe that some of the positive impacts of structural reforms aimed at greater growth may be coming to light during this recovery phase .
It is still too soon to judge the extent to which the improvements in productivity being recorded during the first two quarters of this year are exclusively due to factors linked to the economic cycle .
The European Central Bank tends to put practically all of the increase in productivity recorded over recent quarters down to the economic cycle , but I believe that there are certain indications that the structural reforms that have been adopted over recent years and whose pace is beginning to speed up as a result of the positive impact of enlargement are also beginning to play a positive role in this improvement in productivity .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
" Youth in Action " programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the Council common position ( 06236 / 3 / 2006 C6-0273 / 2006 for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council creating the ' Youth in Action ' programme for the period 2007-2013 ( Rapporteur : Mrs Gröner ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the number of Members present in this plenary is certainly no indication of the importance of this issue , and the ' Youth in Action ' programme for the period from 2007 to 2013 is certainly a milestone for our young European fellow-citizens .
I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for their very constructive cooperation .
At first reading stage , we worked through 58 amendments , most of which found their way into the draft , and it is through this result of informal negotiations that we now arrive at the Common Position , which we are able to accept and on which we are able to agree at second reading .
Working both with and for young people aged between 15 and 18 , the perhaps some 170 million citizens who are the European Union 's primary concern , all three institutions have endeavoured to find a solution that makes Europe real for them , that helps to make the programme less bureaucratic and makes access to it easier for disadvantaged young people .
We have , with this programme , had a number of general objectives in mind .
First among them is the fostering of citizenship .
We want to make it easier for young people to work together as members of society while also offering them the opportunity to cooperate at European level , thereby , among other things , overcoming voter apathy and awakening in them an interest in politics .
Secondly , we want to promote solidarity and tolerance among young people , particularly as a means towards greater social cohesion in the EU .
In this way , it will be possible for young people , together , to develop new lifestyles and models of coexistence .
We want to promote mutual understanding between young people and the multicultural diversity that we in Europe treasure .
We also want to promote systems for supporting youth organisations and young people 's civil society organisations and cohesion among young people even beyond Europe 's borders .
It is with those purposes in mind that we have negotiated a budget of EUR 885 million .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I have proposed the submission of minimum budgets for the following five headings .
Of the funding available , 30 % is to go to the traditional youth exchange ' Youth for Europe ' .
The object of ' European Voluntary Service ' is involvement , for a period of between two and twelve months , in non-profit-making activity for the common good in a country other than one 's own , and this project is to receive 23 % of the funds .
' Youth for the World ' is a new project intended to awaken understanding of other peoples in a spirit of openness , which is very important at various levels , and to which 6 % of overall resources are to be allocated .

The ' support systems for youth ' are to receive at least 15 % ; by this is meant the European Youth Forum and the network of youth organisations and persons active in this field whom it supports .
It is intended that 4 % of the funds should go to support European cooperation among young people , which would amount to the dividing up of 76 % of the sectors , and that would offer the Commission sufficient flexibility to become more actively involved where necessary .
Facing up to challenges is the right approach .
We have the funds to support the special project ' European Youth Week ' , and we want the Pact for European Youth , concluded by the Council in 2005 , to come alive .
It cannot be acceptable that we should look on and do nothing while disorder breaks out among young people and while young people in the European Union lack jobs and prospects .
We must ensure that young people have something to look forward to , and we want the Member States to give these projects their wholehearted support , for we cannot deal with the problem on our own .
I am therefore appealing to the Member States to get stuck in .
I recommend that this House agree to the compromise we have arrived at and adopt the Common Position unamended .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , it is not very often that we feel such a strong consensus as we do now .
I should like to express my gratitude to those who made it possible , as it is not automatic .
I am sure that this consensus makes it probable that in the coming weeks we will be able to adopt , in the full sense of the legal term , the Youth in Action Programme .
I should especially like to thank Mrs Gröner , the rapporteur for the programme , as well as the Committee on Culture and Education , which dealt with matters in a very constructive manner during the procedure .
I extend my thanks to the committee and its chairman , Mr Sifunakis , for their support .
This consensus and progress in the work will allow full continuity between the current Youth Programme and the next one , so that there will be no interruption .
This is a very different case from the previous one seven years ago , when there was a significant suspension in the Youth Programme for several months .
The new programme is a partial but important response to the Union 's priorities : citizenship , growth and peace .
Firstly , in terms of citizenship , it will enable young Europeans to affirm themselves as supportive , responsible , active and tolerant citizens in pluralist societies .
Getting young people more involved in the field and the life of local , national and European communities and fostering active citizenship represents an important challenge for our societies .
There is also a need to enhance young people 's awareness of the fact that they belong to Europe and to develop their sense of European citizenship .
Secondly , it is equally necessary to respond to the aspirations of young people by providing them with the opportunity to enrich their education and training on a less formal level .
Non-formal educational activities deserve to be supported and recognised at European level because they contribute to European growth .
That is why I am very happy that we will have more space for voluntary service in Europe .
Lastly , young people 's willingness to develop new relations between young Europeans and young people all over the world , their concern for mutual understanding , a spirit of tolerance and openness are important contributions towards world peace .
Progress in the negotiations on this programme was subject to the agreement on the financial perspectives last May .
Following the adoption of this budgetary framework and the decision to allocate EUR 885 million , at current prices , to the Youth in Action Programme , the institutions have shown their capacity to react quickly and constructively to have a new programme adopted without any further delay .
I believe that is a very strong message to young people sent by the European institutions today .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the recommendation in relation to the Common Position incorporates numerous amendments made by this House at first reading .
Although , as Mrs Gröner has just said , the budget for the period from 2007 to 2013 provides EUR 885 million for the ' Youth in Action ' programme on the basis of the Interinstitutional Agreement on the Financial Perspective for the same period , I would nevertheless like to remind the House that the amount envisaged in the Commission 's original proposal was EUR 913 million , and , this House having demanded an increase to EUR 1.1 billion , we have now , in the Common Position , ended up with EUR 885 million .


While that may well not reflect what we aspired to , it does give us the security to plan ahead for the coming years , and it is good that we can adopt it in this form today or tomorrow .
' Youth in Action ' is primarily aimed at young people between the ages of 15 and 28 , although some projects are open to 13-year olds and 30-year olds .
My group is glad that this House has been able to take the initiative in highlighting such important aspects of the Common Position as , for example , young people 's participation in democratic life , the promotion of such fundamental values as human dignity , human rights , tolerance and non-discrimination , protection for participants by means of proper insurance - which is a very important consideration - the European Youth Weeks , seminars and structured dialogues involving young people , exchange schemes for young people in Europe and the neighbouring countries and , not least , EUR 2 million in financial support for the European Youth Forum .
While thanking Mrs Gröner , I would also like to say that we hope that the unamended Common Position of the Council will meet with widespread support from this House tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at times when we find ourselves debating the demographic challenges of the twenty-first century , the young people rioting in France and more and more people supporting nationalist parties , it is enormously important that young people be involved in working towards an understanding of other cultures and outlooks and thereby creating the conditions for greater solidarity in Europe .
In particular , young people who do not or cannot become mobile through programmes such as Erasmus , Comenius or Leonardo within the context of formal education need a change to gain useful experience of intercultural dialogue , and there needs to be more recognition of the role and importance of informal education in this respect .
I am convinced of the rightness of prioritising , within the programme , the ' Youth for Europe ' project , which campaigns for youth exchanges and young people 's initiatives .
We should also invite the European Youth Forum to make regular presentations on its work to the committee , so that all Members may learn from its valuable work and benefit from it .
A very wide variety of problems were raised in discussions with youth organisations , including the different procedures for the issue of visas and the failure to reflect on why those differences are there ; my request is that young people be more involved in these .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to welcome Mrs Gröner 's report and the common position on which we have been able to agree .
I am glad that young people in the countries bordering the European Union - Russia , Belarus , Ukraine and the countries of the North Caucasus - will be able to benefit from the new programme as soon as next year .
European Union membership has a positive influence on many aspects of life in the Member States .
Young people , with their present and future challenges and problems , are no exception to this .
The 75 million young people who live in the European Union are lucky in many ways .
They have freedom of movement , opportunities to study and work in various European Union countries , to improve their foreign language skills , participate in intercultural exchange , and so on .
Nevertheless , the above advantages are at the same time also the challenges and tasks that are faced and need to be resolved by the increasingly ageing population of today 's Europe .
My reference to an ageing Europe is not just incidental ; it is a reference to the fact that we must be clearly aware and not underestimate the importance of young people ; we must make every effort to actively involve them in the political and developmental processes of the European Union .
Implementation of the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy is overemphasised as a factor of great importance to young people ; we , nevertheless , must not forget that young people themselves play a very significant role in implementing these objectives .
Investing in young people is one of the cornerstones of pursuing more rapid development and increasing the level of employment in Europe .
It is , of course , very important for the Member States themselves to give the Council 's recommendations proper support and take specific actions .
We know a great many examples of good programmes , and yet many of them have not been fully implemented .
This requires closer dialogue and cooperation between young people and politicians at both the national and European level .
We must treat young people as a source of positive energy , and not as a burden .
Our objective is to strengthen the trust of young people in the objectives of this important European institution and the Member States in order to eliminate any doubt as regards the broadly declared role of young people in the growth , development and stability of the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Gröner for the work she has done on this report .
All of us are convinced that Europe is meant to be an opportunity for young people to be able to move around freely within it , broadening their horizons and learning several languages , improving their education and training and , all in all , becoming trustworthy and responsible people in an open European society .
It is , of course , also important that Europe should gain acceptance among young people .
We need to remind ourselves that it will be the young people who will build Europe up and ensure its future development , in other words that what matters above all is that they should find out for themselves what they want Europe to become in future .
This task of improving opportunities for young people will not be capable of being performed in isolation from other policy areas , among which economic policy is quite central , as also are educational and social policy , together with the Lisbon Strategy issues to which reference has just been made .
I would very much like to see us taking this policy area seriously rather than neglecting it , for young people are the key to Europe 's future .
- ( SL ) The ' Youth in Action ' report is very important in strengthening European awareness and European citizenship amongst young people .
We all know that our citizens sometimes find it difficult to identify with the European dimension , and that European institutions far away in Brussels seem rather remote to them .
Through this report we have sought ways of making European citizenship more tangible by promoting solidarity , initiative and creativity .
Because young people are most receptive to new ideas , we have focused on young people between 13 and 30 years of age .
Young people are increasingly taking responsible positions in politics , and it is right that we should secure for them the tools and conditions which will also direct their attention towards Europe 's common objective .
Of the five actions envisaged by this programme , let me highlight the second : ' European Voluntary Service ' .
Voluntary work is of great importance for the development and future of society .
It contributes to the development of existing systems , cohesive values , social progress and other developments in society , and therefore needs to be promoted and given due recognition .
Young people active in this area set a shining example thereby , especially to a consumer society which is far too preoccupied with money and personal fulfilment , yet all too little concerned about people around us whose lives could be vastly improved with just a little bit of effort .
Politics is also a kind of voluntary work , at least when you are starting out .
When most of us were young , voluntary work was the quickest route into politics .
I support this report and I hope that young people will be able to benefit as much as possible from aspiring to and meeting the ideals contained within it , for the sake of their own personal growth and the benefit of society .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , for her excellent work on this report .
I am sure we all agree that young people are vital to shaping the future of Europe .
I do not believe that we should concentrate on debating whether young people should be supported through EU programmes .
There is clear evidence that programmes for young people and students are the best path of EU action for true integration at the citizen level .
Nevertheless I should like to raise a few points .
First of all , the budget allocated for the programme still seems to be insufficient .
I know the hard work the Commissioner has done , but I still hope that in the final budget for the future years we could see improved numbers .
Secondly , I strongly support lowering the age to 13 .
Providing opportunities at a young age encourages initiative in later years .
I do not think that 13 is too young to participate in ' Youth in Action ' .
Something else that would enhance the programme is the expansion of the list of countries with which youth organisations can cooperate , to include as many countries as possible .
Countries such as China and Russia are key players in world politics and economics .
Forming close ties with those countries at an early age can only be beneficial .
Another factor to consider is the importance of enhanced mobility .
It would be a vital step to ease the current visa regulations in countries outside the Schengen Agreement .
Far too often student exchanges , ' work abroad ' programmes and school trips have to be cancelled because of the difficulty in obtaining visas .
Sometimes the complicated procedures and high prices even discourage starting a project .
To ease that situation I call for standardised documentation in all EU countries for obtaining visas .
We should also try to support the ' Get Visible ' campaign , which suggests a separate visa type for NGO representatives .
That would significantly enhance the possibility of young people participating in volunteer work programmes , exchange programmes and youth organisation work .
The Youth in Action Programme will end in 2013 .
It would be short-sighted of me to say that that will be time enough .
However , it is a good start .
I truly thank you , Commissioner , for all your hard work on this issue .
Member of the Commission .
( SK ) I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the debate , which will continue , in a somewhat different way , during subsequent phases , especially when it comes to implementing the programme .
I think the consensus is evident .
I do not want to speak or respond at length , but I consider it very important that the intensity and level of cooperation and commitment regarding young people in the EU is growing , not only in response to demographic issues but also in response to the overall prospects for European cooperation , solidarity and integration .
The European Pact for Youth was adopted recently , several years after the White Paper .
We now have a chance to launch a new programme for young people that would provide improvements in terms of both quantity and quality .
This is very important because , among other things , the age bracket has been widened and the budget has grown significantly .
Naturally , we have proposed more , but this issue should also be viewed in terms of the limits and scope of the financial perspective .
In addition , the programme of life-long learning and the programme of citizenship or civic cooperation , along with certain external programmes and actions of the Community , clearly offer increasing opportunities for young people .
For example , I have been in Canada , working on a bilateral agreement between the EU and Canada that will cover not only university cooperation but also the area of young people .
These specific lines of cooperation with partnership countries in the area of young people are multiplying and growing .
I firmly believe that they will bear fruit .
Thirdly , it is very important not just to formulate policies for young people , but to do it together with young people , as this will be more effective , more successful and more mature in terms of civil society in the common Europe of the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Annex - Commission statement
The Commission should like to draw the legislative authority 's attention to the need for the financial package mentioned in the basic act to be expressed at current prices , and for this to be done no later than its final publication in the OJ .
This corresponds to the standard budgetary practice and will help to ensure , with all due transparency , that the legislative authority 's decision is complied with .
For the Youth in Action programme , the sum at current prices amounts to EUR 885 million .
Action programme in the field of lifelong learning ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the Council common position ( 06237 / 3 / 2006 C6-0274 / 2006 establishing an action programme in the field of lifelong learning . ( Rapporteur : Mrs Pack ) .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the new ' lifelong learning ' programme was intended to be a sufficient response , within the framework of the Lisbon process , to the challenges of the present day , for education - as we all , together with everyone else , constantly affirm - is the be-all and end-all of our countries ' joint efforts at coming out top in globalised competition .
The Council 's cuts in the general budget have also had the unfortunate effect of cutting this multi-annual programme back .
The Commissioner has had no hand in these cutbacks .
He was on our side , fighting for more .
It is regrettable that the Member States did not want that .
The final figure we arrived at was EUR 14.37 billion over seven years , but , following negotiations , we have been left with no more and no less than EUR 6.97 billion in the Financial Perspective .
Even so , I want to thank all those Members who fought successfully and made it possible for us , together , to achieve a EUR 800 million increase in the funds originally allocated to this programme in the Financial Perspective .
So much for the lofty goals and the bumpy return to earth .
The ' lifelong learning ' programme is founded on the two programmes ' Socrates ' and ' Leonardo ' , develops them further and enables working in synergy .
We have learned from the latest programmes ; our countries ' various national agencies have acquainted us with the problems that they had with the programmes , and their views have all , in fact , been taken into account .
The ' lifelong learning ' programme includes the ' Comenius ' programme for schools , its university counterpart ' Erasmus ' , the ' Leonardo ' programme for vocational education and the ' Grundvigh ' for adults , the ' Jean Monnet ' schemes for promoting European integration and horizontal measures .
I have pushed for more funds than originally planned by the Commission to be allocated to the Comenius programme on the grounds that it is , in my view , the basis for all the other educational programmes , and I have also emphasised the need for more cooperation in the border regions through a new ' Comenius Regio ' .
The programme puts new emphasis on student mobility between the ages of 11 and 16 , with the invaluable experience of a school year spent at a school elsewhere in the EU .
We have also taken account in it of the needs of the children of migratory workers .
The Leonardo programme promotes workers ' mobility and partnerships in ways that were formerly possible only through Erasmus .
Grants payable under Erasmus to university students are being increased to EUR 200 per month , since the former grant was scarcely enough to live on ; we had originally proposed EUR 300 , but that could have been sustained only by a drastic reduction in the number of participants , and so we had to abandon the idea .
Erasmus also covers preparatory language courses and travel grants .
Better financial provision than before has been made for the Grundvigh programme , under which individual exchanges are now available .
The programme is conceived as a response to the current state of the labour market and to population trends .
Whilst continuing to make grants to the College of Europe in Bruges , the European University Institute in Florence , the European Institute of Public Administration in Maastricht and the European Law Academy in Trier , Parliament has also made provision for special grants to the European Agency for Development in Special Needs Education , Middelfart , and the Centre Internationale de la Formation Européenne in Nice .
I am absolutely delighted that participation in these programmes is still open to all members of the EEA and to Switzerland and Turkey , and that the countries of the Western Balkans have recently been invited to join in ; that leads me to highlight the fact that it is now high time , to say the least , that the easier visa arrangement for South-Eastern Europe took tangible form .
I would like to sum up by saying that the ' lifelong learning ' programme will help improve the EU 's educational and training programmes , make people more mobile , support partnerships and cooperative efforts between regions , structure the sharing of best practice and encourage the learning of foreign languages .
This is a programme that will help people gain a better understanding of the European Union , make it easier for them to live together in it and practice intercultural dialogue and tolerance ; it is , in fact the best communications strategy in the EU .
Member of the Commission . Mr President , as our German friends say , Bildung ist mehr - education is more .
It is a key to many more answers in life than are possible without education , and it empowers individuals and societies to seek a better economic , social , cultural and political future ; and that is why I am sure that an integrated lifelong learning programme could provide many new opportunities in quantitative and qualitative terms , because when we see it in combination with what we are doing in Europe all together , it means much more than just a programme .
We are agreeing to create the lifelong learning strategies in Member States by the end of this year .
We have a programme from January 2007 , and we have a benchmark in our cooperation , in order to increase the participation of adults in the lifelong learning systems in Member States .
As Mrs Pack said , lifelong learning is not a luxury , it is a necessity ; and I am sure that it gives individuals experiences which enrich their lives and improve their employability .
Learning helps institutions to transfer knowledge from one to another across Europe , to innovate , to improve and to modernise .
It increases the transparency of Member States ' systems , because when cooperation is open , we see how systems are moving and becoming more and more compatible .
In short , it is a valuable European instrument at the direct service of our citizens .
The new programme will expand opportunities and will , I am sure , bring even more benefits .
So I am delighted that Parliament , the Council and the Commission were able , almost as soon as the financial framework was finalised earlier this year , to reach agreement on the text of the programme decision .
I know it was not easy , but if Parliament adopts it without amendment , as your rapporteur proposes , then the programme can be implemented on time from the start of 2007 .
Given the complexity of the programme , that is a major achievement .
If we compare the past with the current complex programme , we can see the hard work that has been done .
I would like to extend particular thanks to Mrs Pack , the rapporteur , for using her great expertise and experience in the field to make it possible to reach an agreement so rapidly at second reading .
On the text itself , the Commission is fully in agreement that it should not be amended .
The financial envelope will be close to EUR 7 billion for seven years at current prices . But we should also see it in broader terms , where opportunities are growing .
I do not want to go into details , but I frequently encourage ministers to look into structural funds to see how they could serve the mobility of students ; how other programmes like Erasmus Mundus could also help to build a more attractive European educational space .
Our services have been working at full speed to have the implementation arrangements in place so that we can publish the first call for proposals under the lifelong learning programme before the end of this year , and to ensure that the programme is more accessible and simpler for the end user .
Thank you for providing the possibility of enabling us to be so advanced at this moment .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is , of course , a good thing that we can give the green light to these important learning programmes , for , as you so rightly say , Bildung ist mehr , education is more .
Nevertheless , I , like the rapporteur , have mixed feelings .
As Mrs Pack said before me , I would argue that the Member States should never have cut back on these programmes - not as drastically , at any rate , as has now been the case .
These are programmes that can help us make young people into European citizens , the Europeans of the future .
Why ever have we been so brutal in the cutbacks for those programmes ?
That is extremely short-sighted and in any event a missed opportunity for the EU 's future .
I think that the Member States have given a perfect illustration of how to queer one 's own pitch .
I am sure that the Commissioner will agree with me when I say that every Erasmus student , every Comenius student - and I have met a huge number over the years - every student ends up having a life-forming experience .
It broadens their horizons , improves their chances of employment , brings them into contact with others , they experience diversity and learn how to deal with it .
In that way , these programmes also contribute to tolerance and , needless to say , to European citizenship .
This House should , in actual fact , have thrown out this limited budget , but that is a different matter , of course .
It should have done that not least with social reasons in mind , for quite a few students who come from more socially vulnerable environments and backgrounds will now find it much more difficult to take part in Erasmus .
There is no point , though , as somebody already said , in regretting past actions . It is too late for that .
We now have to pull out all the stops to make the most of what we have .
I think that schools are sufficiently creative in seeking , and finding , additional sources of income to fund those programmes .
Industry , possibly backed by the European Union or national governments , may be able to help .
Why could businesses not sponsor exchange projects ?
A factory that is local to me - Ford - could , for example , invite final-year pupils or students for visits to their sister factories in different countries across the border .
It is just a thought , but there may be some scope there .
It is crucially important that we promote the exchange of students and schools to the best of our ability .
I would , at this early stage , express the hope that the Council and the Member States will realise that cutbacks on the forthcoming multi-annual programme are bound to leave their mark on programmes like these , and I wish you , Commissioner , the very best in your endeavours to implement the next programme 2007-2013 .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that we are making today a really big day for culture , with five very major programmes for us to debate and also vote on , which is not the sort of thing that happens very often in this House .
It does , however , highlight the importance and necessity of getting programmes of this kind up and running .
Taken all together , little more than one per cent of the total European Budget for 2007 to 2013 is available to us for all five programmes - education , youth , culture , media and active citizenship - and that puts everything back into perspective and also brings us down to earth a bit .
I would like to say that these are ambitious programmes , and we certainly could have done with more financial support for them ; as has already been said , we had all planned something bigger , and it is the Member States that are standing in the way .

In general terms , though , I do believe that the ' lifelong learning ' programme is aimed in the right direction , with simplification , lump sums and more decentralisation in line with what we demanded .

Expenditure must be proportionate to financial support , and building in the other EU support programmes on a horizontal basis would have been something else worth aiming for , but I would also appeal to the Commission for things to be made simpler for the national agencies and for the applicants too .
The national agencies are in the course of being restructured , and this process will certainly take up more time yet , but here , too , dialogue and support from the Commission are called for .
We , too , should apply ourselves more to dialogue , for there are still a number of problems left to be resolved .
It is to be hoped that the trend towards increasing mobility will continue , for we have set ourselves the target of three million students by 2012 , and so we must make further strenuous efforts and demand many improvements .
The school systems also need to be analysed in terms of quality , which needs to be guaranteed not only by the EU , but also by the Member States , and we have to demand that they do that .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Pack for an excellent report .
Lifelong learning is an integral part of any modern and developing society , since the wellbeing of the nation is based on the education , experience and skill that its population acquires .
In many cases the level of literacy and education determines a person 's health and wellbeing , as well as being a source of income and providing better opportunities for participation in social , political and cultural life .
At the moment , adult education , training and the professional development of working people are becoming increasingly important in Lithuania , just as they are in the European Union as a whole , although it has not yet become a hard and fast rule .
Unfortunately , according to 2004 data , our country is lagging far behind the EU average in terms of continuing education of people in the age range of 24-65 years - 28 % in Lithuania as opposed to 42 % in the European Union .
Many of the residents of our country agree that the main reasons motivating people to study are constantly growing labour market requirements and better self-improvement and self-expression opportunities ; however , for half of our citizens their age has become a barrier , as they believe they are too old to study .
Lithuania still holds on to a negative attitude towards older people pursuing knowledge .
In some cases , in fact , particular social groups are being discriminated against .
In fact , the attitude that only a competent employee is able to achieve good results , contribute to the competitive advantage of the company and , most importantly , to gain a feeling of personal value and self-confidence , is already becoming dominant .
However , it is generally public institutions rather than private employers , who pay most attention to the training of their employees .
This is a huge problem , since private companies employ almost 70 % of all workers .
Constantly developing technologies and competitive challenges call for qualified employees , and this must be an on-going process .
Consequently , funding becomes an extremely important issue .
I believe that this programme and the aid from the European Union Structural Funds will help in reducing the present differences between the various Member States and the lifelong learning strategy will actually be implemented .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , will start by thanking Mrs Pack for the superb job she has done with this report .
That she is one of this House 's really experienced experts on educational policy has already been mentioned , and that is evident from the priorities and emphases that she has added to this report .
Europe is lacking in raw materials - that much is a fact - and so it is all the more important that we should develop the potential in the people who live here .
The growth achieved by both China and India is extraordinary , and so is the number of graduates they produce .
If Europe is to stand a chance in the globalised economy , we have to do more for education , research and development .
I do not actually think that the European budget is focussed on the future ; we are still investing too much in traditional agricultural polices and too little in education , development and research .
Previous speakers have already lamented the fact that we are , in this area , budgeting for too little overall , with the derisory figure of one per cent over the next seven years .

I find that very disappointing ; I really would have liked to see more .
We should be aiming at enabling every student in Europe to participate in the Erasmus programme , which represents the big opportunity for young people , for the experience of studying in different Member States will make real Europeans of them ; they will derive lifelong benefit from what they learn there and , of course , carry it over into their circles of friends and acquaintances and into working life .
That is what makes these experiences so very valuable , not only to them as individuals , but also to society .
EUR 200 is , of course , preferable to EUR 150 , but it is not exactly what we could do with if we are to have a pro-active education policy .
I do , though , think Mrs Pack was right to say that we should start with the young and invest more in them .
All the studies show that to be the case .
That is why spending more on Comenius , within the context of lifelong learning , is the right thing to do .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly welcome Mrs Pack 's multi-layered approach to drawing up this report .
I should like to highlight just a few aspects of the issue .
One of the dangers of the modern world is that people are unable to adapt dynamically because of the narrowly focused and overly specialised nature of education , which gives them a limited worldview and stops them from achieving their potential in the labour market .
The world has changed such a great deal that the traditional ideas of getting an education once and once only , guaranteeing long-term employment and continuous progress until retirement , has gone for good .
People must be capable of reacting more quickly to the way in which their environment is evolving , and individual European educational programmes should enable them to do this .
Lifelong learning helps people to keep pace with the development of science and technology and makes it easier for them to understand the world in general .
Alongside the development of educational programmes , it is necessary to focus on ensuring that lifelong learning is not just a luxury for the chosen few but is accessible to all sections of society , regardless of social status and gender .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the purpose of this decision is for Parliament and the Council to set up an integrated programme in the field of lifelong learning , to be implemented in the years 2007-2013 .
Amongst other things , the programme aims to develop international cooperation between institutions of higher education and schools , and also to promote the mobility of students , staff , pupils and teachers .
The programme is composed of four sectoral programmes , namely Comenius for schools , Erasmus for higher education , Leonardo da Vinci for vocational education and training and Grundtvig for adult education .
The original version of the programme 's budget has been cut .
This has entailed cuts in terms of the quantitative targets for individual components of the programme and also the percentage share of resources .
As less funding is now available , many of the actions previously planned will now not be undertaken .
These include fostering long and short-term mobility of teachers within the framework of Erasmus , along with study visits and innovative and experimental projects within the framework of the inter-sectoral programme .
Pursuant to the provisions of the new 2007-2013 Financial Perspective , the budget allocation for the implementation of the lifelong learning programme has been almost halved .
It has been cut from the EUR 13.62 billion originally planned to EUR 7.171 billion .
This reduction in the programme 's budget implies that there will be fewer grants available for projects and that there will also be fewer opportunities for poorer students to study at foreign institutions .
In conclusion , I should like to thank Mrs Pack very much for all her work .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the lifelong learning programme is an excellent venture , and the aims enshrined in its provisions are all relevant .
This programme is intended to implement one of the pillars of the Union , namely the common social policy .
However , as has been the case with similar excellent ventures , the programme has fallen prey to funding cuts .
One of the provisions of this programme involves supporting the contribution of learning to social cohesion , which should lead to improved relationships between societies in our Community .
I put it to you , ladies and gentlemen , how can this be brought about when the new Member States are still bound by the transitional periods set for access to the labour market , and therefore denied equal access to knowledge and technology ?
Another key aim is also undermined , namely that of increasing competitiveness , mobility and innovation in the aforementioned market .
How can there be talk of such values when there is no mutual recognition of the equivalence of final diplomas , thus putting individuals at a disadvantage at the very start of their career ?
In conclusion , I would point out that , once again , a splendid and noble programme is deemed worthwhile and its provisions and aims are implemented mainly in the countries of the old Union .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Pack has acted as the driving force behind the development of the programmes that we are discussing today , with the integrated action programme .
Without her passion , we would never have made the progress that we have made .
Erasmus is certainly the most popular programme .
Despite the financial increase , the new version will still depend on general mobility conditions such as the transferability of grants , social security and the recognition of qualifications , too .
While mobility does not guarantee that a person 's studies will be integrated into his or her curriculum vitae , taking the Erasmus route means that he or she is likely to have to study for an extra year .
Commissioner , I should like to ask you where in the Bologna process is the inclusion of an Erasmus year ?
As regards the Leonardo programme , the mobility of employees undertaking vocational training is of prime concern to the craft-based industries and small and medium-sized enterprises , which also need to be made aware of mobility-related issues .
Making our workforce mobile : that is what the Leonardo programme could do .
To that end , the Commission should embark on campaigns to raise the awareness of businesses and should also ensure that the available budget is actually spent .
I should like to point out that our ancestors used readily to move around .
Artists and craftsmen were the ones who travelled the most ; it was they who moved society forward .
Cross-border trade is the best way to make our fellow citizens forget about borders and to prove that we can do better .
Finally , I shall not stop repeating , Commissioner , that , given the importance that Mr Barroso attaches to culture , we should have the courage to make it a European policy .
Indeed , those who want a larger budget must be able to submit political projects that are important and that are recognised as being important .
A revival of the debate on the best means of taking the Commission forward would provide a good opportunity for us to speak loudly in favour of such a policy .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join in congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , on her good work , and all the members of the Committee on Culture and Education , whose contributions have enriched this text .
I would also , however , like to communicate my concern with regard to the implementation of the lifelong learning programme .
I remember how , at the outset , we were all falling over ourselves to improve the system of student mobility in Europe .
We all voted in favour of increasing the funds for the Erasmus , Leonardo , Comenius programmes etc . , in the conviction that it was a very productive long-term investment .
Providing the participants with economic facilities and , at the same time , simplifying the process for being awarded grants , brought us closer to the objectives set in the Lisbon Strategy .
As time passes , however , I am finding it harder to remain optimistic .
I note from surveys that fifteen-year-old European schoolchildren have poor reading skills and show a high level of truancy and that many young people do not complete their studies within the time set .
In view of this information , I wonder how we are going to deal with the challenges of globalisation .
If we are to create a knowledge-based society , sustainable economic development and greater social cohesion , we will have to establish a strong foundation from the outset , and that can only be achieved through effective education .
In short , in order to deal with future challenges , it is crucial that we invest more in education .
It is possible to improve the way existing programmes operate and to create new programmes .
If we make the effort , the numbers will gradually prove us to be right , but all of us must try to convince the Member States that we need to dedicate more money to education and training .
- ( LT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to re-emphasise that the programme being discussed provides citizens with more favourable opportunities for on-going training and becoming active participants of the knowledge-based society .
I think that the initial version we have returned to of the document proposed by the European Commission will enable us to more smoothly implement a programme integrating all the initiatives that are now operational in the area of education .
A unified system will ensure clarity and , most importantly , the possibility of avoiding redundancy in certain areas .
Those states that are able to participate in lifelong learning programmes have experienced obvious benefits from this European Union initiative .
For example , the Erasmus , Leonardo da Vinci or Jean Monnet programmes are well known to the Lithuanian people , indicating that European Union initiatives in the area of education are being implemented quite effectively .
I hope you will support my contention that the lifelong learning programme is of vital importance , both for promoting competition and entrepreneurship and in building a shared sense of European citizenship based on the values of the European Union , such as mutual understanding and respect for human rights and democracy .
( PL ) Mr President , I fully support the programme for lifelong learning in the Union .
We are always saying that Europe has to become more competitive .
Competitiveness must be built on the foundations of the knowledge triangle - education , research and innovation .
Education is crucial to this structure .
The Union 's educational systems are the competence of the Member States , but a better-integrated European programme on education is very welcome .
We now have the Seventh Research Framework Programme and a new Community programme on competitiveness and innovation was launched very recently .
The angles of the Union 's knowledge triangle are therefore well established .
Questions arise as to the sides of the triangle : are these programmes adequately connected and do they support each other ?
We must not think in terms of three separate programmes , three distinct key aims for the European Union , but in terms of a single joint aim , namely a knowledge society .
I value the proposed changes to lifelong learning , such as the amendment of the Leonardo da Vinci programme to facilitate the transfer of innovation , and the amendment of the Grundtvig programme to facilitate the innovational mobility of older learners .
All too often , however , the programme introduces innovative learning methods instead of opening up the field for the innovations themselves and for future researchers .
There is no system for recruiting highly talented individuals , particularly participants in the Comenius and Erasmus programmes for young people , and allowing them to continue their development within the framework of the Marie Curie programme .
The lifelong learning programme should also be in line with the research priorities of the Seventh Framework Programme .
All our actions should be aimed at ensuring the continuity of the knowledge triangle from school right up to the European Institute of Technology .
I congratulate the Commissioner on this programme , and urge him to ensure that these comments are taken into account during its implementation .
Member of the Commission .
( SK ) I am sure there is no need for me to add much ; we should rather do more to implement what we have already agreed upon several times .
Education is more than a period in one 's life .
We can deal with the issues of employment and growth through a much more coherent approach , which is what the Lisbon Strategy is all about .
Education cannot be isolated from research and innovation ( which involves creativity and the promotion of knowledge ) .
It is also necessary to deploy knowledge practically , and in innovative ways .
I think that the Commission is heading in that direction .
The proposal to set up the European Institute of Technology provided evidence of this at last week 's summit in Lahti .
There is further evidence of it in the whole programme and the policy of putting education at the heart of the Lisbon Strategy , and aiming to shape Europe and generate knowledge for growth and employment .
The four pillars of the lifelong programme have very inspiring names - Comenius ( Jan Amos Comenius ) , Leonardo da Vinci , Erasmus of Rotterdam and Grundtvig .
In my opinion this is an important signal .
We will not be able to solve all financial problems through this programme , but we can provide a lot of inspiration , in particular for measures at national level so that education , which is within the competence of the Member States , becomes the focus of national approaches or of the Lisbon Strategy .
There will then be much more money available , and we would certainly appreciate having more allocations for mobility and cooperation in the area of education .
I think that the upcoming 20th anniversary of Erasmus , the most popular programme in the European Union , is a great opportunity to evaluate the situation , but also a challenge for us to do more together for education , young people and the future .
With regard to visas and cooperation with other countries , as of 1 January 2007 Member States should implement or transpose the visa facilitation decision for students , lecturers and researchers throughout the European Union , with the exception of the UK , Ireland and Denmark .
In response to whether we need harmonisation or some other kind of policy , I would say that what we need is complementarity and compatibility rather than the harmonisation of our education systems , and this is gradually being achieved through measures such as the Bologna Process .
We are constantly calling not only for more investment but also for better investment .
The first priority is for ' better investment ' whereas ' more investment ' comes second .
' Better ' also means raising public-private funds .
This often takes the form of mobility or education sponsorship on the part of businesses and industry .
So much for my reflections in response to some of the points that have been raised .
May I once again thank the rapporteur , Mrs Pack , the entire committee and all those who contributed for their high level of consensus and commitment .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
Mr President , I congratulate our rapporteur for her work in steering this important report through Parliament .
Next year Erasmus celebrates its 20th anniversary , having been brought into being by one of my predecessors , Winnie Ewing , when she was chair of the Culture and Education Committee , and there is much to thank her for .
Since 1987 , over 1.2 million students have completed exchange courses at universities outside their own countries .
In the 2004 / 2005 academic year , over 144 000 students took advantage of the opportunity provided by the Erasmus programme to continue their studies in a country other than their own .
The benefit and invaluable cultural and linguistic experience this provides for students is second to none .
As a former Erasmus exchange student myself , I can vouch for that .
Erasmus has been one of the successes of the EU in demonstrating its relevance .
But while the uptake for students coming to Scotland has been encouraging , with 2163 during 2004 / 2005 , the number of Scottish students going abroad to study has been far less , standing at 1018 .
I want to see more Scots taking part in this programme and benefiting from the opportunity to study abroad .
Erasmus is one way in which we can encourage our young people to have an international outlook .
Annex - Commission statement
The Commission should like to draw the legislative authority 's attention to the need for the financial package mentioned in the basic act to be expressed at current prices , and for this to be done no later than its final publication in the OJ .
This corresponds to the standard budgetary practice and will help to ensure , with all due transparency , that the legislative authority 's decision is complied with .
For the ' Action programme in the field of lifelong learning ' , the sum at current prices amounts to EUR 6 970 million .
" Europe for Citizens " programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the Council common position ( C6-0316 / 2006 for adopting a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing for the period 2007-2013 the programme ' Europe for Citizens ' , to promote active European citizenship ( 09575 / 1 / 2006 ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Takkula ) .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to thank everyone who has been involved in the deliberations on this report , especially the shadow rapporteurs and members of other committees who have made their comments .
I wish in particular to thank my esteemed colleagues and coordinators , Mrs Pack and Mrs Prets , because , being a member of the smallest group , I would not have been able to produce this report without your support .
I am also grateful for the excellent team spirit and cooperation which you have shown in our committee .
The programme consists of four areas of action .
The first is a Europe of active citizens , which includes town-twinning and citizens ' projects .
Town-twinning has already proven to be a success story , and I hope that this success story will continue and go from strength to strength with this programme .
Furthermore , the citizens ' projects are very important .
One central idea in establishing this programme was that the European Union could indeed have a grassroots programme which would not be elitist and which the people , the citizens of the European Union , could think of as theirs .
The second area of action is active civil society in Europe .
This could help provide structural support for EU public policy research organisations ( think-tanks ) and for NGOs at European level , as well as support for projects coordinated by these NGOs .
I think it is vitally important that open adult education centres and vocational colleges , non-degree-based organisations , have a bigger role , because these are just the sort of organisations that are best at reaching out to ordinary people at grassroots level .
This way , this programme will hopefully also open its doors to people all over the European Union , and they will feel it is something relevant to them .
The third area of action is ' Together for Europe ' , supporting high visibility events , studies and information and dissemination tools .
As we know , it is important to promote the European Union in the appropriate way and to bring it closer to people , because there are shortcomings too in the area of information and communications .
People feel that they are a long way from the decision-making process , and therefore they feel that European Union programmes are remote .
We have much work to do to bring the Union closer to the people by providing information and through various events .
A fourth area of action was added to the programme , and this is the preservation of Active European Remembrance .
There was intense discussion on this in our committee .
We finally hit on the idea that , when this action was transferred from the Culture 2000 Programme , it was just this memory of Nazism and Stalinism that we needed to preserve , so that no horrors like this can ever occur again in Europe .
We think that it is very important that future generations are also able to understand what the European identity is , what peace is , and what stability is , and it is therefore also important to guarantee active remembrance .
It would also obviously have been desirable for the budget to be up-to-date when this programme was being put together .
We know , however , that for some reason there is not as yet enough sympathy in the European Parliament , or at least not in the European Commission or the Council , for cultural projects , or enough appreciation of their importance .
I myself believe that culture and our civil society create a basis on which a dynamic and thriving economy can also be built .
We on the Committee on Culture and Education , being cultured people , should ensure that the budget will be more effective in the future .
This time we were obliged to some extent to cut it from the Commission 's original proposal under pressure from the Council , but I hope that the programme can be got underway here , and that it will become a success story .
Finally , I would like to express my gratitude for the cooperation and general understanding that has been reached between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I am especially glad that NGOs , open universities and amateur sports clubs have been included in the programme .
I hope that when this programme starts in early 2007 it might become another success story .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , not more than half a year ago , I was here speaking on the same programme , asking for a quick agreement .
At that time the proposal had a different title : ' Citizens for Europe ' .
Now , after half a year we are here , very close to the final decisions with the new title , ' Europe for Citizens ' , coming from your input ; but I think this was a remarkable shift , both in consensus but also in the readiness top progress towards finalisation .
This programme is very important for citizens and civic society organisations .
I am very satisfied with the quality and intensity of negotiations between institutions that have taken place on the programme .
I would like especially and sincerely to thank the Committee on Culture for its efforts to accelerate the procedure , and the rapporteur , Mr Takkula , for his excellent work and cooperation .
Those steps in the interinstitutional procedures were accompanied by informal trilateral meetings .
They resulted in a compromise acceptable to all three institutions in the form of four amendments on which you will vote on tomorrow .
Concerning the budget , we agreed to allocate an amount of EUR 190 million at 2004 prices , which means EUR 215 million at current prices .
This is less than the Commission 's original proposal but it still enables us to retain the structure of the programme , only reducing the number of outputs .
I would like once more to express my regrets about the introduction by the Council of a supplementary step to the comitology procedure .
This will slow down the selection procedure for certain categories of projects .
However , with a view to reaching a quick agreement , the Commission accepted the position taken by the Council and supported by you .
Today you are envisaging adopting four amendments : two of them concern the budget breakdown between different actions ; one is technical and will accelerate the entry into force of the programme ; and the last one adds the promotion of tolerance to the objectives of the programme .
That is fully in line with the programme 's philosophy .
Let me repeat that the Commission fully supports the agreed compromise and therefore encourages Parliament to adopt those four amendments .
If you adopt them , the Council has committed itself rapidly to adopt the whole agreed text and the programme should then be able to enter into force by 1 January 2007 .
I can assure you that once the programme is adopted the Commission will take all necessary steps to implement it as efficiently and as effectively as possible .
Indeed , my services are already actively preparing its entry into force .
We will work in close cooperation with the Programme Committee and in close dialogue with the organisations involved in this programme .
I would like to finish by repeating what Mr Takkula said , i.e. that culture forms the basis for our societies , which is why we defined the legal base for this programme in combination with the culture-related Article 151 of the Treaty .
It was the subject of many discussions , but I believe it is the right proposal and the right line to take , for future culture and citizenship to go hand in hand towards responsibility on all levels of our public and private engagement in our lives , as well as in the spheres of enlargement and the future of our Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start with a word of thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Takkula , for this very fine report on ' Europe for Citizens ' .
Now that the overall amount has been reduced to EUR 190 million from the EUR 235 million that this House and the Commission originally agreed on , that is the amount with which , for lack of any understanding on the Council 's part , we are obliged to manage .
We support the rapporteur 's two amendments , one of which aims for a 2 % decrease , and the other at an increase by the same amount .
We are particularly glad to see that the new Action 4 , which has to do with memorials , keeps alive the memory not only of the crimes committed by the Nazi regime but also of those committed under Stalin .
I would , however , Commissioner , like to address one other problem , one that has been raised by those who benefit from the programmes and by those who run them .
This House wishes to point out that its resolution of 5 April 2006 referred to both conferences and seminars , and the bilateral seminars - working parties and meetings of experts - are essential components of the partnership effort in terms of qualifying the programmes and those who work on them , and grants should be available for them in the same way that they are for multilateral conferences .
Furthermore , this House takes it as read that the Commission will , in the course of the applications procedure , accord equal treatment to local authorities and civil society organisations , and the object of that is that the Commission should be prevented from doing as had originally been planned and imposing additional requirements - such as guarantees and special bank sureties - on too many other social organisations , which they would find it difficult , indeed impossible , to meet .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Takkula , for his excellent report and for his good cooperation .
I welcome this programme with open arms , for it will benefit the public , us in this House and the European Union as a whole .
After all , the Europe for Citizens programme finally indicates that the citizens should not be there for Europe but the other way round .
Europe is there for its citizens .
Only when the European Union obtains concrete results for its citizens can we count on support for this European Union .
Needless to say , we can try to enhance the bonding process between our citizens and the EU by organising exchange programmes and events , but it is always more successful if the citizens come up with their own initiatives , which is where this programme comes in .
I am grateful to Mr Takkula , to my fellow Members in all the groups , as well as to the Commission and Council , for the good working relationship we have enjoyed in dealing with this dossier .
There is , however , something that I need to get off my chest . The European Union has recognised that there is a chasm between its citizens and the institutions .
This programme is in recognition of this and tries to make amends in this respect .
Why then , have we skimped on this programme and other vitally important programmes ?
Talking about citizen involvement without injecting money into it is , of course , a waste of time .
I will in any event do all I can to promote this programme to people in the Netherlands .
I hope that other Members will bring this programme to people 's attention in their own countries too .
If we all made a huge success of it , next time , the Council and the Commission may have no choice but to increase the budget of the Europe for Citizens programme to an acceptable level .
There is no doubt that the Europe for Citizens programme can become a success .
In Europe , there are many people who are prepared to actively work on Europe 's integration .
This programme allows them to take part in the process and get organising .
It is , therefore , enormously important for the European citizens to have the sense of being involved in the EU 's development .
That is what this programme makes possible .
My appeal to the citizens of Europe is therefore that they seize that opportunity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work in producing this report on the promotion of active European citizenship .
Many of us who genuinely care about the future of Europe believe that active citizenship will play an important role in the continuation of the European project .
The EU is a work in progress ; progress from centuries of division to a time of mutual cooperation .
That mutual cooperation is for the benefit of all our citizens .
Otherwise the EU has no raison d 'être .
It is also important to understand that this mutual cooperation is not just between Member States .
That is certainly important , but it is not enough .
There must also be mutual cooperation between our citizens so that they too are an integral part of the process - not as an audience , but as actors on the stage ; not as observers but as participants .
We are looking here at participative democracy alongside representative democracy - sometimes an uneasy alliance on both sides , but one we must promote because otherwise we just pay lip service to our citizens , and they deserve much better than that .
I am pleased to see the inclusion of non-formal education programmes in this report .
Perhaps we might extend that to the recognition of volunteering activities through the provision of a European volunteering passport .
Volunteering plays an important role in active citizenship because many of the activities earmarked in the report , such as town twinning , civil society organisations and amateur sports organisations , involve volunteer participation .
Intercultural dialogue must also be supported .
All of us have our prejudices , our misconceptions about others , and it is only by engaging with each other that we begin to recognise each other 's humanity ; and that is the foundation of mutual cooperation and mutual respect .
My only regret is that the funding provided will not be sufficient to accomplish the huge and important task we have set ourselves .
However , I agree with the previous speaker : let us roll up our sleeves and get on with it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Takkula .
I am delighted that there has been a rethink in the naming of the programme , originally called ' Citizens for Europe ' , and that it is now called ' Europe for Citizens ' .
This means that the onus is on Europe , too , and that it must reach out to the public .
The aim is to reach and involve citizens , to meet them locally , to take them seriously , to listen to their concerns and to win them over to Europe and the debate on its future .
Town-twinning activities are a good means of contributing to this .
A general discussion on European globalisation blues will also form part of the debates within this programme , however , as will the question as to how we can strike a balance between excessive neoliberalism on the one hand , and statism or excessive protectionism on the other .
I should like to mention a further point , namely the inclusion of extermination camps - be they Stalinist or Nazi - in this programme .
I believe that a further reappraisal of the history of this particular European totalitarianism , which destroyed Europe and brought great unhappiness to the whole world , is politically appropriate .
Learning the appropriate lessons from this and building a genuinely open and democratic Europe remains one of our challenges for the future .
The programme is also intended to make a contribution to this .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) We share the concerns and the objectives of the ' Europe for Citizens ' programme and accordingly voted in favour .
The truth of the matter is that this European Union is short of neither ' Europe for businesses ' nor ' Europe for the market ' .
Far from it , in fact .
We have had far too little ' Europe for citizens ' , too little support for a European citizenship with an active voice in the major themes on which we are building our shared territory .
In this area , decisions lack courage , laws are thin on the ground and support is virtually non-existent .
This programme alone will not in itself reverse this situation .
We support the programme , but we are also critical of its budgetary weakness .
A 60 % cut on the original proposal is clearly excessive , but very much in keeping with the restrictive and outdated rule whereby all programmes in the field of education , culture and youth are underfunded .
Chronic underfunding is not the result of any scarcity of resources , but of a deliberate policy strategy on the type of Union that the Member States want to construct , which resurfaced when the financial perspective for 2007-2013 was adopted , to the detriment of areas such as culture .
There is no such thing as effective policy without adequate funding .
Words and good intentions are all well and good , but the policy must be much more than this .
Mr President , Mr Takkula , we agree with you as regards your preference for transparency in granting funding for projects .
This should be based on clear criteria with open application procedures and impartial adjudicators . Unfortunately , this has not been the case .
We are pleased to note that we will gradually see an end to the scandal of funding being granted outside the application system to organisations that place themselves above fair competition and are still receiving substantial long-term funding .
This damages the Union 's image .
The fact that these organisations are often associated with important personalities who made their careers in the European institutions only makes matters worse .
I come from a southern European country and I must say I warmly welcome the fresh air blowing in from the north in relation to this issue .
Lastly , as regards the new line of funding on memorials to dictatorships , I should like once again to express our complete opposition to the criteria that have been followed .
The exclusion of memorials to dictatorships that for decades oppressed various peoples in the south of Europe shows a lack of respect for the thousands of victims of these dictatorships .
Without the victory over the fascist regimes of southern Europe , the borders of the EU would be quite different today , and its territory smaller .
The exclusion of these dictatorships , and of the memory of them , sends out the wrong message to the citizens , suggesting , as it does , that there are some dictatorships whose memory should not be forgotten and others that are not so bad or even acceptable .
It also sends out the wrong message to the world .
A pragmatic attitude to dictatorships is indicative of double standards , and poisons and discredits the EU 's external policy .
A criterion based on unambiguously democratic principles would have been better than a mediocre , mean-spirited criterion that was unable to look beyond the scarcity of funding .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are all playing our part in the creation of the European Union , but we bring with us our own particular outlook , experience and observations .
These make it clear that , although we have much in common , there is also much that divides us .
Many European citizens are sceptical about the Union and dubious about European integration .
As a result , whilst some are seeking ways of rapidly bringing about European integration , others feel that if this process has to take place at all , it must do so slowly and be carefully thought through .
They feel it should be a long-term process that respects national traditions and takes account of contemporary experience .
I welcome the fact that the Europe for Citizens Programme contains many of the suggestions made by Members of this House , in particular in the part concerning memorials to the victims of dictatorship .
Financial support is available for places linked to the Nazi regime and also for memorials to the victims of Stalinist crimes .
Much was said during the debate on the programme about how little the citizens identify with the process of European integration .
A distinction was rightly drawn between citizens of the old , new and future Member States .
Insufficient consideration was given , however , to the important fact that , while one group aims to create a single ' one size fits all ' European model of national identity as quickly as possible , another inclines towards a Europe of nations , where the sense of national identity would be respected .
The latter group would determine common cultural values on the basis of cultural diversity and dialogue .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the draft document on ' Europe for Citizens ' is an example of detailed wishful thinking .
Someone dreamt up the idea that if more money were invested in awareness raising , informing and including Europeans in Union events , the citizens would be brought closer to the Union and involved in European integration .
A similar argument was adduced in the Soviet sphere of influence , where our lives were dominated by the single orthodox Socialist ideology .
It was believed that pouring money into events would guarantee the development of so-called Socialist awareness .
The Soviet system tried hard to create a single orthodox Soviet identity in the minds of Russians , Ukrainians , Georgians and others .
Nations were deprived of their right to their own distinctive identity .
Someone has now decided that it will be easier to integrate Europeans if the relevant document is entitled ' Europe for Citizens ' instead of ' Citizens for Europe ' .
We have seen all this before .
Soviet citizens were not supposed to be for the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was supposed to be for them .
What was actually the case was that , for Lenin , Stalin and others , people thinking and acting as Russians , Poles or Hungarians were a hindrance .
People brought up in Soviet multiculturalism were more malleable and more amenable to becoming slaves in the service of the empire .
We would do well to remember that the genuine freedom of individuals and nations arises out of national cultures where it has its source .
That is why this document should be consigned to the dustbin along with the legacy of the former Soviet Union .
Mr President , our sense of citizenship , like our sense of identity , arises from our history , our culture , our language and our experience of life .
It comes from the bottom up .
This citizenship programme is top-down .
It seeks to create a sense of citizenship where none exists .
As such , it is doomed to fail and it is wholly improper .
I was born a British citizen .
I never asked to be a European citizen .
I do not want European citizenship and I totally reject and repudiate it .
The European Constitution , which incorporates the concept of EU citizenship , has been roundly rejected in France and Holland , and it would be rejected if it were voted on in the United Kingdom .
The promotion of this failed concept is therefore highly contentious .
We are using taxpayers ' money to promote one side of a hotly disputed debate , and that is wrong , undemocratic and disgraceful .
I call on colleagues to reject this report out of hand .

Mr President , it is a very important achievement to have a common position adopted by the Council on this ' Europe for Citizens ' programme and I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Takkula , on his work and dedication and , in particular , for improving the scope of the programme .
I want to dwell on two aspects of the programme : town twinning and the memorials to the victims of the twin dictatorships of Hitler and Stalin .
I would urge Commissioner Figeľ to coordinate his work with that of his colleague , Commissioner Wallström , who is responsible for information and public relations , in order to maximise the impact of this extremely important report and programme .
Firstly , on the town-twinning movement , I could not disagree more with the previous speaker .
In my own country there are town-twinning associations which have existed for 50 years and others which have been newly founded .
I wish that the Commissioners - because they are the only people who can do it - would give fair , free and open publicity to the dedication and voluntary work of these organisations .
To hear in my own county town of Hertford , the German , French , British and European anthems sung by local citizens and by school children was infinitely more eloquent than the absurd anti-European propaganda that we are given to digest in much of our popular press .
We are in a battle for the hearts and minds of public opinion and we cannot allow the sceptics simply to have the best tunes .
We have got the best tune , but we have to proclaim it .
Secondly , on the memorials , I am delighted that Mr Takkula has included the victims of Stalinist crimes , because half our European Union was subject to that dictatorship , and just imagine the disbelief of new citizens of the European Union that their suffering should be neglected , whereas those who suffered from Hitler 's Third Reich should be commemorated .
Therefore , I commend this report and this programme to Parliament and the entire European Union and let us hope that this time we win the argument .
Mr President , Hungary has commemorated the 50th anniversary of the 1956 revolution .
Old women and men remember the revolutionary events they witnessed , and young people try to image what happened 50 years ago when the anti-Stalinist revolution united the Hungarians , the reformed communists and the democrats .
But some thousand extreme right-wing rioters changed everything last night .
They attacked the police , burned down shops , some of them threw stones and bottles at a synagogue , shouting anti-Semitic slogans under the banner of the Hungarian Nazi movement .
These tragic events show us how important it is to remember , and to allow us to remember , the tragedies and crimes of the 20th century .
Mr Takkula 's report rightly calls upon us to commemorate the victims of the Nazi and Stalinist regimes .
But it is not enough to commemorate : we have to combat present-day extremist ideologies as well .
Stalinism is over , thank God ; but the danger of the neo-Nazi extremists is still alive .
Every democratic party has to condemn extreme right-wing ideologies and violence .
We have to learn from the lesson of the Weimar Republic .
The smallest concession to the extreme right could lead to huge tragedies .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Eurobarometer data are extremely worrying .
Most EU citizens are unfamiliar with the Union 's institutional system .
The Commission 's role is seen as either vague or very vague .
The Council is virtually unknown as an institution .
The citizens ' perceptions are extremely muddled .
Many citizens are incapable of expressing a considered opinion on Europe .
There is one salient fact running through these data : the citizens want more information and have chosen television as the best means to receive that information .
We have seen that theoretical or bland citizenship , some vague feeling of belonging , makes Europe weaker .
Europe is viewed more as an abstraction than an important presence in our lives .
What we need is not theoretical or bland citizenship , but strong , practical citizenship , a feeling of loyalty , a feeling that Europeans can identify with a Community whose destiny is encapsulated in its universal values .
Without this feeling of loyalty and identification , no political project can succeed .
Citizenship is the biggest challenge facing a post-national society such as Europe .
European citizenship is a product of reason , not of tradition .
It needs to be constructed ; it is not born spontaneously .
This is a new political era , one characterised by sharing and by new forms of governance .
It is indeed a time in which the sovereignty of States has shifted to a sovereignty of people .
Be that as it may , how ironic is it that the policy does not encourage people to identify with a project that places them at the centre ?
The Citizens for Europe Programme does not provide an adequate budget or an incisive enough information strategy .
Publicity about the institutions - especially on television - showing the institutions and the European project must not be delayed any further .
Explaining Europe is vital in forming a feeling for Europe .
- ( SL ) The greatest achievement of the European Union to date has been guaranteeing peace and coexistence amongst the nations of Europe .
However , critics of the European Union frequently complain that the work carried out by European institutions is too expensive and too remote from its citizens .
The ' Europe for Citizens ' programme offers new initiatives that will help to bring European citizens closer together , including those who are not enrolled in any type of formal education but who wish to gain new knowledge and experience and forge contacts with other citizens of the European Union .
Participation in this programme is open to twin towns , so the programme will also be accessible to the kind of people who do not take part in major European Union projects every day .
However , indirect contact and personal experience can contribute appreciably to an understanding of the Union , as I have noticed when I have met groups from Slovenia who are visiting the European Parliament .
Sport , too , has a great power to unify and can communicate across linguistic boundaries .
Participation in top-level sport is fast becoming the preserve of an increasingly narrow circle of people .
This programme supports international participation by the wider masses .
Major projects bring major benefits , but smaller projects bring great pleasure to many individuals .
The programmes will be all the more successful if citizens can access them easily and if they do not have to fill in mountains of forms every time they make an application .
Our citizens often become disenchanted with the European Union precisely because they encounter too many administrative obstacles when attempting to secure funding .
This is why we must endeavour , when offering worthwhile programmes , to streamline procedures and to ensure greater awareness of such funds and easier access to them , at both European and national level .
Member of the Commission .
( SK ) I would like to thank you for all your contributions and particularly for the commitment you have shown concerning the importance of working together as fellow citizens of the EU when dealing with certain issues or ideas .
The programme itself constitutes the legal basis for implementation and will define the conditions that the Commission too will be required to meet .
It is important that these conditions be known and implemented as soon as possible .
Parliament will be involved through the Steering Committee and programme evaluation .
As regards voluntary work and improvements in the recognition of informal education , we are interested in , and are striving for , progress in these areas , particularly from the perspective of young people .
This will be done through the Youth Pass , which should add greater transparency and value to voluntary work .
I agree that it is necessary to raise awareness of the results achieved so far , and of the successes and the nature of this cooperation , particularly , for example , in the area of cooperation between towns and cities .
More than 10 000 municipalities in the EU are cooperating under the civic programme .
Three weeks ago we awarded 11 golden stars for the best projects - those which are inspiring and which help real people solve real problems in towns and cities across the EU .
Such projects might be more widely copied if people were made more aware of them .
In this respect , I agree with Mr Beazley .
The programme will also provide opportunities for special events .
I would like to refer , for example , to last year 's celebrations of the 25th anniversary of the Polish Solidarity Movement that were funded from a special budget line and heading .
It will be possible to implement this approach over the next seven years using the Citizenship Programme .
In conclusion , as well as a ' business-friendly ' or ' market-friendly ' Europe , we also have a real need for a ' citizen-friendly ' Europe that is both well-disposed and helpful to its citizens , having as its foundations civil society and a certain degree of maturity .
I would also like to emphasise that the name of the programme is but one side of the coin , as the relationship between ' citizens for Europe ' and ' Europe for Citizens ' is a very important one .
This is our space and at the same time it serves us .
We need to shape and develop this space and to take responsibility for it .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the entire Parliament for a very constructive approach to the programme .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Please allow me to offer my congratulations on the creation of the ' Europe for Citizens ' Programme ( 2007-2013 ) and to congratulate Mr Takkula on the most recent version of the report .
Europe 's institutional , social and political relationships today form a dense network , the threads of which have become even more closely interwoven since enlargement .
Forming active European citizens plays a key role in this process , and the presence of such citizens is indispensable in order to ensure the continued democratic and balanced development of the European Union .
If we are to have European citizens who take responsibility for themselves and their society , we need to emphasise what today are considered to be ' lost ' values , such as freedom , fairness , tolerance and solidarity , which constitute the fundamental values and cohesive bond of European society .
I also consider the balanced integration of citizens to be important , but above all , I believe that we need to foster dialogue between different cultures and worldviews .
Only in this way can we work together toward a common goal , shaping our own visions while accepting the differences of others and respecting our diversity .
Only mutual understanding , solidarity and a sense of belonging can give the citizens of Europe a sense of identity .
I support the efforts to shape a European citizenry based on common values , history and culture .
It is important to promote and celebrate the values and achievements of today 's citizens , while not allowing our memories of the past to sink into oblivion .
If we keep our common cultural heritage at the forefront , we will strengthen the foundations of our shared future .
In my view , European citizenship means nothing other than taking responsibility for ourselves , our country and the European Union , and freely exercising our rights while respecting the same rights of others .
The right balance must also be struck between democratic rights and obligations .
This is a common European citizenship of which I would be pleased to be part .
Annex - Commission statement
The Commission should like to draw the legislative authority 's attention to the need for the financial package mentioned in the basic act to be expressed at current prices , and for this to be done no later than its final publication in the OJ .
This corresponds to the standard budgetary practice and will help to ensure , with all due transparency , that the legislative authority 's decision is complied with .
For the programme in question , the sum at current prices amounts to EUR 215 million .
Restrictions on the marketing and use of perfluorooctane sulfonates ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Schlyter , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council C6-0418 / 2005 relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of perfluorooctane sulfonates ( amendment to Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC ) .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter , for his hard work on this proposal , which has made it possible to reach agreement with the Council at first reading .
This is an important directive .
It is concerned with restricting the marketing and use of perfluorooctane sulfonates ( PFOS ) and related substances .
These substances are persistent , bioaccumulative and toxic .
They have the potential to cause unacceptable risks to human health and the state of the environment .
The proposed Directive is based on specific risk assessments and impact assessments of possible measures .
It takes into account detailed discussions with all interested parties .
The Directive prohibits in principle , with very limited derogation , the marketing and use of PFOS and related substances .
Derogations are envisaged for essential applications in small quantities , which do not pose any unacceptable risks according to the opinion of the Commission 's Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks .
Large-scale uses - for example in the field of textiles and carpets - have already been discontinued by industry , and this Directive will reliably prevent the reintroduction of such uses .
The proposed Directive will not only ensure the protection of human health and of the environment , but also serve to strengthen the internal market , as it introduces Community-wide harmonised rules for the marketing and use of PFOS and related substances .
With regard to the derogations contained in the proposal , I agree that the use of PFOS and related substances should continue to be permitted in photoresists and photographic materials , when plating with hexavalent chromium and other metals , and in hydraulic fluids , as the risks connected with these uses are acceptable since there are no equivalent alternatives and it is not certain that the toxicological profiles of the alternatives are any better .
With regard to fire-fighting foams , I can agree that the marketing and use of new foams should be prohibited and that a period of 54 months should be granted for the continued use of existing stocks .
On the other hand , I am not prepared , at present , to support the extension of the envisaged restrictions to other perfluorinated alkyl compounds such as PFOA , as this would be premature given the absence of a completed risk assessment and of sufficient knowledge of current uses and alternatives , but we can return to this subject .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that the transformation process has benefited greatly from the close cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The Commission can therefore endorse all the compromise amendments proposed by the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking all the shadow rapporteurs for their very sound and constructive cooperation .
It made it possible to find a solution at first reading together with the Council , which also did some good work on this issue .
This solution improves on the Commission 's original proposal , and I am pleased to see that the Commission too is now backing the compromise .
PFOS and PFOS-related substances are highly fluorinated and extremely difficult to break down .
They are additionally very bioaccumulative .
We have become aware that chloro-organic compounds are poisonous and cause problems in the environment and we have observed that bromo-organic compounds are hazardous .
Fire retardants pose a bigger threat than the fires they were designed to prevent .
It is now the turn of fluoro-organic compounds .
They are extremely stable , and the bond between the fluorine and carbon is the strongest in organic chemistry .
The properties of stability and surface activity are what have made PFOS a much sought-after chemical .
It has , as the Commissioner says , been used for many years in surface treatment for chemicals and textiles .
The largest manufacturer realised the risks posed to its workers and to the consumers of its products .
Its workers had high levels of the chemical in their bodies , and it decided to withdraw the PFOS product Scotchguard from the market .
The Commission 's aim with this proposal was to prevent the re-introduction of PFOS , but the compromise goes further .
We now have tougher concentration regulations and we are setting the limit for preparations at 0.005 % .
This is reasonable , given that its very properties as a surfactant mean that PFOS is used in low concentrations .
If the limit were set at 0.1 % , there would be a risk of more applications slipping through the legislative net .
The definition of surfaces at 1 microgram per square metre shares the same purpose .
Under the compromise with the Council , PFOS is also prohibited in fire-fighting foams .
This is entirely logical .
There are already alternatives on the market that do not contain fluoro-organic compounds .
It is also appropriate to phase out stocks , and , in the compromise , Parliament has extended this phasing-out period to 54 months .
Everyone has a vested interest in hastening the phase-out .
The large oil fire in the UK that resulted in millions of litres of water being contaminated with PFOS showed the costs of using PFOS .
The only way to destroy PFOS is by high-temperature combustion .
Everyone can see for themselves how much work is involved in burning millions of litres of water at high temperature .
Chromium plating is the other big area .
In this field , the proposal restricts the use of non-decorative hard chromium-plating using hexavalent chromium as the process implement .
This exception , moreover , is to be reviewed after an inventory of existing essential uses , which is to be carried out by the Member States within two years .
In this area too there are alternatives , such as bigger , enclosed systems , better ventilation and in the future , I hope , also other processes .
As far as other exceptions such as photolithography processes and anti-reflective coating and industrial treatments for photographic film are concerned , the quantities in question are very small .
Even so , these exceptions too will cease to apply once alternatives are technically and financially feasible .
I would also like to speak about PFOA , which refers to the acids and salts of the same group of substances .
In Germany , many people in the Ruhr area know what it is like to have contaminated water . People now have to take their drinking water from tanker vehicles , which is a costly and unsustainable solution .
We can attempt to stop these contaminants by means of the codicil that has been added to the compromise on PFOA , according to which the Commission is to analyse and continuously take stock of progress on alternatives .
Once there are reliable alternatives , these will replace PFOA .
I believe that we are ahead of our time here .
We must get to grips with this matter because the next great environmental issue may be fluoro-organic chemistry and the various forms thereof .
This is a first step towards protecting people and the environment from a number of these substances .
I would also point out that this is a first reading agreement and that if Parliament were now to support this compromise , that would also mean that the Council would support it and that we should be ready before REACH enters into force .
This agreement would then form an annex to REACH .
If we were unable to succeed with this agreement tomorrow , the proposal would simply fall , as REACH would then take over .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I hope that we are on the way to a first reading agreement .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter , for his excellent cooperative work on this report .
I was delighted to hear that the Commission agrees with all our rapporteur 's compromise amendments .
It augurs well , indeed , for a first reading agreement .
Perfluorooctane sulfonates - PFOS - are chlorinated compounds with numerous applications in consumer products such as textiles and paper , are known for their repellent properties , amongst others , and are used daily in many consumer products .
They also have some specific industrial applications in products as wide-ranging as microchips , fire-fighting foams , chromium plating and hydraulic fluids used in aviation .
These chemical substances are known to be very toxic , persistent and bioaccumulative .
We have achieved several important changes to the draft proposal , which will bring greater protection for human health and the environment , especially in the area where the maximum threshold for the amount of PFOS that can be placed on the market as a substance or preparation has been substantially reduced from the Commission 's original proposal .
I welcome the inclusion of PFOA - perfluorooctanic acid - in the scope of this directive .
According to a recent OECD survey , the substance has a similar structure and toxicity to PFOS and thus should be phased out accordingly .
Industry has voluntarily proposed to limit the use of PFOA by 2014 , which in itself is a clear sign that our instincts were right to insist on its inclusion in the legislation .
The changes introduced by this House have improved the proposal , and Mr Schlyter 's report is both balanced and objective .
The report recognises that limited specific use derogations are needed for critical applications of substances for which no alternative currently exists , for example PFOS is essential in very small quantities in the semi-conductor sector and in hydraulic fluids used in aviation .
The fact that the phasing-out of these will be based on a case-by-case review , taking into account new information on details of uses and on safer alternatives , is a constructive and realistic way to encourage the affected industries to actively seek alternatives .
In conclusion , it appears that this piece of legislation will go through under the Finnish Presidency and we can avoid tying these toxic chemicals up in the REACH queue .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) I welcome the compromise package drawn up by the Council and the European Parliament , which in many respects tightens the Commission 's proposal .
It is good to see that Parliament is so united on the question of banning or limiting a dangerous substance .
Health , the protection of the environment and the desire for a healthy life are more important than the narrow interests of industry .
There is no longer any doubt as to the problem posed by chemical substances .
Stricter regulation is necessary in the area of chemicals , and this is indeed the focus of REACH , which seeks to regulate not merely one particular substance but some 30 000 compounds .
As regards today 's proposal , it has been scientifically proven that perfluorooctane sulfonate is a hazardous substance .
It endangers human health and is a persistent substance , one that does not biodegrade and is bio-accumulative , that is , it builds up in the body 's cells .
Its use must therefore be restricted .
I consider it an achievement that the substance is being banned in more areas than in the original proposal , and in other areas it can remain in use only during a period of transition .
In the case of dangerous fires , fire-fighting foam may continue to be used for some time .
If it is a question of saving human lives , then naturally we must use whatever is at hand .
Over the longer term , however , it is vital that the chemical be replaced by substances that are not harmful to the human body .
I consider it particularly forward-looking that the substitution principle has been built into this directive , which means - as everyone is no doubt aware - that the toxic chemical must be replaced by a different , harmless substance , and that research on and the introduction of such a substance is the responsibility of the manufacturer .
Over the longer term , therefore , the use of PFOS will only be permitted where its replacement is impossible , and where it does not come into direct contact with the human body .
I hope that those who will now vote for the substitution principle in this directive will also vote for the substitution principle for other compounds as contained in the REACH directive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Schlyter , for his constructive cooperation .
It is well known that the two of us do not always see eye to eye , but I welcome the fact that a vote is to be held tomorrow on a compromise that will enable agreement at first reading .
I also welcome the fact that the compromise disregards a number of the demands made by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety such as the precipitate inclusion of PFOA without a prior risk assessment .
The toxicity of PFOS is undisputed , including by industry .
After all , industry took it upon itself to dispense with the use of PFOS in particularly critical applications such as consumer goods .
Some sectors at the top end of the value-added chain , such as the aviation , aerospace and semiconductor industries , cannot dispense with the use of PFOS at present , however .
A ban on PFOS or a derogation involving strict time limits would deprive some high-technology sectors of planning security .
The Commission proposal already lays down appropriate derogations for this , and it is essential that these be retained until there is a suitable substitute .
The problem with PFOS is not the use of the substance in these sectors , however , but the fact that it is still found in old textiles such as carpets and clothing and reaches the environment via these .
I should like to make some concluding remarks on EU chemicals policy with regard to the forthcoming REACH debate .
EU chemicals legislation must strike a balance between the socio-economically appropriate use of certain substances and high environmental standards .
As with PFOS , derogations must always be possible where there are no suitable alternatives .
After all , the objective of chemicals policy must be the safe , risk-based handling of chemicals rather than the ideological policy of complete chemical bans .
I hope that the Commissioner will remain committed to a sound chemicals policy in future , too .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are about to decide on the restriction of the hazardous and harmful substances perfluorooctane sulphonate ( PFOS ) and the closely-related perfluorooctanic acid ( PFOA ) .
I am especially pleased that there is such broad support for the sterling work done by my compatriot Mr Schlyter .
Good work , Carl !
I think that we need to remember this shared vision when , later this autumn , we take another extremely important decision - both for the environment and for our health - namely that relating to the chemicals legislation known as REACH .
I hope that on that occasion we will again see great support across the political spectrum from left to right and from the Commission to the Council of Ministers .
As already mentioned , PFOS is a hazardous substance .
It is bioaccumulative , which means that it stays in the environment and our bodies for a long time .
A study of people from 17 countries by the World Wide Fund for Nature found that PFOS and six other perfluorinated compounds were present in people 's bodies .
It is thus high time that there was a restriction .
I am therefore pleased to see that Mr Schlyter and an in principle unanimous Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety have tightened up the threshold value for how much PFOS may be in use in the market .
I would also have liked to see the committee adding in clearer specifications of dates for when PFOS is to be phased out from the market .
Apart from this reservation , this is , in my opinion , an excellent report that I and my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , look forward to voting in favour of .
I would like to finish where I began .
For Parliament to place restrictions on substances that are hazardous to health and to the environment is a good thing .
It is also absolutely wonderful that there is such broad support for these measures .
I hope , therefore , that we can keep this in mind when we decide on REACH later this autumn .
Let us also , on that occasion , see broad support for powerful legislation on chemicals .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to echo the previous speakers ' thanks to the rapporteur .
Ladies and gentlemen , imagine you are the mother or father of a young child , and your district health authority tells you the drinking water that you yourself have been drinking for months , even years , is no longer to be used for preparing baby foods or for your children on account of very high concentrations of PFOS .
Imagine you are the mayor of a medium-sized town and have to spend several million euro in public funds - taxpayers ' and fee payers ' money - on removing the PFOS from drinking-water supplies .
Then you would certainly have a major problem .
This is what happened a few weeks ago in my electoral region , South Westphalia .
We have major problems with PFOS , and the cause does not lie at local level . Instead , we have found that the trail of this massive contamination leads to other Member States - probably Belgium and the Netherlands .
There is a high likelihood , therefore , of problems of the kind currently faced by parents and local-government officials in my region occurring in many other regions of Europe , too , when one looks more closely .
For this reason , we must now ascertain the exact cause in this specific case and , in the event that declarations have been altered illegally , we must investigate this .
We must also tackle the root of the problem , however , as the concentration is particularly high in this case .
This substance has even been found in Antarctica and at the source of the Rhine , where there is no industry whatsoever .
We have to look at this very carefully .
That is why I am pleased that we have managed to elaborate and improve the Commission proposal , and that we have deleted a number of unjustified derogations - such as the one for fire-fighting foams , for which there are alternatives .
We have now reached a good compromise , and should support it .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Schlyter rightly deserves our congratulations for his excellent report , which I fully support .
Arguably the most important aspect of this legislative proposal is that the story of PFOS is unfortunately one of shame for EU and international consumer protection , and one that should never be allowed to be repeated .
Although PFOS were well known to be persistent bioaccumulative toxic compounds , they were extensively used in numerous consumer products and in various industrial applications for decades .
This has resulted in the irreversible contamination of the environment and of both animals and humans .
Let us all hope that the directive under consideration here will be fully implemented as soon as possible , but let us at the same time remember that appropriate legislation will also be needed to deal with the hundreds of other perfluorinated compounds which are also very toxic and which today are more or less freely allowed to poison us and will continue to do so in the foreseeable future .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by giving my sincere thanks to Mr Schlyter for his report , which shows great commitment .
PFOS , a halogenated hydrocarbon , is toxic to humans , and also both carcinogenic and mutagenic .
There are no scientific limit values for this category of substances , only empirical threshold values .
These substances are not biodegradable , they are fat soluble and , once produced , they persist almost indefinitely .
In addition , once they have been absorbed by the human body , it is virtually impossible for it to eliminate them .
It is highly likely that PFOA has a very similar or identical effect in medical and toxicological terms , even though the body of scientific data on this does not yet have any conclusive evidential value .
REACH will probably apply to this , and the substitution principle will play a decisive role , although , personally , I always have reservations about this .
For all my enthusiasm for the economy and for value added , as a Christian I do not want to balance value added against human life .
I am alarmed by the values of these chemicals measured in both marine and freshwater fish .
Now - rightly and with a clear conscience - we are going further than the original proposal of the Commission and the Council .
The threshold value has been lowered massively by almost two powers of ten .
The number of derogations for chromium plating has been reduced significantly .
Logically , the derogation for fire-fighting foams has been deleted , as unlimited quantities of these can be released into the environment .
The derogation for closed systems has been deleted , as it is scarcely possible to prove that these are sealed .
On the whole , I should like to express my thanks for the constructive cooperation I have enjoyed , and above all for the speed at which this issue has been dealt with , since we were able to reach a workable compromise in less than three months .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to discuss the issue of PFOA briefly , and then go on to make a very fundamental point .
The final decision has not yet been taken in the matter of PFOA .
It was not possible to include a ban on these substances in the Directive , as we are not in possession of a satisfactory risk assessment or an impact assessment .
An international risk assessment is being carried out at present at OECD level , however .
Naturally , we shall look at the results carefully and make any necessary proposals .
I live in the same German Land as the honourable Member Mr Liese and have been following the case he described myself with great interest .
All I can say today is that , although the investigations by the German authorities have not been concluded , I have the very strong impression that this is a case of environmental crime , plain and simple .
Contrary to the law in force , toxic substances have been introduced into the environment .
Whether these Directives could have prevented this is a different story .
Nevertheless , I think it important that Mr Liese referred to this case , as it confirms explicitly once more the kind of risks he described .
In a modern industrial society , it is inevitable that we have to live with certain risks .
The question as to which risks we consider acceptable and which we do not is one on which we have to keep deciding anew .
There is a series of assessment benchmarks that can help us make this decision .
I should like to mention one risk that I do not accept - and here I am speaking as the Commissioner for Industry .
I do not accept the argument that we must accept the risk of highly toxic substances in our environment because investments have been made .
I do not accept the argument that we must accept such substances because they lead to revenue generation .
I do not even accept the argument - even if this does not make me any friends - that we must use these substances so that jobs are not lost .
I consider wholly inappropriate this comparison between jobs in industry and the use of toxic substances for which alternatives exist .
In situations such as this , the decision can only be to protect human beings and the environment unconditionally from avoidable risks .
This is the line that underlies my policy , at least , on all these issues .
The House will notice this when we come to discuss the most important , extensive and modern chemicals legislation in the world - namely REACH - shortly in plenary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Third-country anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard action ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the annual report from the Commission to the European Parliament on third country anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard action against the Community ( 2004 ) .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the 2004 annual report on third-country anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard action , presented by the Commission services , has uncovered a piece of information that has raised a number of concerns within our parliamentary committee .
It appears from the report that there has been an abnormal increase in the number of trade protection cases , involving both traditional users of these measures and more recently developed WTO member states .
In many cases , WTO rules and case-law have been partially or completely disregarded , causing damage to Community industry .
For the developed countries , led by the United States , major problems arise as a result of the unilateral and half-hearted application of WTO rules .
For some emerging countries , the application of countervailing duties is not intended to counteract illegal practices , but to give their local industries extra protection against European imports .
In many cases , the investigating standards are low and raise a number of questions as to their full compliance with WTO rules .
The Commission report relates some of those significant cases , namely the ' Zeroing ' case with the United States , the Indian anti-dumping cases , the South American and Austrian farming cases and , in general , the extensive and unfair use of safeguards .
In many of the cases brought against the European Community , the Community has succeeded in obtaining a satisfactory settlement for resolving the disputes within the WTO .
Nevertheless , a success such as that often comes too late , and irreparable damage is done to European industry .
Faced with the picture presented to us by the Commission in its report , the Committee on International Trade could have acted on instinct and suggested adopting the same methods and behaviour as those trade partners that violate the anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard rules , but it has not done so .
We are in fact convinced that respect for the trade rules established at international level and within a multilateral framework is the mainstay of economic growth and , more generally , of the peaceful relationship between nations .
Two wrongs never make a right .
Having established that , we should like to reaffirm that the rules must be applied and that , if they are not applied , corresponding sanctions must be swiftly imposed in order to guarantee that the law is upheld .
If they are not swiftly applied , the damage will be irreparable .
In defence of the law and of that sector of European industry that feels unfairly affected by unlawful measures , we call on the Commission to take a firm stand in pursuing the WTO negotiations , which are aimed at making other WTO members apply trade protection measures in a less arbitrary way , and to act as the promoter of actions aimed at having the decisions of the WTO dispute settlement body applied more swiftly and effectively .
These points should be included in the Doha Development Agenda if - as we hope - these negotiations are resumed .
We therefore call on the Commission to accord due importance to this matter as part of the initiatives aimed at increasing the external competitiveness of European industry , such as were recently announced by Mr Mandelson before the Committee on International Trade .
Finally , we recommend that the Commission refrain from giving preferential or special treatment to those trade partners that repeatedly fail to comply with WTO rules and case-law , giving rise to serious economic consequences for European industry .
The Committee on International Trade is of the opinion that , when faced with serious situations , we cannot remain completely passive .
If we want to gain the citizens ' support for the new international trade rules , we need to strive for greater transparency , consistency and respect for the law on the part of all the actors , by implementing measures ranging from border controls to the application of common sanctions against those who trade in counterfeit or illegal goods on European soil .
We can associate the conclusions of this report with the recent Commission initiative in favour of a reform of the European Community 's anti-dumping and anti-subsidy policy .
The aim of this reform is to restrict the use of these instruments by the Commission as part of the efforts to ensure that the Community interest is looked at more carefully and more extensively .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , and the Committee on International Trade for the excellent work that they have done on this important issue .
The European Union is a major exporter worldwide and this leaves us exposed to trade defence actions by third countries .
When such actions are taken in compliance with WTO rules , we cannot and should not complain , and we do not .
However , that is not always the case and these actions can easily become a serious and unjustified impediment to our legitimate market access opportunities .
Therefore , we must closely monitor third-country actions against our exports and intervene to minimise the negative impact of such actions on our companies .
And we should certainly be vigilant .
Whenever possible we favour the diplomatic route , which is the quicker and the most efficient way to solve those issues when we have partners who wish to solve them .
But when diplomacy fails , we do not hesitate to resort to WTO panels , as it is our right to do .
Both the diplomatic and the litigation approaches have met with notable successes .
Take , for example , the Indian cases mentioned in the report .
Diplomacy has resulted in the removal of no fewer than 12 measures .
We also hope for significant success on the agricultural products cases that you have identified .
It is well known that the United States is a recurrent problem for us in this context .
It is pro-free trade , but its use of the trade defence instrument is seen by many as unreasonable on certain issues . This has been particularly marked in the steel sector , where we have been arguing against certain practices for years on a large number of their dumping and subsidy measures .
We have had a considerable success in Geneva but , frankly , it is a long hard slog even getting them to implement the remedies to the disputes which they have lost .
We cannot solve everything through diplomacy or litigation .
This is why we welcome your support for the proposals we have tabled in the Doha Round to strengthen the rules and the disciplines governing the use of anti-dumping and countervailing measures .
The Round is suspended , something I deeply deplore and regret , but we are fighting hard to get it restarted .
For trade defence this would allow us to seek improved disciplines along the lines of the EU practice in this field , making it more difficult for countries to abuse the system , which I am afraid some are only too prepared to do .
We need tightened disciplines in the anti-dumping system .
We need greater transparency in the operation of trade defence instruments .
We need less arbitrariness on the part of governments .
Such behaviour simply discredits the rules .
It brings the system into disrepute and it does not reflect credit on the multilateral trade system and its principal institution , the WTO .
We agree with you that the dispute settlement mechanism is an essential feature of the WTO system , which needs protecting , but we are working hard to improve it so that faster remedies can be achieved .
We will take the opportunity of any bilateral trade agreement with third countries to ensure that our partner countries take on specific obligations on the fair use of trade defence instruments .
This is not an alternative to strengthening and improving the rules at the WTO . On the contrary , it underpins that .
It is a way of getting insurance in place , so that we can use all available methods to bring reason and discipline to the operation of these instruments .
This would particularly apply for those countries that abuse them the most .
Good practices are as important as good rules .
That is why the Commission 's departments devote a great deal of time and resources to providing technical assistance to third countries that become new users of trade defence instruments .
Our aim is that they should apply them in a fair and balanced manner and in accordance with our own high standards .
These efforts seem to bear fruit .
The end of 2005 saw a welcome change from the trend of previous years , with a significant fall in the number of trade defence cases initiated against Community exporters , from 33 in 2004 to 19 in 2005 .
Market access , including a fair and proper implementation of WTO trade defence instruments by our trading partners , features high on our priority list and we will continue to take any steps required to ensure that our exports are not unduly penalised .
Of course it is difficult to follow each and every case with our current resources and I would certainly like to do more for our exporters , in particular small and medium-sized companies , which often have little experience in this area .
The EU must remain an example that others can follow .
As the report recalls , we are viewed as a moderate user of trade defence instruments .
That reputation is deserved and that must remain so .
It is in that spirit that I recently launched a reflection process on how Europe 's trade defence instruments such as the anti-dumping instrument operate in the modern global economy .
A broad public consultation will take place early in 2007 , based on a Green Paper expected in the coming months .
This consultation will allow the Commission to draw on a wide range of views and identify whether there is scope to improve our rules and practices further .
Our trade defence instruments can make an important contribution to ensuring both free and fair trade , thereby stimulating our competitiveness .
This will involve strong and close cooperation with all stakeholders , including Member States and industry , and , I would add , the support and involvement of the European Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I welcome the general tone of both the Commission 's and Mrs Muscardini 's reports in wanting to see a world trading system that is as open and fair as possible .
However , when we consider the anti-dumping measures of third countries , we in the Community need to show moral leadership and avoid hypocrisy .
We can agree that trade defence mechanisms are often used as an excuse to protect domestic markets from competition ; but we should also admit that the EU is sometimes guilty of using these mechanisms to protect uncompetitive companies from non-EU providers - shoes and textiles being recent examples .
Fortunately , we continue to be sparing users of these mechanisms .
With the potential collapse of the Doha development round , we must work with our trading partners to ensure that their legislation and practices comply as far as possible with WTO rules .
However , to have any moral authority in this area , our own anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigations must be transparent and impartial .
I am concerned about the call for a Community approach to defend exporting SMEs faced with protectionism abroad .
During last year 's ' bra wars ' , it was a so-called Community approach that suspended imports from China and caused SMEs in London 's fashion industry to lose contracts and to provide compensation to clients left waiting for unfulfilled orders .
If that is a Community approach , then we in London want to see less of it .
When it comes to arbitration , I think we all agree that any ad hoc arbitration group should consist of relevant experts .
But we must ensure that any experts serving on these groups are experts in the sector being investigated who understand the structure of the industry and costs involved , not simply experts in more general trade issues .
Overall , I would like to congratulate both the Commission and the rapporteur on this report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , the increase in international trade in recent years has led , among other things , to increased competition and has tempted many countries to resort to trade protection mechanisms in order to protect their markets .
It should not , therefore , come as a surprise that there have been increasing numbers of situations in which anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard measures have been adopted .
European exports , as the report before us clearly demonstrates , have been the target on a number of occasions of such measures on the part of third countries .
Such cases have risen alarmingly .
As well as the traditional countries , some of the new players to have arrived on the international trade relations scene are involved .
This phenomenon , which could significantly harm a number of European industries , must therefore be tackled seriously .
Such an approach entails , first and foremost , carefully separating cases in which the use of these instruments arises entirely from the legitimate implementation of the principles of fair trade relations from those in which their use is merely a legal smokescreen to cover up illegal protectionist measures in the very worst sense of the term .
This distinction can only be made completely clearly if we are committed to strengthening transparency in the processes aimed at assessing whether trade defence measures are being used legitimately or otherwise . The aim is therefore to ensure complete compliance with the rules and the case law of the World Trade Organisation .
To this end , the Commission must channel its efforts into helping improve these procedures , thereby discouraging the illicit use of these instruments .
That being said , it is appropriate to mention the importance of the Commission 's assistance to the Member States and to European industry in trade protection cases initiated by third countries .
This support is particularly significant for SMEs , which by nature are less well equipped to deal with situations of this kind .
Lastly , we welcome the fact that the Commission is ready to take an active role within the WTO in jointly reviewing the provisions regulating the adoption of trade protection instruments , with a view to stressing the value of multilateralism .
At no point in this debate , however , must it be forgotten that the EU is the most open trading area in the world and that the Europeans also have legitimate interests to safeguard .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Muscardini on this successful report .
Freedom of access to foreign markets is vital to large numbers of European enterprises .
This freedom of access does not exist in many cases today , with third countries hindering European enterprises ' market access in downright breach of agreements or in contravention of the WTO rules .
In so doing , these third countries exploit the whole spectrum of tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade skilfully to their advantage and our disadvantage .
The competitiveness of the European economy , and thus of the EU labour market , suffers tremendously as a result of these problems .
These actions on the part of some of our trade partners are unacceptable .
Commissioner , the EU cannot allow other countries to treat us like this .
All participants in world trade must abide by the rules .
It also applies that the EU should not treat third countries like this .
We , too , must abide by all the rules in order to take credible action against rule-breakers without any open flanks .
Fair , free world trade is possible only if rules are in place that are binding and are observed by all parties without exception .
What is to be done , therefore ?
I would call on the Commission to do everything possible to ensure that we Europeans abide by the rules .
I call on the Commission to take measures to protect our enterprises if it is established that individual trade partners have failed to abide by the rules .
I call on the Commission to make consistent use of the existing - or even an improved - dispute-settlement procedure here if , in specific cases , no amicable settlement has been reached in the short term .
We must focus our future efforts on ensuring that all trade partners abide by the rules .
Only if all parties , without exception , abide by the rules , can people draw long-term benefit from world trade .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for a very comprehensive report on the safeguard action taken by third countries against the European Union .
Unfortunately , a study of Mrs Muscardini 's report and of the Commission 's own report confirms that European trade policy gives undue consideration to protecting producers at the expense of consumers .
This is particularly true of the agricultural sector .
Import quotas , anti-dumping duties and administrative obstacles for agricultural products cost every European household approximately USD 1 500 a year .
Clearly , there are occasions when it may be permissible to impose protective measures , but only in very limited and clearly defined cases .
The circumstances in which they can be applied must be laid down in advance , and any decisions must be planned in good time and widely publicised , in order to enable entrepreneurs to make appropriate arrangements for their orders or supplies .
Unfortunately , market players are currently still paying too high a price for poorly planned trading policies and for sudden decisions to apply protective rates , which cause legal and commercial uncertainty and make it more difficult for those involved in trading to adjust quickly to any changes .
It is therefore very important for trade policy to be stable and predictable .
Preferential rates need to be understandable and easy to apply .
Their implementation should be widely discussed in advance with all trading partners , so that each entrepreneur is properly informed , and can feel certain of the future and of his or her orders .
I would like to conclude by saying a few words about trade with developing countries , the World Trade Organisation and the European Union .
Developing countries should be able to take advantage of all the opportunities arising from membership of the WTO .
These countries should be treated as equal partners .
It is therefore not acceptable for industrialised countries to protect the interests of large firms located mainly in the EU and in the USA .
( EL ) Mr President , having congratulated the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , and thanked the Commissioner for his detailed statement , I should like to say by way of introduction that maintaining and strengthening the competitiveness of the European Union in the new globalised environment requires , firstly , increased European intervention in third country markets and , secondly , effective protection from unfair trading practices by our partners .
The Community - and this has already been said - is still firmly a moderate user of trade defence instruments .
On the other hand , the constant increase in trade defence instruments against the Community is taking on worrying proportions .
The Union is - and must remain - an open market to international competition .
We are against protectionism .
At the same time , however , we are against distorting competition and against our partners ' achieving competitive advantages by relying on underhand practices in infringement of international trade rules .
There is no sense in unilateral disarmament by the Union .
Trade ' pacifism ' operates only when applied by all parties .
No one disputes that we are seeing increased use of trade defence instruments against the Community .
This being so , the Commission should keep a close watch and ensure that abusive and non-compliant measures are withdrawn , either through consultations and / or by taking recourse to the judicial bodies of the WTO as and where needed .
We are also seeing a comparatively large number of trade defence instruments against European agricultural products .
It is therefore the Commission 's responsibility to ensure that the radical reforms of the CAP are taken into adequate account by our trade partners when activating anti-subsidy measures .
Mr President , I have never been a unilateral disarmer at any stage in my political career , in any context .
I have always been a multilateralist , whether it be in respect of disarmament or the putting in place of international rules to create institutions of global governance or in the design of processes to create agreements or to solve disputes in the world .
I bring those principles and that approach to this subject as I have done to others throughout my political career .
We have heard a call this evening for moral leadership .
The morality that I bring to this subject of trade is my belief in free trade .
I say it is moral because I believe that free trade is the best way to drive economic growth , to lever up living standards , to create opportunities for people and to attack poverty in our world .
That is what I call ' moral ' .
However , one of the ways in which we ' morally ' pursue free trade is by standing up for fair trade .
When I look around me and see the public disquiet , uncertainty and unhappiness about what is going on in the global economy and the sense that people feel increasingly insecure and threatened by the dramatic changes that are taking place in the architecture and landscape of the global economy , I see people beginning to question whether free trade is a good idea .
I see them beginning to wonder whether sheltering from the global economy would be better ; whether erecting barriers between us and our trading partners might not be a better way of securing our jobs and our livelihoods .
I make a very strong argument against that reaction and instinct , but I will never help that argument against protectionism if I am seen to be or thought to be weak when it comes to standing up for the upholding and implementation of internationally agreed trade rules which stand out against anti-competitive behaviour , state interventions or trade distortions , which are designed to give one trading partner an unfair , unreasonable and unacceptable advantage in trade against another .
That is why it is appropriate and proper to operate trade defence instruments within the rules created by our multilateral institutions .
However , I would never want to see those rules used as a weapon against others ' low-cost competition or against others ' legitimate use of their comparative advantage .
That is not right and it is not acceptable , but nor , if I may say to Mr Kamall , was that the case either in respect of textiles or shoes .
Shoes , yes , was an anti-dumping measure , arrived at after considerable investigation , analysis , recommendation , discussion , debate and finally decision amongst our Member States , as it properly should be .
I would stand by the objectivity and the transparency with which that decision was arrived at , and it certainly was not adopted for protectionist purposes .
However , in the case of textiles , I never said it was unfair trading .
I never said that the fierce competition that we were facing in the case of textiles was as a result of price or market distortions by the Chinese .
I merely pointed to the fact that with the final lifting of quotas we in Europe were suddenly and unexpectedly faced with what amounted to an avalanche which , if it had not been resisted , would have had the likely effect of burying our market and severely distorting what people produce , how people sell , their profits , their livelihoods and , therefore , their jobs in such a sudden way that I believed it was appropriate - and , in the end , our Chinese trading partners also agreed that it was right and appropriate - to take voluntary cooperative measures to slow down the rapid increase in Chinese textile exports .
You are right that at all times , on all occasions and in all cases we should operate impartiality , transparency and truthfulness in the analysis we put forward , the conclusions we reach and how we seek to justify the measures we are advocating .
It is true , as Mrs Handzlik said , that any intervention of any sort in the market - legitimate , anti-dumping or other uses of trade defence instruments - is bound to create some uncertainty and weaken the ability of businesses to plan ahead .
Mr Kamall made a similar point .
I take this very seriously indeed , because I do not want my actions , as agreed by the Member States , to have the effect of making a bad situation worse by further disrupting or undermining the ability of companies to plan ahead and to organise their production , which , of course , is hampered if supply and production chains are undermined or disrupted by interventions such as these .
Therefore we must minimise the disruption .
One of the things I want to take very seriously in the context of our Green Paper and our examination of this matter , is how we can minimise disruption and offer the greatest possible predictability to companies that might be affected .
I just want to make this last point : Mr Caspary said - if I may elaborate on and embroider his words slightly - that we should keep to the rules and at all times seek to strengthen and improve them .
I agree with that .
That is precisely what we are doing in the DDA and why we have a multilateral system and process governing these rules and an institution that enables us to negotiate precisely the strengthening and the improvement that you advocate .
That is why the WTO system is so important .
I would just like to say in conclusion that , whatever disruptions , interventions , distractions or diversions we have in a trade agenda which is very wide and very complex , I will always keep my eyes very carefully focused on the DDA , the importance of the agenda we are pursuing in the DDA and the vital importance of bringing those negotiations to a successful completion .
I want to do that in respect not only of market access but also of trade rules and their strengthening , and that is what the Commission remains dedicated to achieving .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Peace process in Spain ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the peace process in Spain .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the European Community was born out of a quest for peace and stability .
Peace and stability are still a resource for the development of the Union and it is very important that these matters are also discussed .
It is especially natural for the European Parliament to discuss the principles of peace and stability .
On 23 and 24 March this year , the Spanish Prime Minister gave the European Council an account of the announcement of a permanent ceasefire by the terrorist organisation , ETA .
At the time the Council said that it was satisfied with the account given by the Spanish Prime Minister .
Since then , the Council has not discussed the issue and abides by its statement of the time .
The issue of security is a particularly topical one , and one that affects all Europeans .
The Finnish Presidency is satisfied with all the actions that have been put in place to ensure that ETA ceases its terrorist activity and to bring about a peaceful solution within the framework of Spain 's democratic organs of government .
As we in this Chamber all know , the Union is active in weeding out terrorism and its causes .
The Council once again expresses its support for the action which the Member States have implemented and are implementing to combat terrorism in accordance with the principles of the rule of law .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , terrorism represents one of the worst imaginable threats to democratic societies .
Terrorist attacks not only endanger security but constitute an assault on the fundamental values of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The Commission is strongly committed to the fight against terrorism and intends to continue working for the prevention of terrorism and the protection of our citizens and infrastructures by bringing terrorists to justice and by responding adequately to terrorist attacks in order to save as many innocent lives as possible .
The specific measures that will be taken at European level are clearly outlined in the European counter-terrorist strategy and in the action plan on combating terrorism .
The Commission is obviously deeply concerned at the dramatic scale of ETA 's terrorism in Spain ; four decades of terrorist activity have seen more than 800 assassinations and other attacks , with economic extortion and blackmail becoming common practice .
Law-abiding citizens have learned to live in fear ; many have been permanently threatened in their daily lives .
The serious crime committed yesterday in the south of France - probably by ETA , according to the French prosecutor - is a source of concern .
The attitude of Spanish society during all these years has been exemplary ; indeed , its tenacity and conviction in combating terrorism through respect for democracy and the rule of law has paid off , leading to the increasing weakness of ETA .
The Commission , once again , pays tribute to all the victims of ETA 's terrorist attacks and recalls the importance of helping them and helping to make good damages suffered .
In these circumstances , the Commission recalls the statement made in its presence by the European Council in March 2006 , welcoming the report of the Spanish Prime Minister on the announcement of a permanent ceasefire by terrorist group ETA .
The Commission also recalls the statement made by the President of the European Commission on the announcement by the Spanish Prime Minister on the launch of a dialogue with ETA , sharing the hopes of all those who look to a future in which Spain is free from the scourge of terrorism .
The Commission is most hopeful that those announcements will result in the total disarmament and dissolution of the terrorist group .
At the same time , the Commission is aware of the complexity of the initiative , as well as the extreme sensitivity of the matter , but is convinced that Spain , through all its democratic institutions , will find the right path that will bring an end to ETA 's terrorism and restore peace , with full respect for the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
We shall not be divided today , since we shall not forget that the target of this debate is a common enemy of Spain and of Europe : terrorism .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is one of the most noble tasks of a politician to work for peace .
We all want peace on Earth , in Europe and in Spain .
There are , however , often differences of opinion about how to achieve this objective . This is the case again today .
This debate is not about party-political tactics and gains , but principles and fundamental convictions .
For this reason I ask that everyone here show great respect in this debate today and that we do not deny each other the mutual good will that sustains our conviction .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats would like to know how it is that we can trust that ETA and Batasuna want peace when they have not expressed a single word of regret or apology or made any kind of appeal for forgiveness to the families of the over 800 people that they have murdered .
Until this occurs , we must expect that they will begin to kill again if they do not achieve their goals through negotiation .
Today , our sympathy , our respect and our solidarity are with the victims of the acts of terrorism and violence carried out by ETA and Batasuna .
I can see from here our highly esteemed fellow MEP Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , whose husband , the then Chairman of the Socialist Party in the Basque Country , was murdered in 1984 .
Several attempts have been made on the life of Mr Iturgaiz Angulo , and seven of his political associates from the Partido Popular in the Basque Country have been murdered .
We owe it to the victims to ensure that the murderers are punished . This is in accordance with the guiding and basic principles of our system of states under the rule of law .
If it is to be credible , the process of reconciliation must begin with reconciliation between perpetrators and victims , including the victims ' descendants .
We call upon ETA and Batasuna to give your victims - who are surely on your consciences - a sign of conciliation and of apology .
We would remind people that ETA and Batasuna are on the EU 's list of terrorist organisations .
They have not surrendered their weapons .
These weapons remain a threat to the constitutional order of Spain , as well as of France and thereby of the whole of Europe .
The Commissioner has reminded us of the events of the day before yesterday in Nimes .
A woman and two children were taken hostage and the French authorities have stated officially that this took place as part of an ETA weapons robbery .
In other words , weapons remain an instrument of political argument .
We have to ask ourselves what goal ETA and Batasuna are trying to achieve .
A statement was issued on Euronews on 24 October from a high-ranking representative of ETA and Batasuna .
The statement said that weapons would not be surrendered until the Basque Country was - in their words - independent .
MEPs have received a letter from Batasuna , which states in English , ' Regarding the negotiation between ETA and the Spanish and French states it will be them who decide all about the demilitarisation of the conflict . '
This form of words is a bad sign , since , if the negotiations fail , the blame is already being laid at the doors of the Spanish and French states .
What we in the PPE-DE Group , have to say to this is that we want dialogue .
Spain and France are free and democratic states .
They are not dictatorships , they are not tyrannies , against which one may express resistance through violent means .
No , they are free states , and in free and democratic states it is democratic dialogue and not violence that must be used .
As we share this conviction at the deepest level , our group , the PPE-DE Group , has tabled a resolution .
It is not merely a resolution on the part of our Spanish allies in the Partido Popular , it is a common resolution on the part of the whole of our group , and we will defend it with solidarity and now , today , and in this debate , commemorate the victims .
( Applause from the right )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of terrorism in Spain is not a Spanish internal problem ; it is a European problem .
Terrorism is an attack on our values .
Terrorism is always an attack on everything that we in this Parliament defend on the basis of our common European convictions .
No terrorism , absolutely none , is justified .
It is for all of us to find ways out of this terrorism because we are all - when it is our values that we are defending - victims of this terrorism too , every time a terrorist attack takes place .
Mr Poettering , commendably , made reference to my colleague Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , who is herself a victim .
We have many people with us in the public gallery today from the Basque Country who themselves were and are victims in that they have lost loved ones or in that they have personally suffered injury to life and limb .
They are here listening to us today because they want to say ' yes ' to the route of dialogue because it is only through dialogue that the spiral of violence can be ended .
I admire men and women who must have experienced the deep sorrow that these victims have been through and who nevertheless come out and demand an end to the death , to the violence and to the downward spiral .
This moral force must be the impetus to reach a solution to the problems of violence , not only in the Basque Country , but everywhere else too .
It is thus a European problem that we are discussing today .
I admire the courage of the Spanish Government in choosing this path , a path that is controversial and fraught with risks .
It is , however , a path that is best described by a quotation that I would like to read to you .
( ES ) For the sake of peace and your rights , we shall not close ourselves off but , rather , we shall open ourselves up to peace , hope , forgiveness and generosity and we shall do the best we can to ensure that peace is lasting with the help and hope of everybody .
( Applause )
( DE ) What I have just read out to you is a wonderful sentence that describes what this is all about .
It is a sentence uttered by the Spanish Prime Minister who sent his Secretary of State off to negotiate with ETA . It is a sentence spoken by the Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar in 1998 .
That is the spirit that can form the basis for us all to reach a common solution to this problem of violence , since what the Spanish Government is doing today is in the tradition of all the governments before it .
( Applause )
It would therefore be a good thing if we were able to attain a joint resolution .
I do not always agree with Mr Aznar , which will not surprise you to hear , but on this issue he was right , dear members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and dear members of the Partido Popular , he was your party leader , after all . In this spirit we can agree , as one , that we are prepared , for the sake of such a fundamental right and through dialogue , to find a solution .
Mr President , when Members of this House had to deal with terrorism in the past , they were always aware of the risks .
When John Hume und David Trimble , Members of this House , set off together on the road to peace they were also aware that it is a road fraught with risk and that there is no guarantee of success .
The gun heist in France yesterday - which we condemn in the strongest possible terms - shows that if you want to get out of the cycle of violence there is always the risk that someone will attempt to use violent means to block your road out of the deadlock .
You cannot afford to be forced off this road , because what is the alternative ?
Remaining deadlocked means perpetuating the violence .
The dialogue that has been entered into is thus a great opportunity , and I implore all of you , let us adopt this dialogue together on a common platform supported by all the groups .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the European Union has been referred to as the greatest example of conflict resolution in history .
We must be concerned with the remaining conflicts at home , just as we are concerned with conflicts beyond our Union .
It is not for us in the European Parliament to intervene directly between the Spanish Government , political parties and the long-running conflict in the Basque country , but nor can we turn a blind eye .
We should encourage what may be the best prospect for peace in a generation .
I extend my solidarity and sympathy to all those families who have been bereaved of loved ones over the years as a result of the violence .
But surely the most appropriate response that we , as democratic politicians , can bring to those countless victims is to ensure that there will be no more victims .
It is for that reason that Liberals and Democrats lend their backing to the resolution before the House today .
It is neither a time nor a subject for political point-scoring .
It is my firm belief that all democratic forces who wish to see a peaceful end to violence and terror in the Basque country and elsewhere in Spain where atrocities have been committed should back the endeavours of whichever Spanish government is prepared to work to that end .
Earlier this year , this House welcomed the announcement of an ETA ceasefire .
It is right that we now build on that and engage a process that entrenches it , without prejudging or commenting on the outcome of any political dialogue or settlement .
As with the Northern Ireland peace process , which is not identical but offers some important lessons for conflict resolution , it is occasionally necessary for politicians to take a risk for peace .
I recall that our former colleague John Hume and his Unionist counterpart David Trimble were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998 , following the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland .
They took a risk for peace .
This is not to hand a victory to the terrorists , as some would suggest , but rather to hand them a defeat .
For there can be no dialogue among democrats if one of the parties still maintains the intent to kill .
We should not imagine that building the house of peace will be easy .
There will be setbacks , such as the discovery of a cache of weapons in south-west France .
But it is our duty to build the house of peace with the bricks of effort and the mortar of persistence .
That is why my group appeals to all sides of this House today to set aside party politics and unite for the prospects of peace , as much as we stand together in revulsion at acts of terrorism .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance supports the process opened up in Spain to finally put an end to the terrorism of ETA and find a solution to the Basque conflict .
At the same time we reiterate our profound solidarity and respect for all of the victims of terrorism .
We support this process because it rejects violence , it leaves all options for a final solution open , it is not exclusive and it also gives the Basque political parties and Basque society in general responsibility in terms of putting an end to the so-called Basque conflict .
Debating this issue in the European Parliament does not mean interfering in the policy of a Member State . It simply means promoting a process already underway and restating that terrorism and violence affects all Europeans .
However difficult this process may be and however unsure its result , we support and we will continue to support those people who have decided to run the risk of taking a different direction to that of the Aznar Government , which quite clearly did not achieve any real results .
As Gandhi stated , ' There is no path to peace . Peace is the path ' .
We believe that it is appropriate to debate this process here and we have always been in favour of doing so , even when the People 's Party was determined to bring this conflict to the European Parliament in order to gain support for its policy , a policy that we always believed to be mistaken , because it was based on the idea that , in order to defeat terrorism , it was necessary to divide Basque society rather than unite it .
The Basques and the majority of Spaniards are tired of this policy of confrontation .
In our view , the key factors for the success of this process are dialogue , non-violence and respect for the citizens of the Basque country 's right to decide .
With these objectives in mind , we are going to support this process , as firm friends and allies in the fight against terrorism , against all forms of terrorism .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , my group has always condemned terrorist acts , whoever the perpetrators and whatever the scale of the acts and the reasons given to justify them .
We are in favour of political struggle , with the exclusion of all forms of violence .
We see violence as reprehensible in all circumstances except where , as provided for by the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , a population , in the absence of the rule of law is ' compelled to have recourse , as a last resort , to rebellion against tyranny and oppression ' .
Even in this case , attacks on civilians are , in our opinion , to be prohibited .
All the more reason for our having unreservedly and systematically condemned the attacks by ETA , which have killed hundreds of innocent people .
We continue to remember these victims and express once again our solidarity with their loved ones .
For a long time , we have been hoping that this chapter could be closed , once and for all .
We were therefore extremely pleased to welcome the announcement of the permanent ceasefire by ETA .
We therefore also greatly appreciate the open and responsible attitude with which the Spanish Prime Minister , José Luis Zapatero , has taken this opportunity to endeavour to achieve peace , in particular in his speech on 28 June 2005 , by choosing the path of dialogue while taking care to respect the laws and legal procedures in force in his country .
The European Parliament would be honoured to lend its support to this move .
It is in this spirit that the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has united with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe through a joint resolution .
I would add that we believe it would be a good thing for MEPs from other groups to also lend their support to a move that is nothing short of a reflection of the wishes of the majority of Spanish people , namely that a peace process be opened , based on legal grounds .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to join with my colleagues in saying that today is a very sensitive occasion for us in Parliament .
In all our deliberations we have to remember the victims of terrorist violence and , today in particular , the victims of ETA violence in Spain over the last few years .
But we must also look to the future and ensure that there are no more victims , because political solutions will be found to the differences in Spain , France , and the European Union as a whole .
I believe it is wrong to draw parallels or to say all processes are exactly the same .
However , previous peace processes can act as a guide to what might happen , the kind of difficulties to be overcome and the challenges to be faced .
If dialogue is to succeed , both sides must be open .
You cannot talk about a future process with one hand tied behind your back .
You have to ensure that those with whom you have a dialogue are committed to reaching a compromise and finding a solution .
And the most important thing to remember is that when you go into a peace process you have to make peace with your enemies , not with your friends , and that can create a lot of internal difficulties .
( Applause )
The opportunities now presented to us by this process should be grasped , but it should not be predetermined that everybody gets what they want .
It is most important that we do not point the finger of blame at someone else from the Popular Party or from the Socialist Party , but encourage the main forces of democracy in Spain to unite in finding a solution for all of the people of Spain and not to be driven down the road of division and dissension .
That is not in any way to undermine or to ignore the suffering people have gone through .
Can any of us imagine what it would be like to lose a loved one because of a so-called political cause ?
We in Ireland know what that is like - there have been 3 000 victims of terrorist violence in Ireland over the last 30 years - and yet we could find a way forward and bring extreme opinions together .
An opportunity does present itself if people genuinely want to act .
Opportunity comes to pass but not to pause .
Let us seize the opportunity and give our support .
( Applause from the left and the centre )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , my group does not wish to involve itself in Spanish domestic politics , but there are principles of international law to which all countries are obliged to adhere .
Sometimes , they do not provide a clear answer .
The right of peoples to self-determination is an inviolable principle .
Every people has the right to chose its own fate .
Every nation has the right to its own country .
There are , however , only around 10 to 12 countries in the world where people , nation and geographical unit combine to form a higher unit .
Everywhere else it is a question of negotiating solutions that are respected by the different peoples and nations that share the same territorial unit .
The EU does not interfere in the forms of government of the Member States .
This is an area in which they themselves have competence , whether they wish to have a unitary state , a federal community or devolved arrangements or to be divided into multiple states .
The states must protect minorities and respect human rights .
National discrimination is not permitted .
So what can the EU do in the Basque Country to end terrorism and ensure a durable solution with peace and tolerance ?
We can encourage our fellow MEPs from Spain to find a negotiated solution and we can provide an economic carrot - financial support for economic development , jobs , training and education instead of terrorism .
I come from the border region between Denmark and Germany , where we have had wars and hatred for centuries .
My grandfather was a German soldier with Danish sympathies .
My father was conceived in Germany , but born in Denmark after Northern Schleswig rejoined Denmark following a referendum .
Our national leader , Hans Peter Hansen , was a moderate who did not want areas that had German sympathies to rejoin Denmark , as Germany was on its knees after the First World War .
What a stroke of luck !
The reconciliation between Danes and Germans began , and now everyone recognises the border .
Denmark grants the German minority more rights than it grants to Danes , and the same applies to the Danish minority in Germany , an example being exemption from the 5 % electoral hurdle to qualification for parliamentary representation .
Recognition , respected rights , special rights - these are the keys to understanding and lasting peace .
As a boy , a German-owned shop was not somewhere that I could buy things .
Today , that seems incredible , and I now work with both the German minority in Denmark and the Danish minority in Germany .
We drew up together the proposal for the protection of minorities in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I hope that the Basques and the other peoples of Spain will be able to reconcile their differences .
The means of achieving reconciliation between Denmark and Germany proved to be a referendum on special rights .
Referendums do not hurt as much as bullets and gunpowder .
It is indeed possible to put the past behind you .
( Applause )
Mr President , coming from Northern Ireland , which has experienced what at times was euphemistically called a peace process , I see uncanny parallels and lessons to be learned .
ETA-Batasuna and IRA-Sinn Féin are both revolutionary Marxist-based organisations intent on foisting their will and ideology on a civilian population through vicious violence as and when required .
It is not surprising that deep terrorist links have existed between them .
Both , moreover , are expert in hijacking the language of peace , while glorying in past and even continuing exploits of terror as they adeptly dodge from one phase of struggle to another .
Learn from our mistakes .
In 1994 the IRA announced a ceasefire , which proved merely tactical as 18 months later they launched the infamous Canary Wharf bombing attack and dipped in and out of terror as it suited .
In 1998 they promised to decommission within two years , and yet it was not until 2005 that they made any notable delivery .
They were foolishly and prematurely admitted to government in Northern Ireland , only to launch their ' Stormontgate ' spy ring within that government .
In late 2004 they purported to engage in genuine political negotiations while , at the same time , planning the biggest heist in UK history - the Northern Bank robbery - and weeks later IRA men murdered Robert McCartney .
Now they want back into government , but think they should keep their Army Council .
Therefore , do not be taken in by mere proclamations of commitments to peace by those whose stock in trade is duplicity and mayhem !
Test them long and test them hard , or you too will have your goodwill exploited .
To conclude this debate , two motions for resolutions have been presented pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.30 p.m. after the formal sitting with the President of the Republic of Hungary .
Results of the informal summit of heads of state and government ( Lahti , 20 October 2006 ) ( debate )
The next item is the European Council report and Commission statement on the results of the informal summit of Heads of State or Government in Lahti on 20 October 2006 .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last Friday , 20 October , I had the pleasure to host the informal meeting of Heads of State or Government in Lahti and the dinner that followed it , where the Russian President Vladimir Putin was our guest .
Both the meeting of Heads of State or Government and the dinner organised after it were a great success .
These informal meetings of EU leaders are an excellent way of building political consensus to take the Union forward with regard to its key challenges .
At the summit we focused particularly on external energy relations .
We also discussed immigration and the situation in Sudan / Darfur .
A separate working session was devoted to ways of promoting innovation policy to guarantee the Union 's competitiveness and economic growth .
Developing innovation policy is crucial to EU competitiveness and our ability to keep good jobs in Europe .
The open and thorough discussions during the working lunch enabled us to close ranks for the dinner , despite the doubts that had existed in certain quarters .
The atmosphere over lunch was excellent and the solidarity among the Member States could definitely be felt .
We attached a great deal of importance to speaking with one voice , and I would like to call this determination to reach consensus the Spirit of Lahti .
The discussion over dinner with Russian President Vladimir Putin was very honest and frank .
In addition to energy issues , we also discussed topical international issues and freedom of expression in Russia .
The meeting of Heads of State or Government held a comprehensive and broad debate on energy .
The atmosphere was excellent and the basic message , despite slight differences in tone , coherent .
The main topics were the principles for developing EU-Russian energy relations and their execution , closer relations with strategically important third countries , the fight against climate change through energy policy ; and more effective exchange of information through a network of energy correspondents .
With regard to EU-Russian energy relations , we agreed that there is a need for closer partnership .
It should be based on the principles laid down in the Energy Charter and the G8 Declaration , in particular openness , market-based solutions and reciprocity .
These principles should already be applied now in practice and they should also be incorporated in concrete form into the forthcoming EU-Russia Agreement .
At Lahti we laid down a common policy for EU-Russia energy relations .
There was also consensus at Lahti that we should continue and step up our efforts to forge closer relations with producer and transit countries in the Union 's neighbourhood by the end of the year .
The goal is to apply the principles governing the internal market as widely as possible in neighbouring regions of the Union .
Climate change was referred to in many addresses as the most urgent international challenge .
The EU must , in particular , demonstrate leadership in the promotion of sustainable energy .
As regards innovations and technologies that relate to energy efficiency , European companies have a lot to offer .
We shared the view that issues of energy and climate should in future feature prominently at EU summits with developing world countries , as they have during Finland 's EU Presidency .
If a reliable supply of energy is to be secured , there needs to be huge investment in transmission networks and other infrastructure .
Therefore , cooperation with international financial institutions must be stepped up in energy infrastructure projects .
Energy security must be one of the criteria taken into account when European Investment Bank lending mandates are being granted to developing world countries .
It is important for the Union to have comprehensive information on which to base its energy policy decisions and responses to external problem situations .
We agreed in Lahti that we should try to make swift progress in the establishment of a network of energy correspondents by the end of the year .
The details are to be agreed by the Council .
Improving the way information is collected and analysed will help increase cooperation between the Member States and institutions , and make for greater solidarity on energy issues .
Discussions at the summit on external energy relations will also prepare the ground for the next spring European Council , which is to adopt a prioritised Action Plan on Energy Policy for Europe .
At the working session of the meeting of Heads of State or Government , we discussed how to move forward on innovation policy .
The main topics were intellectual property rights , particularly patents , cooperation between the corporate world and the public sector , the European Institute of Technology , and standards .
We agreed that the Union needs a clear strategy on intellectual property rights .
The Competitiveness Council will provide the Commission with more details of what it would like to see in the area of intellectual property rights .
At Lahti , we stressed that the Commission proposal should look in particular at the quality of the intellectual property rights system .
The Commission will put forward its proposal before the spring European Council .
One of the very strong messages from Lahti was that the European patent system must be made more cost-effective and easier to predict .
Litigation systems also need improving .
We need to try and move ahead quickly on this .
Towards the end of the year , the Commission will issue a communication containing concrete proposals on the development of the European patent system .
When it has received the Commission 's proposal , the Council will consider the various options .
The issue of how to make the patent system more effective has been a difficult one for the Council , but it is vitally important for our capacity for innovation to develop the European system .
I personally think that everyone should bear the common interest in mind , be prepared to show flexibility rather than stubbornness with regard to national positions , and agree to simplify the language regime , for example .
We also agreed that we needed to promote cooperation between the corporate world and the private sector .
The European Technology Platforms and Joint Technology Initiatives are good tools for developing key technologies .
If we are to make progress , it is important that the EU 's Seventh Framework Programme be adopted without delay .
The programme should also be a source of EU funding for Joint Technology Initiatives .
I am very pleased that the Lahti meeting confirmed that Artemis , one of the most advanced technology platforms , will be taken further , and that the Commission 's desire to implement it as a Joint Technology Initiative , is to be endorsed .
Businesses in the sector are investing huge sums in the joint initiative .
The Finnish Government too has set a good example here , promising to contribute EUR 70 million over a seven-year period .
Over all , Artemis is one of Europe 's biggest Joint Technology Initiatives , in a very important and promising technological field .
Last week , the Commission put forward a legislative proposal concerning the European Institute of Technology .
Lahti gave the go-ahead for a swift and detailed examination of the proposal by the Council .
I see this as a very valuable initiative and I think that it could bring genuine added value to the development of research cooperation between universities and business .
Lastly in this area , I would like to mention standardisation , a subject which we also touched upon at our meeting .
As I have already stressed before , standardisation is very important in the lives of the Union 's citizens .
For example , introducing the Europe-wide GSM standard phones made it possible for Europe to become the world leader in the field .
If Europe cannot agree on good standards , others will set them .
We all know that innovation can deliver success and growth , but the problem has been how to take concrete steps forward .
The guidance we received at Lahti will now help us to make progress in creating the kind of environment that promotes competitiveness .
Our discussion on immigration highlighted the commitment to cooperation and the matter of solidarity amongst the Member States in solving immigration problems .
It is a matter that concerns the whole Union .
While we require rapid , short-term action to deal with the acute crisis that we are seeing , our discussions also emphasised the need for a coherent and comprehensive policy on immigration .
The policy should address both legal and illegal immigration .
We also need to do more to help immigrants to integrate .
The need for close cooperation with African countries , as well as other countries of origin and transit , was particularly apparent .
The best way of dealing with the pressure on people to leave their country is promoting development , in Africa and elsewhere .
The meeting gave its full support to the work being done by the EU 's border management agency , and it was acknowledged that more resources were needed to bolster its work .
The meeting also spoke of the need to develop our decision-making system , to enable the Union to respond promptly and more effectively to urgent problems .
Thank you for the strong and thorough contribution you made at Lahti , Mr President .
You made it very clear that the European Parliament wants more effective decision-making in the field of justice and home affairs .
The Finnish Presidency shares this view fully .
( Applause )
The theme of immigration will be dealt with again by the justice and home affairs ministers and the foreign ministers .
We will be returning to the issue at the December European Council .
We also spoke in Lahti about the grave situation in Sudan / Darfur .
We expressed our deep concern about the humanitarian situation and human rights in Darfur .
As representative of the Presidency of the Council , I will be passing this urgent message on to the Sudanese President .
We must keep up the pressure on the Sudanese Government to bring an end to the fighting , enable the UN to mount a peace-keeping operation and start negotiations with the rebels .
The informal discussions with Russian President Vladimir Putin were extremely useful for the development of our strategic partnership .
That involves eagerness to cooperate and being prepared to discuss all issues .
The partnership should not be seen as static but as an ongoing process .
We believe that a genuine and lasting partnership has to be built on common values .
Mr President , I would like to thank you too for your contribution to our dinner debate and for the support which you expressed regarding this crucial matter .
Values are the foundation of everything .
In our discussions with President Putin , we talked about how we could promote the goals of energy cooperation through a new agreement .
Our talks will also pave the way for the EU-Russia Summit in November .
The intention is that an agreement will be reached at the Helsinki Summit on the commencement of negotiations on a new and comprehensive EU-Russia pact .
On international issues , we agreed with President Putin that we would try to establish closer cooperation between the EU and Russia .
The need for closer cooperation has been demonstrated very clearly by recent events in Iran , North Korea and the Middle East .
Over dinner , I brought up the shocking murder of journalist Anna Politkovskaya .
I told President Putin that people in the Member States were worried that the situation regarding freedom of speech and expression in Russia had taken a turn for the worse .
Speaking for the Union , I said that this murder , which had deeply shocked us all , should be investigated and those responsible brought to justice .
I also mentioned our concerns regarding Chechnya .
Relations between Russia and Georgia were also brought up .
I told President Putin that the Union was concerned about increasing tension and said that the Union was prepared to act to find a solution to the crisis .
We are building a strategic , tangible partnership with Russia on an extremely wide front within the framework of the ' common spaces ' .
The most prominent themes during Finland 's presidential term are : energy , the environment , transport , justice and home affairs and human rights .
The European Union must be able to speak to its partners with one voice .
Divided and disunited , we are weak .
We will not be able to look after our interests or promote the values on which the Union is built .
At Lahti , we succeeded in showing President Putin that the Union is determined and united in its opinions .
Representing the Presidency of the Council as I do , I am proud of this achievement , and I think that we have taken a step forward in our relations with Russia .
This does not mean that Russia agrees with us on everything .
We actually had a long discussion , in which President Putin answered our questions in detail and also looked for weaknesses in the EU 's action .
We are used to this with Russia ; it is part of normal dialogue .
The crucial question now , in the wake of the Lahti meeting , is how we translate words into action and move forward on the issues that we discussed .
We are relying on the preparatory channels which we normally employ .
Most of the work will be done in the Council on the basis of Commission initiatives .
For many issues we will draw on the policy guidelines we have received in the remaining weeks of our presidential term .
The European Parliament will also have a central role to play in accelerating action on what was agreed on at Lahti .
Thank you for this opportunity to present to you the results of the Lahti informal meeting of Heads of State or Government .
I will be glad to answer any questions which my introduction to the subject may have given rise to .
( Applause )
President of the Commission .
Mr President , Prime Minister Vanhanen has given you a comprehensive overview of the results of the informal European Council in Lahti last Friday .
I should like to concentrate on a few points .
The Lahti summit should be seen as part of a process .
As you know , we have been saying that we should drive forward integration through practical , concrete actions and we have been doing so , hand in hand with Parliament and the Council .
We have set out an ambitious agenda , for example on security , on energy , on research , and now we must put that agenda into action .
That is precisely what we did at Lahti .
Firstly , on innovation , everyone agrees that innovation is important and that Europe is lagging behind .
There is a consensus on the need for more support and incentives for innovation and fewer barriers for innovators .
That has been endorsed in the European Council and in resolutions from this Parliament .
What we needed were some clear , practical steps to show that Europe was prepared to take a lead and that is what we got at Lahti .
On joint technology initiatives , for example , key projects such as the Artemis Programme on embedded computers were being held back by a lack of national funds .
Now we have some clear commitments for direct support .
On procedures to set European standards for products , we have an agreement that these should be speeded up .
I also believe that momentum is building up on intellectual property , including patents , and the Commission will push that further before the end of the year .
Importantly , the Commission received the green light on the European Institute for Technology ( EIT ) .
I am grateful for the support I received from all the Members who spoke in favour of the EIT in the part-session two weeks ago .
There is a growing consensus that the EIT will offer European leadership on innovation .
We are receiving enthusiastic support from all over the business and scientific community in Europe .
The attention given by Parliament to that important initiative has been of real help in developing the details of the proposal .
Of course there will now be negotiations on details , including the budget .
I look forward to working with you and the Council in order to move swiftly towards adoption of the regulation .
I believe that the EIT can be a flagship of excellence in innovation for Europe .
We should ask the EIT to make its first priority the great challenges of climate change and everything related to environmentally-friendly sources of energy .
That is an important task for us as a society .
We should ask the scientific community of Europe to help us solve these problems , so that we can maintain the lead in what is perhaps the most important challenge of the 21st century .
The second main issue in the debate was energy .
The Commission , working closely with the Presidency , had identified three practical steps forward , and we received support for them all .
First , the European Council agreed that we should step up our energy relations with our neighbours , especially producers like Russia , Norway or Algeria , and key transit countries like Turkey and Ukraine .
Secondly , the European Council agreed to create a network of energy correspondents , which will also make us better prepared for unexpected shocks to our energy supply .
Thirdly , the European Council agreed on a specific common approach to Russia .
We made clear to President Putin our wish to have a close energy relationship with such a key partner , but that relationship must be based on the principles that Russia has already signed up to at the G8 hosted by Russia this year , as well as the energy charter : transparency , the rule of law , reciprocity and non-discrimination , along with market opening and market access .
Those principles apply to energy , but not just energy .
They are necessary elements in increasing the mutual confidence and investment essential to a long-term relationship .
That message was all the more powerful in that we were united .
In Lahti there was a clear sense of solidarity , an understanding that the European Union will act as one and that Europeans should receive the same standards of reliability from our Russian partners , whichever Member State is concerned .
Prime Minister Vanhanen spoke on behalf of the whole European Council , presenting the general issues regarding our broad relations with Russia , and I was proud to have been asked to speak on energy matters .
It was important for that meeting and for the success of the Lahti summit that the statements by the Presidency and by the European Commission were clearly supported by all members of the European Council .
The idea of solidarity is more important than ever .
Solidarity and coherence are more than ever the key words of our European Union .
Going forward on energy , within the framework of our new global agreement with Russia , will help ensure that this common approach is maintained .
In short , the message is getting through : energy is a European issue and needs European solutions .
There is growing recognition in the Council of what you in Parliament have long known , i.e. that the European Union has a central role to play in creating energy security and , through energy policy , in tackling climate change .
That bodes well for the energy package that the Commission will present in January .
The European Union must not reduce its relationship with Russia to energy .
At the dinner with President Putin , the European Union raised other issues : human rights , trade , visas , culture and common international concerns .
We covered sensitive issues like Georgia .
Prime Minister Vanhanen repeated the European Union 's concern at the murder of Anna Politkovskaya , expressed so eloquently in our previous debate in the European Parliament .
As we negotiate a new global agreement with Russia , this broad spread of issues must be maintained .
That is the essence of a comprehensive agreement .
Thirdly , at Lahti there was a short but important discussion on immigration .
Again , there was a clear understanding that this was a collective problem , demanding a collective response .
I was able to explain that in the coming weeks the Commission will be making proposals on how to improve maritime control of the Union 's southern borders .
We will also be updating the global approach on migration in the run-up to the December European Council and working to tackle the problem at source in the Euro-African Conference on Migration and Development next month .
However , there is still much more that we could do in this area if the political will and determination is there to give us the tools and resources needed .
In particular , we believe that our decision-making system should be adapted .
We can already do that under the existing Treaties .
We cannot go on waiting so long for decisions that are so often blocked because of the rule of unanimity .
Let us be frank : it is completely absurd that in a common space of freedom of movement we still sometimes think in terms of 25 migration policies .
We need a European policy on migration .
( Applause )
Finally , Darfur was also discussed .
I remain determined that we will do all we can to prevent another humanitarian tragedy .
Therefore , Lahti was another signpost on our collective road towards equipping Europeans for globalisation .
We will not be diverted from this path .
The expectations of our citizens for a Europe of practical results are increasing .
We must continue to respond .
I am grateful to Mr Vanhanen for his excellent chairmanship and to the Finnish Presidency for our close cooperation .
May it continue to the end of the Presidency and beyond .
That is the way to achieve practical results for our Europe .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Prime Minister Vanhanen , President Barroso , in assessing the success of the Lahti meeting we may certainly work on the basis that its results are commendable .
Things did not bode well for the summit .
Many newspapers , the highly regarded Financial Times in particular , painted a very gloomy picture of the meeting in advance , saying that it was a big risk inviting Russian President Putin along , as the EU is divided and disunited on energy and Russian policy .
It said that this would just be a victory for President Putin .
Things turned out differently , however .
It was good to see EU leaders acting in unison and speaking with solidarity over dinner .
In speeches I have given here , I myself have said that the EU should have a united , unanimous , long-term policy on Russia .
Now the first steps have succeeded in being taken .
This will also show the public that the EU can act in difficult situations too .
Obviously , we have to acknowledge that we still have a long way to go before things become concrete and Russia ratifies the Energy Charter , which will open up the market and enforce compliance with common rules .
Although this was a small step forward , it was nevertheless an important step towards a uniform , long-term policy on Russia .
It was also important that we ventured to speak openly about human rights and the murder of Anna Politkovskaya and not dodge the issues .
We cannot sacrifice human rights on the altar of energy policy .
The discussion was frank as far as President Putin was concerned too , even though he did not change his views .
Hardly anyone expected him to either .
Cooperation can only be built on mutual trust and a common will .
Now a path has been opened up for greater cooperation on energy and other issues .
What I missed at the dinner discussion with Putin was matters to do with the Baltic .
This would have been an excellent opportunity to bring up with Russia the problems of the Baltic Sea .
I understand , of course , that you cannot speak about everything over one dinner .
In general conclusion regarding the Lahti Summit , may I say ' Well done , Prime Minister Vanhanen ' .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin with an observation about the Russian President Mr Putin , who featured prominently in Mr Vanhanen 's speech and , Mr President of the Commission , in your own .

The evening spent with him must have been a memorable one indeed .
From the reports I hear , and from what I read , the meeting with President Putin was quite something .
It is good , I feel , that Mr Putin is so frank .
I have no problems with this and nor , for what it is worth , does my group .
I would like , first of all , to say that when Mr Putin comments on the speech made by the President of this House , Mr Borrell Fontelles , he honours us .
It shows that he has at least been listening .
We never know , of course , if everyone is listening , but it does appear that Mr Putin has been .
We do , however , reject comments that Mr Putin has made in relation to the speech where these are of an offensive nature , as the President of this House speaks for all its Members , and we thank him for what he said .
( Applause )
Secondly , I would like to say that , yes , it is indeed a good thing for Mr Putin to speak about what he thinks of Italy . It is indeed a good thing for Mr Putin to speak about what he finds worthy of criticism in Spain .
I believe these to be good things because European society is an open one .
In our society anyone can criticise anything .
This makes our society distinctly different from Russian society , where not everyone can voice criticisms of anything .
( Applause )
It is therefore fruitful to have an open exchange of opinions with the Russian President .
For that reason , we are also stating that what is happening in Chechnya is not right and that it must be condemned when human rights are breached and when people are degraded .
I would also mention that Russian people too , including soldiers of the Russian army , are treated dishonourably there .
It is , of course , completely obvious - we will be pointing this out in the resolution on the death of Anna Politkovskaya - that it is not possible to describe today 's Russia , where journalists have to fear for their lives if they air grievances about their country , as a functioning democracy .
That much is completely obvious .
Thus , the open exchange of opinions on our part with Mr Putin and with all the Russians , and Russian politicians , that we come across is a part of our understanding of what it means to deal with people as partners .
We do , after all , criticise what goes on in the United States .
We reserve the right to criticise what goes on elsewhere in the world just as we ourselves may be subject to criticism .
I am , then , also critical of the speeches made by Prime Minister Vanhanen and the President of the Commission , in which they promised many fine things .
It all sounded so wonderful .
You are , of course , aware of that , as I say it in every speech I make in relation to your remarks .
Excellent !
Superb !
Once everything that you have described to us is implemented Europe really will be an El Dorado for technology , an El Dorado for training and qualification .
We will be the knowledge-based society of the 21st , nay the 22nd , century .
Superb !
Onwards , ever onwards !
I have to tell you , though , gentlemen , that the point will come at which you will have to deliver the goods !
So much for the announcements .
Outstanding !
Except for the fact that - and this applies not only to you , least of all , indeed , to you , Mr President of the Commission , you who in fact make the right proposals , and who also seek to work towards the goals you announce - you in the Council , you , Mr Vanhanen , and the other Heads of State or Government , you must all put into practice what you have described in relation to energy policy , and that includes implementing it in your national energy plans .
( Applause )
Moreover , I have to tell the House that , if you do not wish to be dependent on Russian energy , you must put an end to the waste of energy in Europe , in the US and in the industrialised nations of the world .
If you want to limit climatic disasters , you must reduce CO2 emissions , and that will be accomplished , not by using natural gas from Russia , but rather through greater energy efficiency , through greater use of renewable energy , through power stations that make use of Combined Heat and Power ( CHP ) and through power plants with the highest level of efficiency .
To do this , I might add , we will need more technology , and this is where we come full circle , back to the Lisbon process , for , if we want new technology , we need to invest in the minds of our people , in the universities .
All that is true . It is just that we debate this time and again from scratch .
Time and again , the same old things once more . Time and again , the same statements , and time and again , the same speech from me .
This speech is not new either . I have already made it in modified form on numerous occasions .
I have no desire to bore myself - not even with my own speeches .
So , I beg you , let the announcements by the Commission and the Council at long last be backed up by actions .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , there is no resolution to discuss today .
But then again there were no conclusions to the summit .
My point is not that such occasions are not worthwhile : on the contrary , such is the need for greater action at European level that the Union could and should have four formal summits every year , as foreseen in the Treaty of Nice .
What was on the menu at Lahti ?
I refer not , Prime Minister , to the artichoke soup or the grilled goose that you served at supper , proving that you can supplant prosciutto di Parma , but to the EIT and the European patents , to energy security , to immigration , to relations with Russia - strategic themes which need serious reflection , but also strategic decisions which highlight the need for coherent policymaking .
What is the use of a European technology university producing innovative ideas , if as a Union we are not able to agree a quick and easy patent registration system ?
What is the hope for a collective climate change strategy if we are not prepared together radically to change our patterns of energy consumption and generation ?
And what are the prospects for a common immigration policy if we fail to devise development and trade policies to bring relief from grinding poverty and misery ?
Green Papers and action plans galore point the way forward but , like proverbial horses , Member States can be brought to water but not made to drink .
That is why Europe is failing and that is why we need more , not less , Europe .
My group salutes President Borrell and Prime Minister Vanhanen and the other Prime Ministers who raised the issue of Anna Politkovskaya 's murder .
If the invitation to President Putin and the publicity he received leaves many of us feeling distinctly ill at ease , the Finnish Presidency and the Finnish President are not to blame .
The mistake was made when President Putin 's country was invited to join the Council of Europe and the G-8 , before anchoring the rule of law into its culture .
Mr Putin , ' mafia ' is not a Russian expression , but organizovanniye zhuliki is too often our impression of your country .
The European Union should sign no partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia until freedom , transparency and the rule of law are established , along with the legal certainty for investors that flows from them .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lahti summit has demonstrated with great clarity that action on the international stage and internal political choices are ever more closely linked .
We believe that supporting democratic Russia and those who , like Anna Politkovskaya , fought and continue to fight against the authoritarian drift of Mr Putin 's system of power is perfectly consistent with the attempt to secure our continent 's energy supply , compliance with the Kyoto protocol and the development of energy efficiency and renewable energies .
Casting a veil of silence over the massacres in Chechnya , the closure of more than 90 non-governmental organisations , the arbitrary trials , targeted killings and growing corruption in order to obtain gas is not a winning strategy .
In this regard , our group congratulates President Borrell .
Nonetheless , we still respectfully state that we disagree with the clear support that he and the Finnish Government have given to reviving nuclear power .
Whether we like it or not , there is a clear link between the so-called peaceful use of nuclear power and the proliferation of nuclear armaments - as shown plainly by the situation in Iran .
There must not therefore be a trade-off between rights and energy .
Events in the Ukraine and those which have taken place in Georgia more recently illustrate that appeasement does not increase Mr Putin 's reliability , but only his determination to act in the sole interest of his power group .
We have already lost much precious time on this issue ; therefore we must not miss the significant opportunity presented by the expiry of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement at the end of the year .
We would like to state now that we will be completely opposed to any attempt to remove conditionalities , and , in particular , the reference to the human rights clause of this agreement .
We must develop a strategy which aims to reduce the unsustainability of consumption and the terrible inefficiency of our transport , construction and electricity systems , and which also aims decisively for excellence in our enterprises for the development of renewable energy .
This is the best route to reducing our dependency and upholding peace , disarmament and democracy .
I would also like to add a few words on another extremely important subject that has been discussed : the issue of immigration .
I believe that in this regard , the barrier lies within the Council and between the Member States , because up to now they have not been able to tackle the issue of regulating legal immigration , to negotiate and provide funding at European level for serious cooperation agreements that can truly help developing countries not to be forced to send their best forces to our countries , and to guarantee that European policies , above all in the areas of fishing and agriculture , do not have a devastating effect that does nothing more than to drive even more people onto the boats along the coasts of both their countries and ours .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Commissioner , the informal meeting at Lahti was originally convened to discuss EU competitiveness and innovation policy .
This meeting will not have left any trace of these topics in EU history .
Russian President Vladimir Putin was invited to Lahti to play solo with the EU orchestra .
People wanted to speak to him about energy .
At the same time it was an opportunity to talk about the country 's human rights issues .
Human rights and freedom of the media cannot be sidestepped when policy on Russia is being considered .
It is nevertheless impossible to reach agreement with the country on these matters , just as it is impossible for a certain other superpower on the other side of the Atlantic to agree with anyone on ending the torture of prisoners of war or trying US citizens for war crimes in the International Court of Justice in The Hague .
President Putin wants a strategic partnership for the EU and Russia .
It reminds one of the strategic partnership between NATO and Russia and the institutional solutions adopted for it .
Within this framework Russia is prepared to conduct a dialogue on energy and will even commit to a legally binding instrument .
It remained unclear , however , as to whether this would then mean opening up markets on both sides or only in one direction .
Moreover , if it were in one direction , which one would it be ?
Lahti did not provide the answer , and the next time it is discussed will be at the EU-Russia Summit in November .
The Lahti Summit was a kind of rehearsal for that .
The country to hold the Presidency , Finland , receives gas from Russia more cheaply than other EU countries .
Electricity for industry and households in Finland is among the cheapest in the EU .
Harmonisation of the electricity markets in the EU would mean a rise in electricity prices in the country which Prime Minister Vanhanen represents , while in a few countries prime ministers would certainly rejoice over a common energy policy of that sort .
Mr Vanhanen 's Government used the Lahti Summit to obtain a show of support from the other EU countries for price hikes for electricity and for covering up the wretched state that democracy is in , so that the Finnish Parliament is compelled , on the government 's suggestion , to ratify a constitution that perished in referenda held by other EU countries .
All the European federalists are enthusing about it , but that is not democracy .
The EU elite may be speaking with one voice today but they are not listening to the people .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Prime Minister Vanhanen and President Barroso for their presentation here this morning .
I should only like to say two things , which I already mentioned to the Prime Minister but perhaps President Barroso could take them on board as well .
The majority in this Parliament agrees with and supports the need for the European Institute of Technology , but what arrangements are there to make it happen ?
We can speak about it again and again , but there must be positive action to get it up and running , to give a core element to innovation and research in Europe .
Secondly , with regard to the whole patents area , there must be protection of the ideas and creations that come from that innovative strategy and policy .
Otherwise , all research money , all researchers , all the top graduates at doctorate level will move to the US , Japan or elsewhere , because that is where their ideas can be protected and there is bigger investment .
To my mind , those are the two key issues with regard to achieving the Lisbon Strategy for the future .
I congratulate Prime Minister Vanhanen .
When everybody said that you could not get a united voice from Europe to speak to Russia , you achieved that .
Congratulations .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is rather difficult for me to know where to begin on this .
Energy is the lifeblood of any nation state and , of course , I am sent here to represent a nation state .
I think it is very difficult for the people of the United Kingdom to accept that their energy policy should be decided basically by foreigners .
It is within living memory that we have had to fight the battle of the Atlantic and we have had to live on a knife-edge for freedom because continental countries seem to find it impossible to live together .
The thought , the idea or the concept that United Kingdom energy could possibly be controlled by some sort of arrangement with a gangster like Putin is absolutely ludicrous !
It is absolute madness to expect anything from a piece of paper signed by Putin , any more than we would from one signed by Adolf Hitler .
The man is a gangster .
If you are expecting the people of the United Kingdom to make any sort of arrangement for their lifeblood , the very lifeblood of the nation state , and to base it on people who have no fundamental interest in the wellbeing of the United Kingdom , I can tell you that it will not happen .
We also have to start speaking the truth .
There seems to be some sort of abstract concept here of renewable energy .
It is a scientific fact that most of our renewable energy technology does not work .
Wind farms are absurd .
Any scientist independently retained will tell you that it is complete and total nonsense to expect the United Kingdom to produce the sort of energy levels that the European Union seems to require - which is 20 % from a renewable source - by means of wind farms .
We have to start telling people the truth .
We do not yet have the technology for renewable energy .
Let us be honest about it , but then honesty , of course , is something that we avoid in this Chamber !

( PL ) Mr President , I shall begin by thanking President Borrell for making it clear to President Putin at Lahti that the European Union will not trade human rights for energy .
This significant statement was also made on my behalf , and I feel it was also made in the name of all Polish MEPs , and indeed of all MEPs from the new Member States .
President Borrell , along with the President of Poland and the Prime Ministers of Latvia , Denmark and Sweden , defended Europe 's honour .
We need to look our Russian partners in the eye when we speak of human rights .
We cannot condone double standards , that is to say , we cannot insist on respect for human rights but only in the countries we do not happen to trade with .
A united Europe is more than a question of economics and business .
It is also a system of values that should be constantly uppermost in our minds , and not just when it suits us .
As we conclude necessary and important business deals with Russia , we would do well to keep in mind the words of Lenin , the archetypal Russian politician , who said that ' the capitalists will sell us the rope with which to hang them ' .
Yesterday , some Polish journalists asked me if the Lahti Summit would mark a turning point in relations between the Union and Russia .
I do not know .
It might .
To date , individual Member States of the Union have preferred to deal with Moscow over the heads of the others .
Mr Schroeder hugged Mr Putin , Mr and Mrs Blair had a lovely time with Mr and Mrs Putin , Mr Berlusconi sang the praises of the Russian leader , and President Chirac became misty-eyed as he spoke of the President of the Russian Federation .
Enough is enough .
The European Union must unite .
Mr President , let me first of all , as chairman of this Parliament 's Russia delegation , express my appreciation of the fact that the Finnish Presidency devoted so much attention to our partnership with Russia .
This partnership could be in both our interests .
As the Prime Minister stated , we could be mutually supportive in achieving good diplomacy in the Middle East .
If we shared principles of democracy , that would be the best guarantee of stability in our bilateral relationship .
Furthermore , economically and in terms of energy , we both need each other .
This partnership can only work if it is based on shared principles , balance and a basic trust .
I want to make a few remarks on these matters following the informal summit .
It must be made very clear that the boycott of Georgia and the treatment of Georgian people in Russia are unacceptable .
This forms part of a pattern of interference by Russia that was also seen in Belarus and Ukraine .
It must be clear that European principles mean that our common neighbours have their own sovereignty in deciding where their future lies .
Secondly , the killing of Anna Politkovskaya is the latest incident in a long line of at least 19 journalists who have disappeared or been killed since Putin became President .
I welcome the declaration by the Duma and the remarks by Putin , but the only thing that will really convince us is if the killers are tried and brought to justice .
Further , the Duma and the President would be even more convincing if they agreed to measures to increase reduced press freedom .
Thirdly , the question of economic cooperation was raised , a subject often discussed .
Here , there must be reciprocity .
We cannot have a situation where Russia wants to invest in our gas and oil infrastructure and even wants to buy a minority stake in Airbus , but where at the same time our companies like Shell and Mobil are kicked out of the energy fields in Russia .
I say this because I think that Europe needs to unite on these principles .
Europe showed strength for the first time in Finland .
Putin was put on the defensive because of a united Europe .
Let this be an encouragement to unite much more in the future , because this is the only way in which this partnership will be a balanced one that is in the interests of both partners .
In conclusion , if we think , like Mr Schulz , that innovation is not going far enough , then we should support the President of the Commission , because he is trying , and we should put pressure on our national leadership to support the Commission in achieving real results .

Lastly , I compliment Mr Blair and Mr Balkenende for their initiative on climate change .
It deserves our full support .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I think that the Lahti summit represents an important step forward .
I hope that the spirit of Lahti that you invoked will - as Mr Schulz said - also bring real , concrete results .
Mr Barroso , you have made a foreign policy proposal in the field of energy policy that I very much welcome - you have my full support .
I would just ask you to stand firm when certain countries once again shy away when they realise that perhaps they do not want these common energy and foreign policies after all .
I would also ask Mr Vanhanen to say the same thing to the members of his Council .
The decisions that have been taken here - and I have heard some very positive reports of the discussions in Lahti - now need to be implemented .
It is the only way that we will be able to defend our interests .
Dependency on Russia has been mentioned , but we really should bear in mind that Russia is also dependent on the European Union , on its consumption of crude oil and natural gas , precisely because the pipelines almost all lead solely to the European Union .
We should therefore go into these negotiations and discussions with pride and self-confidence , and not be afraid to bring up certain subjects .
Particularly in this area , we should establish an interdependence , including , of course , those regions that you mentioned , Mr Barroso , and which we should not forget , such as Ukraine and other countries in the Black Sea region , particularly Turkey .
We must draw up a joint policy with them , too .
Then we will be able to establish a true partnership with Russia .
With regard to the disputes , we must not forget that , in our relations with Russia , particularly in the future partnership agreement , we also need a clear dispute resolution procedure .
Conflicts may arise at any time , and we will not always be able to avoid them in future , so we must have a dispute resolution procedure like in the World Trade Organisation , so that we can ultimately resolve these matters mutually or through an independent mediator .
Our goal is partnership .
As Mr Schultz has already said , it is quite clear that Mr Putin is a strong man .
Many Russians see that as a positive thing , but when the European Union is united it is stronger than Mr Putin .
Then we will really be able to achieve a good , appropriate and equal partnership .
( Applause )
- ( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , Finland is presiding over the European Union at a particularly difficult juncture , since Heads of State or Government are very much at odds with each other about the European Union 's future .
What is worse , some of them do not even know in what direction they want to take it .
A prestigious guest , such as President Bush , or more recently , President Putin , may well , then , prove to be the answer .
Given its past , though , Finland is probably the best placed Member State to enter into open and in-depth dialogue with Russia .
I should therefore like to congratulate the President on how he has guided the informal summit and also on the unanimity he managed to generate , both in terms of energy policy and in terms of Russia .
I have to get one thing off my chest , though : 25 plus 2 Heads of Government and State all crowded together around the leader of one superpower ! I still think it is a little saddening .
It is my dearest wish for the EU 's Heads of Government and State to finally get the European Union to grow up .
Mr President , firstly I would like to pay tribute to Prime Ministers Blair and Balkenende , because they are taking Europe forward on climate change , and explicitly in this letter they did not mention nuclear .
Nuclear is only 6 % of our energy and it will divide Europe more than it will bring us together to speak with one voice .
Mr Barroso , I think you now have the historic responsibility to come up with a comprehensive energy review in January .
In this energy review we need a CO2 target for Europe for 2020 .
If we do not have a CO2 target for Europe we will not have investment security for our industry ; and what is better regulation about , if it is not about bringing energy and climate policy together in the document you bring forward ?
The second priority of this energy review must be putting an end to the oligopolistic structure in our energy and transport sectors .
European business , European citizens , are losing billions of euros because of the lack of competition , and these same companies are preventing the innovation boost which we could have in these sectors .
And as long as these oligopolies are not dismantled , we need specific policies in sectoral renewables and so on .
Such a strategy is the ground for a foreign energy policy and this is a peace project for the world , because these technologies will diminish pressure on resources and it is a business opportunity for Europe .
( PT ) The increasing dismissal by the European institutions of the social impact of the acceleration of neoliberalism is alarming . Not only does this phenomenon keep the rates of unemployment , poverty and social exclusion high , it also increases unstable , poorly paid work .
What is more , attempts are being made to bring back ' flexicurity ' , which obliges workers to relinquish their fundamental rights and to accept increasingly unstable work .
The measures being implemented and others being put forward , such as the liberalisation and deregulation of services and the dismantling of public services , are trampling the concept of the European social model underfoot , and we are vehemently opposed to this .
There have been increasing protests against these policies , as evidenced by the huge demonstration in Lisbon on 12 October organised by the CGTP ( General Confederation of Portuguese Workers ) . Some 100 000 workers took part , making it the biggest demonstration since the 1980s .
Do you not think that the time has come to take on board their justified grievances ?
( PL ) Mr President , it is widely known that the Lahti Summit did not end with a breakthrough .
Neither was any significant progress made in talks with Russia concerning cooperation on energy policy .
What is even more regrettable is that , despite statements to the contrary , the European Union did not present itself as a single power that Russia would have to take very seriously .
In this context , the stance adopted by certain countries , including Poland , should be commended .
The same is true of the approach adopted by the President of the European Parliament , Mr Borrell , thanks to whom the voice of the new Member States - Russia 's neighbours - was heard at Lahti .
All this has also been interpreted as a call for unity on energy policy within the European Union .
It is only by adopting a tough and determined stance towards Russia that we can hope for success in the negotiations on Europe 's energy security .
Sadly , not all Member States have understood this yet .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have heard many lofty words of pathos in defence of human rights , even from the ranks of those parties which for decades remained silent while in the East there were popular uprisings in Berlin , in Budapest , and so on .
At that time , Europe remained silent and those parties remained silent , whereas now they are all supporters of human rights , and are putting Vladimir Putin 's Russia in the dock .
If it is true that human rights must not be traded for economic interests , and I am completely convinced that it is , it is equally true that our focus and our determined defence of the values on which Europe is founded and which are today frequently infringed in Russia , but not only there - incidentally , I would like to hear the same pathos in speeches on infringements of human rights in Turkey , for example , a country which some would like to welcome enthusiastically , even immediately , into the European Union - must not close our eyes to a necessity .
It is clear that as much as Russia needs us for energy collaboration , we need an economic partnership agreement with Russia .
I would like to point out that Mr Putin himself has stated that he does not reject the principles of the Charter , but asks that another document be drafted , taking these principles and amending them in part .
This is therefore a clear opening .
The question of the agreement with Russia is highlighted by geo-economic and geo-strategic issues .
Such is the agreement before us , and it regards the economic future of our region .
A sense of realism is therefore needed , without , of course , abandoning the protection of human rights , which nonetheless represent a means of applying pressure in this instance also , given that Mr Putin 's policy is turning towards an economic nationalism that is worrying for Europe , closing itself to collaboration and cutting contracts with Western companies .
This is a realist policy that we need to support strongly and with a great sense of responsibility .

Mr President , listening to Mr Bloom from the United Kingdom Independence Party earlier , I was somewhat surprised , as I thought dinosaurs had died out millions of years ago .
I should like to focus my thoughts on the central issue at the Lahti summit : the issue of energy security in Europe and our continuing relationship with Russia .
The recent dispute between Ukraine and Russia on gas supplies gave us all cause for concern .
Let us be in no doubt that the relationship between the EU and Russia is of vital significance and ways must be found to strengthen it .
We will need Russia 's energy resources in the decades ahead and Russia , by the same token , will need access to EU markets if it is to develop its economic potential .
The stakes on both sides are too high for diplomatic grandstanding .
I was pleased to note that President Putin has said he wants to build a relationship based on common values .
Those values must include an unshakeable commitment by Russia to pluralism and democratic process .
If that great nation is to be embraced as a strategic partner in the years ahead , then we in Europe need to be assured that it will pursue the same kind of values and standards on democracy and human rights as we do .
At this time perhaps we should take Mr Putin at his word and encourage him to ensure that democracy flourishes in Russia .
However , there are some who believe the democratic process in Russia has actually stalled recently .
I hope that more movement will take place in the right direction .
I congratulate President Barroso on saying that the relationship with Russia requires transparency , the rule of law and reciprocity .
I hope Mr Putin was listening .
I was a little disappointed on human rights issues .
I was disappointed that my own British Prime Minister , who had claimed that he was to raise those matters with Mr Putin , seems to have failed to do so .
He must now find a suitable moment to do that .
There is nothing to fear from frank debate on those issues .
It is very necessary for a productive relationship in the future between Europe and Russia .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , informal summits lead only to speculative conclusions .
This is the world of the imaginary , of dreams .
Let us imagine for a moment that the dream comes true .
Europe is an economic giant .
Even excluding trade between the 25 Member States , we are the world 's leading exporter .
Europe is the leading destination for direct international investments .
Not counting mergers and acquisitions , for 2005 , the company IBM registered 8 000 investments in new production capabilities worldwide , including 900 in China , 600 in India , 1 200 in the United States and 3 200 in the Union , which thus takes 40 % of world production investments .
Yes , Europe has lost market shares , but less than the United States or Japan .
Yes , China has become our top supplier , but Europe has doubled the volume of its exports to China .
In fact , 60 % of Chinese exports in 2005 were carried out by foreign companies operating in China .
The Triad countries sell the goods that they produce in China to themselves , for the greater benefit of our consumers and the shareholders of multinational companies .
Yes , our unemployment rates are too high , even though we are creating new jobs .
The lowest salaries can be found in sectors such as catering , caretaking and cleaning companies , small businesses and craft industries , which are not subject to global competition .
Of course , Europe could do better , if only the dwarfs who govern us would implement their own decisions and invest in innovation , research and trans-European networks .
What we need is a real Union budget that would allow us to support the swift integration of the new members and so create an internal market in which we all experience more growth .
Furthermore , if the leaders would honour their own signatures , we would perhaps arrive at a new energy treaty for Europe .
Finally , if the summits were to stop taking speculative decisions , President Barroso could put in place a European Institute of Technology provided with real funding .
Mr Vanhanen , must all this remain but a dream ?
Mr President , I welcome the European Union 's united negotiations and discussions with Russia on human rights , the rule of law , the murder of Anna Politkovskaya and other journalists in Russia and , of course , on energy .
There is an old Russian saying that says ' love your neighbour but put up a fence ' .
The current energy negotiations with Russia have to be based on reciprocity , the rule of law and transparency .
However , what is happening now in Russia in the field of energy is the very opposite of this and we need to take note of it .
This also proves the absolute necessity of a common European energy policy , not only on security of supply but also for fighting global warming .
Very soon we will be negotiating the emissions-trading system with Russia , which has signed and ratified the Kyoto Protocol .
That will be the true test both of European Union unity and what Russia ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , it may be difficult to combine European energy security with our fundamental European values , but are we willing to fail because of that ?
In Russia , contract killings are as much a part of life as the suppression of non-governmental organisations and the restriction of fundamental democratic rights .
The Yukos case , the detention of Mr Khodorkovsky and Mr Lebedev , and the war in Chechnya are still , with regard to energy policy and human rights , current examples of the despotism of Mr Putin 's Government .
The murder of Anna Politkovskaya once again made it tragically clear that , when it comes to crimes against critical journalists , Russia is second only to Colombia .
Russia is currently standing at a crossroads between small steps towards democracy and authoritarian structures .
Criticism alone is no longer enough : energy policy and human rights must be negotiated jointly , and must not be played off against each other .
According to Mr Putin , there can be no reliable guarantees in energy security .
Despite that , we must ensure reliable guarantees for our European system of values .
( EL ) Mr President , I shall comment on two issues debated during the informal summit in Lahti .
The first has to do with innovation policy which , in your opinion Mr Vanhanen , will be the source of European development .
However , I do not think that we have the same innovation policy in mind , given that you are talking about abolishing the obstacles to cross-border economic activity and removing the factors that distort competition .
Perhaps , however , we should focus on a more social development model ?
Moreover , as you can see , the opinion of European citizens about the Union is at an all time low .
Perhaps it is time to think about a more viable strategy for restoring confidence ?
The second issue concerns Cyprus .
Just one question , Mr President-in-Office of the Council : did you discuss the possibility of Turkey 's continuing not to recognise the Republic of Cyprus and keeping its ports and airports closed in December ?
. - ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , firstly , the Lahti summit was an indicator of the unity of Europe 's policies .
If we can now manage to speak with one voice on energy , that is a step along the path to speaking with a united voice on all foreign policy issues .
Secondly , another indicator is whether and how we can influence Russia 's policies .
When talking to the European Union about energy , Russia knows very well how to exploit our fears , while for our part we forget that Russia has an interest with regard to us - selling its energy profitably , easing the visa system , and making use of all that European civilisation provides , if we can put it in this way .
This point should be used effectively , in order to achieve progress in the spheres of freedom of the press , democracy , human rights and investment equality .
Thirdly , there is innovation policy .
Currently , the potential of the new Member States is not being fully exploited .
It is precisely in a new Member State that the European Institute of Technology should be set up .
Riga in Latvia , as the Baltic States ' centre of technology and environmental protection , is the most appropriate location for the institute . Thank you .
( EL ) Mr President , I think that we are still moving in the wrong direction .
Why are we picking on Russia ?
This last conference was also a war on Russia .
That is what all the headlines are saying .
America wants to play its little game and getting us to fire the shots .
However , we are pushing Russia into creating a Sino-Russian axis , which will sandwich us between America , Russia and China .
Why ?
What quarrel do we have with them ?
Are we going to repeat the historic mistakes we made 200 years ago ?
So why pick on Russia ?
What do we have to divide ?
As for the human rights I have been hearing about , let us not delude ourselves .
We turned a blind eye to the issue of Chechnya because we wanted Russia to turn an equally blind eye to Israel and Palestine .
That is tit for tat .
Can we therefore formulate a new policy for cutting our American apron strings ?
I heard someone talking about the dwarves that rule Europe .
Even the dwarves should pull themselves up to their full height at long last .
We cannot be led by the Americans down a path which will only cause Europe problems .
We need to understand that .
( NL ) Mr President , the informal Lahti summit has once again exposed the limitations of the European Union in a painful manner .
It failed to persuade President Putin to sign the energy agreement that should make better access to Russia 's gas and oil fields possible .
EU enterprises investing in Russia still face major legal uncertainty , particularly in the areas of compliance and enforceability of contracts .
President Putin came to Lahti in the knowledge that the European Union would be unable to speak with one voice about the human rights situation in Russia and about Russia 's attitude to Georgia , for example .
The lack of political unanimity is apparently as structural as is our dependence on Russian energy sources .
I cannot imagine that the negotiation process with Turkey was not a talking point at the informal summit , given Turkey 's refusal to comply with the current criteria and given a general worsening of relations with it , even though one third of its population is still in favour of EU accession .
I should like the Council to tell us to what extent the Member States are prepared to accept sham solutions , such as placing Cypriot sea ports under UN control .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasise what the public has remembered of this informal summit at Lahti : the visit by the Russian President at a time when relations between Europe and Russia are particularly tense , on the subjects both of the energy strategy and of human rights , following the assassination of Russian journalists in the last few days .
I welcome the fact that Europe has had the courage to speak frankly about its questions on freedom of expression in Moscow , even if it confined itself to more diplomatic remarks in front of the cameras .
European integration is founded on the rule of law and respect for democratic values .
We have a duty to promote these principles , both at home and among our partners .
This does not mean , contrary to what the Russian President implied , that Europe believes itself to be perfect .
Of course , we have our faults , but we also have a duty to express clearly our concern and our disapproval regarding worrying abuses .
Europe is not simply an economic Community .
On the issue of energy , the Russian President has clearly stated that he does not reject the principles of the Energy Charter and that he would welcome a document that took up those principles while amending some of its provisions .
In my opinion , this will be the overriding issue of the European Union-Russia Strategic Partnership to be negotiated shortly , as well as of the European Energy Summit proposed for next year by President Chirac .
Finally , regarding immigration , the various positions are still too far apart for us to achieve a swift definition of the common policy that we need so much .
The Member States appear decidedly less hurried than Europeans are to take this issue forward in order to give consistency to the different national policies operating within the Schengen area , in particular in relation to illegal immigration .
In December , the Finnish Presidency must draw practical conclusions on the issues that have been raised at this informal summit .
However , without the political will of the Member States , a presidency is reduced to impotence even when armed with goodwill , such as that currently being demonstrated by Finland .
( FI ) Mr President , the extraordinary summit meeting held in Lahti should be considered a success .
The EU had a joint message for the Russian President on energy policy , democracy and human rights .
The discussion must , however , be seen as only the start .
Just as the Chairman of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament Group , Martin Schulz , said , we now need concrete action .
Whether speech is translated into deeds will be seen in the very near future , when we begin to negotiate the actual details of the EU-Russia agreement .
It was important at the Lahti meeting to have spoken with Russia and not just about Russia .
It was good that the discussions on energy also included consideration of the future .
Although it may seem that the most important thing in the short term is the availability of energy , it was good that attention was paid to the future .
Fortunately , it was left over from the session on innovation on the Lahti agenda .
Our challenges in the area of energy policy and the answer to the problems of the future lie with innovation and with how we can start to exploit renewable energy sources and develop technology to save energy to a substantial degree .
We have to get to a stage where over the long term carbon dioxide emissions will be cut by 60-80 % , and this can only happen if we have a genuine common will as Europeans to invest in renewable sources of energy and energy savings .
Furthermore , a social Europe was on the agenda at Lahti , not on the agenda of the summit itself , but on that of a separate labour market meeting .
Employment and improved levels of employment are a very important component of the competitiveness of the European Union , and should therefore be clearly visible at all meetings .
( FI ) Mr President , just before the informal EU summit Finland was criticised for having invited President Putin to the meeting .
His invitation was right , because one of the topics of the meeting was relations between the Union and Russia .
Mr Putin was a guest at Lahti , though not an honorary guest .
Whilst courteous , the Finns did not succumb to window-dressing , and instead raised the issues of the murder of Anna Politkovskaya , human rights in Russia , and the unsatisfactory state of democracy in the country .
Some suspected beforehand that these matters would not be mentioned .
The EU-Russian dialogue is important .
Finland took and is taking responsibility for sustaining it .
Mutual dependence is a good thing for Russia and the EU , as long as it is exercised in the right way .
Europe needs Russian markets , because Russia is close by and is a rapidly growing economy ; but Russia also needs the EU .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the informal Council summit signals the strength of international competition with the single strategy of the European Union and of the antagonism between Member States vying to control the sources and means of conveyance of energy and new hardships for the peoples .
The Council guidelines include actions on all three levels - economic , political and military - designed to allow the Euro-unifying monopolies to secure a strategic agreement with Russia and acquire a larger share of the spoils from exploiting natural resources in third countries .
On the basis of the doctrine of energy security , the European Investment Bank is being called upon to step up its blackmail of third countries so that they bow down to the onerous terms laid down by the monopolies in order to control energy sources .
Mr Solana announced that in the next 20 years 200 new nuclear power stations will be built , thereby setting the objective both of the European Union leading the way in the sale and exploitation of these stations and the maintenance of the oligopoly of enriched uranium , thereby revealing the true causes of the aggression of the imperialists in order to control ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
. - ( LV ) The Finnish Presidency 's aspirations to maintain continuity , by continuing discussions on the issues mooted last year by the British Presidency , are to be welcomed .
These subjects are worthy of serious debate .
This is particularly true because in the space of a year little has been achieved in these spheres .
The guest invited to the event - the President of Russia - is proof of how serious the Presidency is about security of energy supply .
The idea is to be welcomed in every respect , since it gave Heads of Government the opportunity not only to listen to the opinion of Russia 's leader on the chances of ratification of the Energy Charter and about the risk to Europe 's investments in the energy sector in Russia , but also Russia 's policy of pressure on Georgia and its understanding in the sphere of human rights .
It was a useful prelude to the summit between the European Union and Russia scheduled for next month .
We may allow ourselves to hope that this meeting has increased understanding among the European Union Member States that the most effective way of making Russia into a partner with an interest in Europe is to approach it as a united cartel of energy consumers .
Russia 's current and future economy is built on the export of energy resources .
There is no doubt that the achievements of the Presidency and the Commission should be evaluated in terms of their ability to achieve partnership among the Member States and unity in the Union 's foreign policy . Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , I am pleased that attention was paid in Lahti to the problem of immigration , but I regret that other issues were treated as more of a priority .
When the Finnish Presidency presented its programme in July , I called in this House for illegal immigration to be treated as a priority issue .
There has been little cause for optimism since then .
On the ground , what is taking place on the shores of the Canary Islands is very serious .
The Frontex system and solidarity amongst European partners in general have not been up to the task , but perhaps unilateral regularisations did not create the best possible climate for persuading the partners to cooperate .
Illegal immigration is a problem for all of us in an area without internal borders , such as the Schengen area .
At European level this area is essentially dealt with by means of taking decisions and implementing them .
Ideas and plans have largely been established , for example in the conclusions of the European Councils of Seville , in 2002 , and of Thessaloniki and of Brussels , in 2003 .
Those conclusions enshrine the principle that immigration should be integrated into the European Union 's external action and that cooperation is needed with third countries in the field of illegal immigration .
There is also a mechanism for assessing the degree of cooperation of third countries and furthermore the assessment criteria are included .
I believe , however , that this mechanism has been used little and in a very bureaucratic way .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to point out that decisions on illegal immigration no longer require unanimity in the Council , but that , during 2004 and 2005 , this problem was relegated until the assaults on the fences in Ceuta and Melilla .
The Union must not act in a reactive manner , in response to events , and then forget those issues that were previously priorities .
We have been negotiating a re-admission agreement with Morocco for five years .
Mr President , it is not acceptable that we should only take terrorism seriously following 11 September 2001 , the energy crisis only following the Russian-Ukrainian crisis , and illegal immigration , only after the deaths at the fences of Ceuta and Melilla .
The European Union will be judged by its results .
I hope that there will be results in the remaining months of the Finnish Presidency and also at the European Council in December , and naturally that the progress made at previous European Councils be taken into account .
( FR ) Mr President , the subject of immigration should in fact have been discussed more widely at Lahti .
I believe that this was requested by all the countries situated on Europe 's borders , and in particular by the countries of the South .
We are very concerned , because it is evident that the Member States are still dragging their feet with regard to drawing up a genuine common policy in the field of immigration .
What is more , some people want to approach the issue of immigration solely from the point of view of cracking down on it .
However , in my view , the urgency is first and foremost humanitarian .
We must combat the exploitation of immigrants by networks seeking to lower labour costs and bypass labour laws and rules on social protection .
In the European Parliament yesterday we had an enlightening hearing enabling us to observe that , on European soil , immigrants are considered as slaves .
They are largely underpaid , forced to work extremely long hours and housed in terrible conditions .
They are ill-treated .
Some have suffered physical assaults .
It is because it was confronted with these unacceptable living conditions and people without rights that Spain decided to regularise en masse all those working in its territory , and I pay tribute here to the immense courage shown by that country .
Mass regularisation is not , and must not be , a solution .
In this case , however , to act otherwise was impossible .
It had to be done .
We must all now be vigilant in our countries in order to ensure that all working immigrants have rights and are considered in the same way as all other workers .
That is what the credibility of the Union and its values requires of us .
If we really want to be effective in the field of immigration , the Member States must finally agree to work together in order to put in place a genuine policy on legal immigration and , above all , a genuine co-development policy , as close to the people as possible . Member States must also take great care not to enrich dictators or fuel corruption .

( SV ) President Vladimir Putin , we are concerned about developments in Russia , and your comments about Georgia at the summit do nothing to alleviate that concern .
Many of us in the EU want to see a successful Russia : an extension to a world based on democracy and justice .
We want you to help those of us who wish you Russians well , but you are not doing so .
We must hold out the prospect of a common free-trade area and we must work towards freedom of movement .
How , President Putin , are we to do this , however , when you are giving a show of strength to a small country like Georgia ?
How are we to do this when you have not approved the border agreements with Estonia and Latvia ?
How are we to do this when you belittle the work done by Anna Politkovskaya ?
Our cooperation must be based on common values and ground rules but , following the summit , it now unfortunately feels as if we are further away from each other than we were before .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Lahti , an important step was taken in energy policy , but in my view it was not a milestone .
It would perhaps be wiser for us in European politics not always to bandy about grand speeches and then disappoint the people when we do not get results .
I find Mr Barroso 's proposal to undertake realistic projects and implement them bit by bit much more intelligent .
There has been an important development in energy policy on the subject of security of supply .
First of all , the subject of security of supply has come to the forefront of energy policy , and has , I hope , perhaps helped us here in Parliament to stop discussing energy policy only from the point of view of climate policy .
Security of supply is a high priority .
At least since the developments in Ukraine - since it became clear that Russia and President Putin are using energy policy as a political tool - we are all surely a bit more prepared , as was evident in Lahti to a certain extent , to take this issue more seriously .
This is not just talk - there has clearly been a change in Russia .
Anyone who takes Mr Putin seriously - and we must do so - must address these positions .
There is also the fact that we are taken more seriously when we act together .
To that extent , Lahti was a success , because we spoke with one voice .
The next step would be for us to push harder for Europe to be given competences in the field of energy policy .
Thirdly , we must be more consistent in the specific actions we undertake .
Security of supply has a foreign policy aspect , but also involves strengthening the industries involved in it .
We must examine more closely whether our rules , regulations and inspections are really ensuring security of supply , or actually producing uncertainty .
Those who negotiate for us , those who buy energy out in the real world , need to invest , and businesses only invest when there is a reasonable degree of certainty .
Last but not least , security of supply also requires a variety of energy sources .
It would be idiocy to rule out nuclear power : it would do security of supply a serious disservice .
( HU ) The Lahti Summit was a great success , proving that the real strength of the Union lies in its unity .
Without the Lahti Summit , the Russian president would not have used a more accommodating tone towards some Member States .
I congratulate our Finnish colleagues ; many countries could learn from Finnish diplomacy , which has always been able to continue the dialogue with Russia even during the most difficult times .
Obviously , there exists a mutual but asymmetrical interdependence in energy supply between the EU and Russia .
We in the EU , as importing states , are more dependent , but Russia 's dependence must also be considered .
Our aim is to reduce this dependence on Russian energy sources , but for most Member States - Hungary amongst them - there is no viable medium-term alternative .
As far as renewable energy sources are concerned , Mr Barroso , the European Commission has no viable concept of any kind .
We criticise Russia on the rule of law , and rightly so .
But can we speak of the rule of law , Mr Barroso , if there is no legal security within the European Commission ?
When , in the middle of the maize harvest , the Union changes the rules of intervention for maize ?
This is no rule of law nor legal security .
We rightfully criticise Russia , but we too have to observe the rule of law .
My congratulations on the summit , and I ask Mr Barroso to take steps , because otherwise Hungary will call on the European Court of Justice , as this is no rule of law nor legal security .
Let us set a good example for Mr Putin and the Russian democrats !
- ( LT ) I am very glad to see that the Lahti Summit has at last induced Europe to pool its efforts , demonstrate solidarity , and take a firm stand in the dialogue with Russia on energy and democracy .
We see at last something tangible being done about the words that the energy sector is an integral part of foreign policy .
In the discussion of the issues of safety and transparency in the energy sector , what happened on the Druzhba oil pipeline , when Russia stopped the supply of oil , took on more the character of a political accident than a technical one .
Moscow expressed its discontent over the fact that the Lithuanian company Mažeikių Nafta was sold to the Polish company PKN Orlen and not to a Russian enterprise .
That Europe should have so clearly expressed its position , during the Summit with Russia , that rules must be obeyed in the energy sector , is a huge achievement .
I cannot conceal my admiration for the changed positions of Finland , France and especially Germany .
I hope this brings Schroeder 's politics to an end .
The current position of such decision makers as our Commission President , Mr Barroso and Mrs Merkel offers the hope of a united Europe with a common energy policy and a common future .

( PL ) Mr President , media accounts of the Lahti Summit have been dominated by what Prime Minister Vanhanen described as a frank conversation with the President of Russia .
I , however , would like to focus on another important subject discussed at the summit , namely innovation and technological progress .
I fully endorse President Barroso 's opinion that the more the Union focuses on practical tasks and on actions close to the citizens , the more it will be respected and appreciated by them .
Mr Barroso 's promotion of a European Institute for Technology is an example of just such an action , that is to say , a specific venture which is bound to generate a positive response from European citizens .
It was perhaps unintentional but , in a sense , highly symbolic that the planned Institute was agreed in Finland , which is the most innovative country in our Community .
It is also very important , however , to involve the new Member States of the European Union in the process of developing cutting-edge technologies .
The current level of investment in innovation in the aforementioned countries is far too low .
The structure of the European Institute for Technology proposed by the Commission , namely a central core plus a network of Knowledge and Innovation Communities spread across the whole of Europe , will enable academic institutions in Central and Eastern Europe to be involved in the Institute 's activities .
The European Institute for Technology 's budget and sources of funding are a key concern that goes hand in hand with any discussion concerning the plans for the Institute .
In my country , Poland , I have noted a readiness to devote structural fund resources to setting up the Institute .
The Polish authorities are thus demonstrating their desire to link regional development aims to contemporary challenges .
These mainly involve investment in knowledge and developing an economy based on modern technologies .
In cooperation with the regional and local authorities , the Polish Government is putting forward the city of Wrocław as the seat of the Governing Board of the new European Institute for Technology .
The Polish authorities also propose that Wrocław should become one of the main scientific research centres .
I firmly believe that the city is ideally suited to this purpose .
Wrocław , and the surrounding region , can offer a vibrant and innovative academic environment , with over one hundred thousand gifted and ambitious young students and considerable new investment in industrial development .
( EL ) Mr President , today we are supposed to be debating the results of Lahti .
What results ?
On energy and relations with Russia , the prime ministers said that they will insist on respect for fundamental rights by Russia .
They then ' unsaid ' that , implying that ' realpolitik ' is the only solution in order to satisfy the Union 's energy requirements .
In the end , they managed to get Russia to turn its back on them on both energy and humanitarian issues .
The results were even more disappointing on the major issue of immigration .
We need , the prime ministers told us , to focus on better guarding of the borders .
Fine , but then why did we cut the Frontex budget ?
More importantly , however , the more they insist on addressing immigration solely as a policing issue with repression , the more they will undermine our future .
In order to address illegal immigration and inhumane trafficking in human beings , we need , first of all , a legal immigration framework .
They bicker among themselves and refuse to adopt one .
We need a serious foreign policy and economic development and conciliation policy which they are unable to formulate .
We also need a bold policy for the integration and equal treatment of immigrants which they refuse to design .
( DE ) Mr President , it is quite true that we need a partnership with Russia , and it would be nice to have a community of values too , but what is the reality of the situation ?
In Russia , the vertical of power is organised down to the last detail , the Duma has been domesticated , governors are appointed , not elected , freedom of the press is restricted , and the work of non-governmental organisations , including political foundations for democracy and human rights , is getting harder and harder .
Therefore , we cannot currently have a community of values with the Russian Government - it might be possible with the Russian people , but they were not in Lahti .
That , Mr Vanhanen , is why Mr Barroso is right when he says that we should agree on specific principles for stable relations : transparency , legal certainty , national treatment , and mutual opening up of and access to markets .
On the basis of these principles , we can build a partnership and cooperation agreement , and also hope for and work towards the conclusion , one day , of a strategic partnership with Russia based on shared values .
I would like to add that I believe we should be conducting this debate in Brussels rather than in Strasbourg .
Mr President , without a doubt the Lahti Summit was a success for the EU .
Its focus on competitiveness and innovation was followed by a constructive dialogue with Russia and the issue of human rights was also raised .
Our heads of state and government showed unity and reflected our common values .
As the EPP Vice-President , Michel Barnier , said a couple of weeks ago in Lyon , none of us can sit at the table of global decision-making as a national politician .
This really is true and also applies to EU-Russia relations .
Freedom of speech is in great danger in Russia .
In a very recent study by Reporters Without Frontiers - where many EU Member States held the top positions - Russia was placed 147th out of 168 countries .
I rarely agree with the President of Parliament , Mr Borrell Fontelles , but I have to say that he was right to emphasise strongly the question of human rights and democracy in Russia with President Putin .
We must have a clear stance on human rights , whoever we might be facing .
An independent and efficient investigation to find and condemn the vicious murderers of the courageous journalist Anna Politkovskaya is a real test for freedom and the rule of law in Russia and for its relations with the EU .
The democratic world simply cannot stay quiet when freedom is threatened and its strongest advocates are shot down .
If we do not act now , we might lose another 30 years of freedom , as did our Hungarian citizens when the western world did not act bravely enough to support the people who rose up in revolution 50 years ago .
Practical cooperation with Russia is important , but nothing is more important than the progress Russia makes on the path to freedom and human rights .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when speaking to China about trade issues , to the United States about agriculture or to Russia about energy , or when intervening in crisis situations such as Lebanon or the Middle East in general , a common theme has been apparent for some time : no European country , on its own , has the ability to deliver , to stay the course and bring goals and ambitions to fruition .
Therefore , the theme also holds true in relation to energy and the issue of our relationship with Russia , and a leadership causing increasing concern : Europe must be united and speak with one voice .

If , as Mr Goebbels has said , the Lahti summit has produced only speculation , much now remains to be done , and for this we need an authoritative and bold Commission , capable of laying aside national self-interests and speaking on behalf of all , a Parliament capable of being the most authoritative exponent of Community interests , and a Council and governments which understand that interdependency among our countries is the key to increasing our negotiating power .
There are signs and examples of this , from among which I would like to cite the decision made by the Italian Government , which , on hearing the news of its seat from January on the UN Security Council , said straight away that this seat will be used in the service of Europe .
This is a practical action representing an example of a contribution from one member of the Council .
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to draw the House 's attention , as regards Lahti , to the proposal for a European Institute of Technology ( ΕΙΤ ) .
The first messages from the Council 's side are positive , as they are from Parliament 's side .
What I wish to highlight , Mr Vanhanen and Mr Barroso , is that we need a new and innovative tool which successfully combines education , research and innovation .
We need a steam engine which will enable us to transform research into innovative products and services .
However , we do not need an institution which will uproot the long-standing university tradition in Europe ; we need one which will respect and make maximum use of it .
It is therefore , for this very reason , extremely important for us to know what our universities , research centres and undertakings believe before we take a decision on this new institute .
Numerous agencies have already submitted their opinions .
At first glance , it would appear that the messages we are receiving are often contradictory on certain important issues .
However , I consider that the positions are not set in stone ; rather they express concerns .
That is why it is also very important for us to give all the partners a great deal of our time in order to consult willingly and in a spirit of cooperation .
The initial approach in the proposal for a regulation leaves open numerous questions on crucial issues , such as how will we safeguard viable financing for the ΕΙΤ ?
How will we persuade private individuals to invest in an unprecedented vehicle ?
How will we safeguard the fundamental participation of universities and convince them that the ΕΙΤ will not clash with them or weaken their activities ?
How will we convince them that research activities will not be fragmented , leading to the opposite of the result being sought ?
We need to clarify all the details , because that is where the success of the endeavour will be judged ; not in the general idea which is generally accepted .

( ET ) In his speech today , Mr Barroso said that the Georgian question had been touched on .
We all know that a touch can be either a gentle caress or the hug of a bear .
At the press conference in Lahti last Friday evening , we all found out , to our great surprise , that nothing is happening between Georgia and Russia , and that instead there is a conflict between Georgia on the one hand , and Abkhazia and Ossetia on the other .
According to President Putin , the situation is nearing the point of bloodshed .
Last month , however , Putin informed Western journalists that if Kosovo were to be separated from Serbia , Ossetia , Abkhazia and Transnistria would definitely break away .
Since these are not island states , separation would actually mean being incorporated into Russia .
That is a serious revision of the 1975 Helsinki Agreement .
Mr President , we know that the conflict between Russia and Georgia is not about a provocation on the part of Georgia , but rather a new awakening of Imperial Russia , which is based on the one hand on inciting Russian nationalism , and on the other hand on the use of energy supplies for the restoration of the empire .
The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline is also not insignificant in this matter .
I call upon all European Union institutions to defend Georgia with a stronger hand than ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) I note with dismay that the Lahti summit represents a wasted opportunity as regards the issue of energy , both in terms of the EU 's relations with Russia and the common understanding between the Member States .
Under pressure from the media , European politicians have made it clear that they appreciate the importance of speaking with one voice when it comes to energy .
I fear , however , that we have yet to achieve any actual unity and harmony when it comes to promoting energy issues .
This is evidenced by the fact that some EU Member States prefer to conduct bilateral negotiations on their energy security issues rather than on behalf of the EU as a whole .
I must highlight the fact that the energy issue has environmental , economic and , above all , geostrategic implications .
Europe is dependent on external energy sources .
This inability to harmonise our interests and approach weakens our negotiating position in the global energy market , exacerbates our vulnerability and seriously weakens our authority as Europeans acting in a foreign policy context .
Our ability to promote values such as democracy , the rule of law and market transparency around the world will be restricted .
I should therefore like to call on the Council and the Commission to take practical steps to prepare and implement a European energy policy , which is a potential solution and which would prepare the ground for a common EU energy policy .
Such a strategy would set out our goals in the area of energy , as well as the measures needed to achieve those goals , and would lay down a clear mechanism for joint decision-making on energy projects and for communication inside and outside the EU , strengthening our solidarity in energy issues .
At stake here is our future in the globalised world and our ability to safeguard the continent 's stability and prosperity .
I firmly believe that the energy issue will be a key test of the EU 's ability to act in an effective manner .
( FR ) Mr President , in Finland President Borrell has , to his credit , championed human rights .
President Barroso has been sure to champion Europe 's energy rights .
That is his duty .
As would any Head of State or Government , President Chirac has stuck up for his country 's gas consumers .
That is as I would expect .
However , it pricks European consciences , which would have been pricked in the same way if oil from Saudi Arabia , Iran or some African country had been at issue .
For me , the issue is not that of knowing whether gas can be purchased from the Devil .
Purchased it will be .
The issue is , rather , that of how gas from the Devil can be done without .
I think that , over the next few years - and in your case , Mr Vanhanen , over the next few months - it is independence that must guide us .
In the next 10 to 20 years , oil and gas must be to our independence what coal and steel were to our peace .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all , thank you for this debate , which has shown that Parliament also seems very united in its main policies and that it is fully in accord with European Council and Commission views .
In this respect , I believe that it will be easier for the Union to find a basic approach in its foreign energy policy .
It is actually worth remembering that we did not begin the debate on foreign energy relations at European Council level until March this year , at a summit dinner during the Austrian Presidency .
At the time we reached the conclusion that the Union also needed a foreign energy policy .
During the subsequent presidency , Finland assumed the task of shaping a foreign energy policy in collaboration with the Commission , and that is what we are doing .
The Commission drafted an excellent paper for the Lahti Summit , and over lunch there we spent around three hours discussing the approach so thoroughly that President Barroso and I were able to speak for the group as a whole in the evening when we met President Putin .
Over the months to come we also will be defining this foreign energy policy in terms of a Union approach , not just in respect of Russia , but all our partners and all third countries .
Quite a number of speeches here pointed out that the Lahti Summit was a step or a first step in the right direction .
That is how I also feel .
I also sympathise with the comments that we must in practice show that we are also taking action .
The next important stage will be in the next few weeks when the Council must reach agreement on the negotiations mandate , on the basis of which the Union is to commence talks with Russia on the future Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , or whatever name this new agreement should be given .
At the EU-Russia Summit in November consensus will have to be reached and a decision taken on the commencement of talks .
In this respect , the Lahti Summit was a practice run .
The Lahti Summit , however , also let it be known to Mr Putin that at the meeting in November , at which President Barroso , High Representative Javier Solana and I will represent the Union , we will be speaking on behalf of the entire Union .
This debate we have now had in Parliament will provide firm support for that .
We might say that all the Union 's institutions are in the front line on this .
We are dependent on one another .
This dependence must be made to benefit both parties through reciprocity .
Dependence also needs to be based on common values , as has already been said so many times in the Chamber .
This is a clear Union aim and policy .
When we talk of cooperation with Russia , however , we should not make Russia or the Russians out to be monsters .
They want cooperation , they want to improve their standard of living and prosperity , and they want to cooperate with us .
This was also the strong message that President Putin was sending .
He stressed that Russia and the Russians are in fact more dependent on Europe than Europe is on Russia .
They particularly need cooperation in very many areas of technology to make progress in their own development work , and we must also be prepared for this .
With regard to investment , I would like to remind everyone that European companies have already made investments in the Russian energy sector to the tune of many billions of euros .
Some major investment projects are unfinished , some companies are having difficulties with the Russian administration , and some have seen their projects through to completion more smoothly .
For that reason we need common rules to play by , rules which are the same for everyone .
Similarly , the rules for Russian companies on Europe also need to be the same .
I wish to thank you for this debate and the feedback .
In December we will return to many of these subject areas , with some firm conclusions , and then we will also definitely be returning to the questions raised in several speeches here relating to immigration .
On matters of immigration , whether it be legal or illegal immigration , we need solidarity amongst us and a common policy , and we will also definitely be returning to that .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that practically everything has already been said .
Allow me simply to return to a number of points you raised during the debate .
With regard , first of all , to the European Institute of Technology - and as Prime Minister Vanhanen pointed out - the European Council gave the green light - not the orange light , but the green light - to the initiative at the end of the Lahti summit .
It now remains to implement it .
That is why we have already presented a legislative proposal to be examined by the Council and Parliament and covering , for example , the issue of the financing that you mentioned during the debate .
Our approach is that there must be financing not only by the Community institutions but also by the Member States that wish to support the initiative .
It is a way for them to achieve the Lisbon objectives where innovation and research are concerned .
We also await contributions from the private sector .
On this subject , allow me to point out to you that , on the basis of our informal contacts , the private sector has a great interest in financing certain actions to be taken by the European Institute of Technology , a state of affairs that is , moreover , only to be expected since the same ideas are to be found in many of our Member States .
Public-private partnerships do exist and , if initiatives on the part of the Member States manage to attract private investment for research , I wonder why we should not be capable of achieving the same at European level .
I say that because we think it necessary to give a European dimension to support for research .
Where this very subject of research is concerned , the United States manifestly differs from Europe due , in particular , to the existence of institutions or networks covering the whole of the territory of the United States of America , for example the National Science Foundation , familiar to a number of you , or the National Institute for Health .
In Europe , we have until now had practically nothing along those lines .
A number of our countries have major institutions in the form of great universities , but it is only now that we have set up the European Research Council , which is an institution crucial to implementing the Seventh Research Framework Programme , and the European Institute of Technology , which is an institution specifically founded on the idea of networks with a view to giving a European impetus and perspective to innovation , research and teaching focused on excellence .
That is why it is a great project , and I would thank all those who have spoken in favour of it .
We have asked for this Institute 's main priorities to include the fight against climate change and a leading role for Europe in the area of renewable sources of energy that respect the environment .
I believe that we have a specific mission in this regard , and I shall address my remarks more particularly to those , including Mr Turmes , who have expressed concerns about this matter .
Energy is , without a doubt , the issue of the future , and not only from an economic , but also from a political , point of view .
I agree with the comment by Mr Poignant , who draws a parallel with the situation in the coal and steel sector .
I do think that , where energy is concerned , there is a serious argument in favour of a federal approach .
That is , moreover , why , a few months ago , we presented a Green Paper on sustainable energy , and we were very pleased with the support given by the European Council to the idea of a common approach to energy matters .
It is , therefore , precisely along those lines that we are working , Mr Poignant .
That approach is very important if we consider our responsibilities to our planet and to future generations .
Climate change is perhaps the greatest challenge of the 21st century .
However , it is also very important from the economic point of view , so crucial is it for us still to be capable of being in the vanguard of the fight against climate change , providing it with its impetus .
It is also very important as a demonstration of solidarity , especially with a view to the enlarged Europe .
We have here an opportunity to show that solidarity needs to be real .
I therefore think that we are concerned here with something very ambitious , and I can guarantee , in particular to Mr Turmes , that it is in this spirit that we are preparing the energy package to be presented in January .
What is more , you have already seen an initial sign of what is to come in the form of the proposal on energy efficiency that we have just tabled .
As Prime Minister Vanhanen has said , the Lahti Council has opened the way to the formal decisions on energy that we hope to obtain at the spring Council under the auspices of what will already be the German Presidency .
I shall conclude by saying that I share the ambition , and sometimes even the impatience , expressed by Mr Goebbels , Mr Swoboda , Mr Schulz and many others .
Our role now is , as Mr Goebbels said , to convert the dream into reality .
Indeed it is .
However , the informal summits offer an opportunity to deepen the debate and to consolidate positions , as shown moreover by the Hampton Court summit .
From this point of view , I can honestly say to you that the Lahti Council signalled progress .
It was difficult , particularly because of our ever more complex relations with Russia .
Where that aspect too was concerned , I had the sense of progress being made , with Mr Putin 's presence contributing to this .
I had the feeling that the Heads of State or Government understood the need for coherence and solidarity .
That is why I hope that now , with the vigilant support of the European Parliament , the conditions will be present , during the Finnish Presidency and beyond , to make progress in these very important areas of energy and innovation and also to make headway with our project of a more united Europe .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I knew that UKIP members are divorced from reality , but even then I am astonished at Godfrey Bloom 's speech , in which he seemed to imply that Britain was self-sufficient on energy and did not need to work with , or even talk to , other countries .
He says that Britain 's ' lifeblood ' should not be in the hands of ' foreigners ' , but how does he want to avoid us importing energy ?
Certainly not by renewables , which he dismisses out of hand as ' nonsense ' claiming that wind farms are ' absurd ' and that ' no reputable scientist ' would claim that renewable energy can play a significant part in Britain 's energy mix .
So , no imports , no renewables , North Sea oil and gas running out , nuclear , if kept , catering merely for a small proportion of electricity , and the possibilities for expanding coal being somewhat limited , the UKIP vision of Britain 's future , untarnished by ' foreigners ' , is a dark one !
( PT ) Against the backdrop of the summit , forces are gathering to discuss how to ( re ) start the process of ( re ) imposing the unacceptable Treaty that is inaccurately and insultingly referred to as the ' European Constitution ' , against the sovereign , democratically expressed wishes of the French and Dutch peoples .
These nefarious plans have increasingly been coming from above .
Take , for example , the words of Antonio Vitorino , strategist of the Portuguese Socialist Party , who , we hear , ' now works for the Commission ' . He says that the Portuguese Presidency in the second half of 2007 will have ' the enormous responsibility ' of ' taking the first steps towards implementing the [ so-called ] constitutional amendment programme ' and ' this will be a launch pad for the new [ so-called ] European Constitution ' , thereby implementing a ' programme ' previously defined by the German Presidency and to be concluded by the French Presidency in the second half of 2008 .
The headlong rush towards capitalist integration that characterises the EU and the neoliberal , federalist and militarist integration that the so-called ' European Constitution ' would reinforce in the legal and political spheres will once again , in spite of all the propaganda , obfuscation and authoritarianism , have to contend with categorical rejection by all those who are fighting for a Europe of sovereign , equal States , a Europe of social progress , cooperation and peace .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a few remarks about the Lahti European summit .
Firstly , at a time when our continent is subjected to an unprecedented wave of illegal immigration , the Heads of State or Government have not seen fit to devote more than half an hour to this problem .
Nothing - absolutely nothing - is to be expected of the European Union in this area , and it is a matter of urgency to acknowledge formally that no immigration policy can be anything but national and no cooperation on the subject anything but intergovernmental .
Secondly , Mr Putin is quite entitled to retain a degree of sovereignty over his country 's energy resources and to refuse to sell them cut-price to hungry oil multinationals in the name of an economic liberalism to which he does not subscribe .
As for the sabre-rattling about human rights , respect for which must form the basis for the EU 's relations with the rest of the world , this would be more credible if it were not so selective and if it were also directed at countries such as China .
Finally , we are still waiting for the Council to condemn the Turkish authorities , who have tried to force the removal of one of our Cypriot fellow Members from a delegation of MEPs .
It is less and less acceptable to negotiate the accession of a country that refuses to recognise the full range of Member States .
( The sitting was suspended at 12 noon in anticipation of the formal sitting and resumed at 12.05p.m. )

1 .
Peace process in Spain ( vote )
We shall examine the motion for a resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has presented an amendment to paragraph 2 of its motion for a resolution .
( Parliament rejected the amendment by electronic vote )
We shall now vote on the motion for a resolution presented .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution by roll-call vote )
Next we shall examine the motion for a resolution by the PSE , ALDE , GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups .
( IT ) Mr President , in accordance with Rules 136 and 138 of the Rules of Procedure , I would like to request an explanation regarding the fact that substantial amendments have been made , outside of the terms laid down by the Rules of Procedure , to the title and paragraph 6 of the resolution on which we are preparing to vote , a resolution of great political importance .
In addition , I would like to point out that versions of the new text are not yet available in all languages , as laid down in the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , we would like to know why the services have accepted such an amendment without , I might add , obtaining the agreement of the political groups , and did not make use of an oral amendment , as provided for by established practice and the Rules of Procedure .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , it is not possible to vote on an amendment to the text that was tabled outside of the permitted time and without having consulted the political groups .
The Secretariat informs me that a text is available for the honourable Members in all languages .
They assure me of that .
( PL ) Mr President , may I enquire if there has been some misunderstanding ?
According to our voting lists , the first vote was by show of hands .
The second vote , on the resolution tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , was by roll call .
According to our lists , however , this vote should have been on the Socialists ' resolution and we voted against , in the belief that it was the second vote .
Have I understood correctly that the vote that has taken place was the first vote ?
I would like to point out that many of my Polish colleagues and also colleagues from the Czech Republic and other countries voted in the same way .
Could the situation be clarified , please ?
What the Presidency has put to the vote is very clear : we have put an amendment to the motion for a resolution to the vote . What we were voting on after that was very clear .
We were voting on the resolution presented by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
One would have to be completely deaf not to understand what we were putting to the vote .
( Protests from the right )
( Applause from the left )
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to stress two procedural issues .
The first is that the amendment should have been voted on by a show of hands and not by roll-call vote .
( Applause from the Group )
As we have just seen , Mr President , that error has led to confusion amongst some Members in terms of their voting intentions .
I would therefore ask you to put this error right in application of our Rules of Procedure .
The second procedural issue is that the text of the Socialist resolution has been subject to a substantial amendment - and I would stress , substantial - which has not conformed to the Rules of Procedure .
It should have been done by means of a registered amendment , which was not done within the time limit laid down , or by means of an oral amendment in plenary .
The text of the Socialist resolution does not therefore conform to the Rules of Procedure , Mr President , and I would ask that you act accordingly .
( Applause from the right )
( Protests from the left )
Mr Vidal-Quadras , we have not taken a roll-call vote , but rather an electronic vote .
You have been here long enough to know the difference .
Secondly , interpreting the Rules of Procedure is not your responsibility , but rather that of the President , with the assistance of the Secretariat , and I am listening to all of the arguments expressed so that I can take them properly into consideration and then act in the most appropriate manner possible , but please do not pontificate .
Do not say : this conforms to the Rules of Procedure and this does not , because that is not your role .
( Protests of the right )
( Applause from the left )
( DE ) Mr President , I think you have said all that needs to be said .
The organisation of the agenda , particularly in terms of the order and conduct of votes , is the responsibility of the President .
My impression is that you conducted the votes perfectly properly .
However , my political experience has also taught me one thing - we are all politicians , and that includes you , ladies and gentlemen of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : when no more progress can be made politically , then the agenda has to take the blame .
We know that , but I would ask , Mr President , that we vote now .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , given your esteemed background as a Spanish Socialist , is it possible that you might have a conflict of interest in continuing in the Chair , just on this point ?
( Loud and sustained applause from the right )
( ES ) Mr President , given the confusion that certain speeches may have caused , I simply wished to clarify that no Socialist resolution is going to be voted on , but rather we are going to vote on a joint resolution by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Group of the Greens / EFA and the GUE / NGL Group , that is to say , by several parliamentary groups jointly .
No Socialist resolution is going to be put to the vote , Mr President .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , people may be trying to change the vote , or whatever , but I actually voted the wrong way because of the roll-call vote .
That is the proof of the matter .
There is at least one vote that was wrong there .
( Applause from the right )
( PL ) Mr President , it is surely essential for votes to reveal the wishes of this House , that is to say , the wishes of the Members of this Parliament .
Due to a mistake , or an oversight , a significant number of MEPs failed to vote according to their wishes .
I therefore make a formal request for the vote to be taken again .
There is no risk involved , as the House will simply indicate what its true wishes are .
( Applause from the right )
Please , we are dealing with a serious and important issue .
I would ask you to cooperate with the Bureau so that we can make a rational and appropriate analysis of what is happening .
There is no need to support each speech with approvals from one side or the other .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regardless of one 's opinion on this vote , I have one comment , and I would like the chairmen of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to respond to this : what has been said here is a gross impertinence that the whole of Parliament should condemn .
This President was elected by a large majority , and he has the right to lead every vote , whether you like it or not .
Anything else is impertinent and obscene !
( Applause from the left )

( ES ) Mr President , I simply wished to refer to your reply to the Vice-President of Parliament , Mr Vidal-Quadras , to the effect that it falls to the President of the European Parliament to interpret the Rules of Procedure .

Rule 159 ( 1 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure states that Parliament will normally vote by show of hands , and Rule 159 ( 2 ) says that ' if the President decides that the result is doubtful , a fresh vote shall be taken using the electronic voting system ' .
Mr President , you proceeded to an electronic vote before any result was known and that has led to confusion .
Mr President , two months remain of your mandate in this Parliament .
Do not compromise your independence or prestige , because neither you nor this Parliament deserve that .
( Mixed reactions )
I shall give the floor to Mr Poettering for a final speech on points of order ; there will be no more , because this could go on forever .
I will then consult the Members of the Bureau so that I can take the appropriate decision in accordance with our Rules of Procedure .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , this morning , in the difficult situation in which we find ourselves , we had a debate that was very definitely worthy of this House .
Now is the time for all of us to take action , and I would like to make it clear that the integrity of the President of this House is not being questioned .
( Applause )
Having said that , I would also ask that we now find a process that will enable us to come to a decision .
It would have been right if the first vote had been by show of hands , since that is the normal way of going about it .
I then assumed you had called an immediate electronic vote on the grounds that you thought the results were so close together , but the normal way of voting would have been by show of hands .
This voting process then had the regrettable result that some Members ended up voting a different way than they had intended .
There is also the question as to whether the common text on which the groups agreed was put together properly and whether translations are available .
Taken together , all this adds up to a whole bundle of problems , and so I would like to appeal to your goodwill in order that we may repeat the votes before moving on to vote on the groups ' joint motion for a resolution .
This House will then have spoken , and its political will will then have been made manifest .
I ask you now to show the goodwill of which I have spoken .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Poettering .
Thank you for coming out in defence of the honour of the President of the European Parliament .
I believe that what Mrs Doyle has said is totally unacceptable and that it has nothing to do with what is happening here .
( Applause )
We have more important things to discuss .
Ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to take a few minutes to consult the members of the Bureau in relation to the three issues that have been raised during these speeches .
The Presidency will then announce its decision and I would remind you that , according to Rule 166 ( 4 ) of our Rules of Procedure , the President will take the decision he considers appropriate , immediately after the points of order that have been raised with regard to what is being discussed , and that the President 's decision will not be subject to any vote .
In other words , whatever the President decides will be applied .
Please allow me now to consult the members of the Bureau on the technical issues relating to the three problems raised .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Ladies and gentlemen , having consulted Parliament 's services and having studied the aspects of our Rules of Procedure that relate to the issues that we have debated , I believe that we should proceed as follows :
with regard to the Resolution presented by a series of political groups , the PSE , ALDE , GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups , I am told - and I have no reason to doubt it - that the text is available in all languages .
I am also told that there were last-minute amendments to the text , yesterday , that the Bureau accepted them without subjecting them to any formal amendment procedure because it did not believe that to be necessary .
The Resolution presented by the PSE , ALDE , GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups is therefore ready to be voted on in the version subject to the latest amendment for the purposes of incorporating it into the debate .
We shall vote on it ;
secondly , it is very reasonable to believe that there has been some confusion and that some Members have voted the second time without being aware of precisely what was being voted on , despite the fact that I believe the Presidency had made it very clear .
I believe , however , that the objections have been raised with the best of intentions and that there have certainly been errors in the interpretation of what we were voting on .
Consequently , and in order to truly reflect this Parliament 's democratic will , I shall repeat the two votes .
( Applause )
( Parliament rejected the amendment by show of hand , verified electronically )
The result of the second round is therefore the same as that of the first : the amendment has been rejected .
( Parliament rejected the motion for a resolution by the PPE-DE and UEN Groups by roll-call vote )
The result is therefore exactly the same as the previous result , but I imagine that everybody will feel reassured and that the will of the Members will have been better reflected .
( Parliament approved the motion for a resolution by the PSE , ALDE , GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups by roll-call vote )
2 .
European order for payment procedure ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to refer to the Rules of Procedure and I thank you for having quickly granted my request to speak .
The speed with which the Presidency has given me the floor gives me the assurance that my voice can reach even where the microphones do not .
According to the Rules of Procedure I must propose that , following the decision made and the subsequent vote , we proceed immediately to amend our Rules of Procedure in line with the practice that has been established in the Chamber today .
From now on it will no longer be obligatory to have access to texts in all languages twenty-four hours beforehand , but it will be sufficient to receive texts at the time of the vote , and it will no longer be necessary to table oral amendments , since any one of us may amend texts put to the vote , even at the last minute .
Mr President , allow me to congratulate you , since this means that once again a blow has been struck to democracy .
( IT ) Mr President , I just wanted to say that today has been a difficult day and that I believe that the decision to repeat the vote represents a dangerous and wholly unnecessary precedent .
rapporteur . - Mr President , the committee and the political groups requested that we vote on compromise amendment 4 first , as it is the amendment that was agreed with the Council and the Commission in the trialogue .
It respects our rules in Parliament on the new comitology procedure .
That would mean , therefore , that amendment 2 will fall , when you take compromise amendment 4 first .
In view of the statement given by Commissioner Frattini during the debate on Monday and his commitment to look at the effects of this regulation and the civil justice laws for parties domiciled in third countries , in particular the States of the European Economic Area , the groups have agreed not to insist on Amendment 1 .
Therefore we will be voting as groups against that amendment .
I hope that avoids any confusion during the vote .
President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , the Presidency also takes note of Parliament 's interest in extending the scope of the European order for payment procedure to claimants and defendants resident in a European Economic Area member country .
However , also taking into account the negotiations in the Council , it appears to be impossible to change the definition of cross-border cases in the text of the regulation at this stage .
The Presidency is available to look more closely into the effects of the regulation for parties domiciled in states of the European Economic Area .
3 .
" Youth in Action " programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
4 .
Action programme in the field of lifelong learning ( vote )
5 .
" Europe for Citizens " programme ( 2007-2013 ) ( vote )
6 .
Restrictions on the marketing and use of perfluorooctane sulfonates ( vote )
7 .
Establishment , operation and use of SIS II ( regulation ) ( vote )
- Before the vote :
President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , there is hardly any need to underline the importance of the legislative proposals for the second generation Schengen information system .
The SIS II system is a central tool for law enforcement authorities and at the same time makes it possible to expand the Schengen area and abolish controls at internal borders .
For the first time in the history of the European Union , we are creating a legislative basis for a massive information system in codecision with the European Parliament .
The Presidency has , together with the European Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Coelho , prepared a compromise that it is hoped will be acceptable to all parties at first reading .
We thank Mr Coelho and his team for their cooperation .
The Council 's position on the legislative package on SIS II was submitted to the President of Parliament in early October .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs voted on its position on 5 October .
It did not approve the addition proposed by the Council concerning authorities ' access to the system .
According to the Council 's position , all authorities that enter data in the SIS II system should also have access to that system .
This would ensure full and indispensable cooperation between all authorities involved in the protection of the area of freedom , security and justice .
The addition concerning access by authorities was proposed at a very late stage in the negotiations .
Therefore , it is fully understandable that the Committee on Civil Liberties felt that it could not approve the addition without an opportunity to examine the issue in more detail .
The Presidency followed the plenary discussion on this issue on Monday with great interest .
I hope that the European Parliament can approve the proposed text today .
In the next few weeks the Council will discuss the outcome of the plenary vote by Parliament .
I believe that we can reach a solution with Parliament at first reading .
I want to emphasise that we are now very close to a solution for this important legislative matter .
8 .
Access to SIS II by the services responsible for issuing vehicle registration certificates ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , the Council could not attend the Monday debate and has just issued a statement .
I feel it is right that Parliament should issue its response to the Council 's statement through your rapporteur .
If I may , Mr President , I should just like to make two very simple remarks .
Firstly , I wish to congratulate the Presidency on its work on this matter , and , like the Presidency , I believe that Parliament can be pleased with the fact that the Act that we are about to adopt will help strengthen our external borders , and will help increase our citizens ' security .
The Presidency contributed a great deal to this process , but the Council , as such , did not .
The Council did not honour its undertakings in the trialogue in May here in Strasbourg .
I hope that the Council does not do to the Finnish Presidency what it did to the Austrian Presidency . Hopefully , it will honour its commitments and adopt the document in the form in which we are set to adopt it , because this is the only way in which we will have an agreement at first reading and in which the second generation Schengen Information System will enter into force without delay .
9 .
Establishment , operation and use of SIS II ( decision ) ( vote )
10 .
Relations between the European Union and Russia following the assassination of journalist Anna Politkovskaya ( vote )
11 .
Breast cancer ( vote )
12 .
Third-country anti-dumping , anti-subsidy and safeguard action ( vote )
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , this is a very sensitive subject .
I would simply like to thank all my colleagues at the Committee on International Trade , beginning with its chairman , and all the staff of the Secretariat , for the excellent work carried out and for the contribution made to the debate on what is a very sensitive and difficult subject regarding Europe 's future not only in terms of trade , but also from the point of view of our freedom .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Mr President , unfortunately the vote on the peace process in the Basque Country has been slightly poisoned by the procedural measures , but I believe it is a good day for the process because the European Parliament has supported it and has been involved in it .
That is fundamental in solving the political conflict that is now taking place in the Basque Country and the Spanish State .
Steps will now have to be taken to solve the problems in the Basque Country .
On the one hand , there is a need to cease all armed activity and dismantle the terrorist organisation ETA , but , on the other hand , the political conflict has to be faced and resolved .
If there is no pressure to resolve the political issue , there could be a terrible situation in future .
The involvement of the European Parliament is very important , because we now have a concrete arena in which to resolve the conflict and that might be the only possible way .
Europe is the place in which this political issue has to be resolved .
We have found the right arena .
The Basque community , along with political parties , trade unions and the European Union , also needs to be involved in the solution .
( ES ) Mr President , as a Basque political representative , I do not believe that I am mistaken in saying that , for the great majority of Basque citizens , of Euskadi or of Euskal Herria , today is a great day , an historic day , on which this Parliament , the institution representing all of the Europeans , is finally agreeing to turn its attention to a part of its internal territory which has been suffering a conflict for a very long time , a conflict which , because it has not been dealt with properly or quickly enough , has led a group of extremists to resort to violence over recent years , spreading death and pain .
Today , Basque society has rejected the use of violence to achieve political objectives and fortunately it would appear to have genuinely opted for a democratic solution to the conflict .
I would call upon those people who have not wanted to make it possible for the citizens to speak rather than bombs , to reflect and to look to the future , and , once this Parliament has voted by a majority , to democratically accept the Resolution approved and allow the process to move ahead .
Finally , on behalf of the majority of the Basque people , I would like to thank all of the Members of the European Parliament , who , by voting by a majority in favour of this motion for a resolution , will have given us the opportunity to achieve peace .
I trust that we will not let you down .
( FR ) Mr President , I am speaking in this House as a Member representing the Basque country , since my constituency covers Ipar Euskadi , that is to say the northern part of the Basque country .
This is a very important day for the European Parliament , since we have decided , as good Europeans , to apply the European method , which makes dialogue the only solution to violence .
The ingredients of the process applied to the Basque country are as follows : firstly , the cessation of violence ; secondly , the opening of a debate from which no one is debarred , given that we make peace with our enemies , not with our friends ; thirdly , the proper conducting of a fair debate whose outcome is not pre-determined ; and , finally , a result that , whatever form it takes , will have to be validated democratically .
I would urge France also to commit itself to the process .
Indeed , we need to stop being hypocritical , given that the Basque country straddles the Pyrenees .
I shall conclude with a splendid phrase that I found on a wall in the Basque country and that , I believe , is attributable to Gandhi : ' There is no path to peace .
Peace is the path ' .
( ES ) Like previous speakers , I would like to congratulate the European Parliament on having created a new milestone on the road to peace in the Basque Country .
It has not been a simple task ; we have witnessed that and we have suffered it , but things are never simple when it comes to peace processes .
Over recent days we have seen certain gestures and certain attitudes that do nothing to help resolve the Basque conflict , but this must not be a reason for us to cease in our efforts to find a reasonable solution , which leads a complex situation towards a framework of political dialogue in which there is no room for violence of any kind .
That is essentially what we have voted for and approved today : condemnation of violence , solidarity with all of the victims and support for peace .
It is sad to see that not everybody is willing to take on that task , but there are enough of us to suggest that we are truly at the beginning of the end .
I hope that those people who have not supported us in this Resolution will eventually realise that this is the right direction to take .
( HU ) I would like to comment that the Spanish Government 's efforts to begin a dialogue with the ETA terrorist organisation is nothing new .
In my capacity as a former Hungarian ambassador , I came to learn that every democratic government conducted negotiations with representatives of the organisation .
This was done by the Suárez government , by several governments led by Felipe González and also by the government of José María Aznar .
Why did I speak and do I speak now on behalf of the 13 Hungarian members of the European People 's Party ?
Because for us , the question of enforcing minority rights is extremely important .
Many Hungarians , our compatriots , live as minorities outside the borders of Hungary .
We have to affirm one thing : minority rights must be protected within the framework of the rule of law and European norms .
Let me emphasise that no matter how anyone voted , we will continue to stand up for human and minority rights , and that we condemn the use of force and terror in any shape or form .
( NL ) Mr President , as non-attached MEPs , we have not had the opportunity to express our criticism or add anything to the texts , and that is why we have been unable to vote in favour of either of the present resolutions .
In the one case , we could not be in favour , because we cannot possibly agree to a resolution according to which the Basque country cannot , in principle , be independent .
In the other case , we could not vote in favour either , because we take the view that in a normal political world , talks can only be held with people who completely denounce violence - which is often no more than criminality - or even condemn it .
What this comes down to , though , is that the European Union as such , or its institutions for that matter , should not really interfere in the domestic affairs of Spain or the Basque country , so as not to make the Basque country 's separation from Spain , or remaining part of it , any more complicated than the electorate , democratically , want it to be .
We should let Spain and the Basque country decide for themselves through peaceful negotiations and in a democratic manner .
( ES ) Mr President , I too am a Basque political representative .
Basque and Spanish .
I would like to state in this House that Basque society has always been against terrorism , not just now .
I would like to state in this House that the terrorist group ETA is not an extremist organisation , it is a terrorist organisation , which for forty years has been murdering in violation of Spanish democracy . I would like to state in this House that there is no political conflict in Spain that is any different from that of any other democratic country in the European Union .
These are the political conflicts inherent in democracy . What exists in Spain , in Euskadi , is a terrorist organisation , called ETA , which has been murdering in violation of democracy for forty years .
Mr President , I have not voted for any of the Resolutions in a political gesture opposed to a debate entitled ' on the peace process in Spain ' , because I am fifty-four , Mr President , I have never lived through war , I have lived the whole of my life in Euskadi and in Euskadi we do not lack peace , we lack freedom .
The challenge is therefore freedom , and to talk about a peace process may encourage certain people to have the nerve to claim that terrorism is a product of a political conflict , and there is no such political conflict in our country .
I voted in favour of the resolution tabled by my colleague Mrs Grossetête on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the peace process in Spain in relation to the problems facing the Basque country .
I wish to commend the fact that Parliament has spoken with one voice in condemning the use of violence , in paying tribute to the victims of terrorism , and in calling for a complete return to peace .
I am very disappointed that the political groups have failed to agree on a common text on a matter as serious as this , whilst not overlooking the fact that the responsibility for dealing with this issue rests primarily with the Member States concerned , namely Spain and France and the political forces in those countries .
I hope that common sense will prevail and I am happy that my voice has joined the chorus of those who are convinced that this situation must be solved peacefully , by democratic means .
We regret the fact that it was impossible to arrive at a common resolution on account of domestic party-political differences being too great in the area in question .
Despite this , everyone is agreed that dialogue is the only answer to reach a peaceful solution .
If this is to happen , all democratic forces will need to combine together in order to facilitate a political solution between all peoples in Spain .
It is therefore unacceptable that every democratic process , which entails a change to the EU 's internal borders , based on the right to self-determination , should be condemned from the word go .
This would also immediately condemn all democratic and peaceful processes leading to more autonomy and independence in other European Member States .
Take Belgium , where the call for Flemish independence is getting louder .
I believe that regionalisation and Europeanisation can go hand in hand .
My party , the N-VA - New Flemish Alliance - stands for a peaceful Europe where all peoples are given the chance to develop , based on the right to self-determination and in a spirit of ' unity in diversity ' .
That is why this debate on a possible peaceful solution cannot be reduced to a debate on terrorism alone .
in writing . Since the announcement of the ETA ceasefire in March of this year , Sinn Féin has argued that a unique opportunity exists for resolving the conflict in the Basque Country .
All political forces that believe this to be an important political objective , including the European Union , should do all in their power to ensure that this opportunity is grasped .
It is unfortunate that both resolutions presented to Parliament today do not address the central issues nor where the peace process is today .
The EPP-ED resolution was opposed to the peace process .
The joint resolution , while better than that of the EPP-ED , was clearly a missed opportunity .
On that basis we voted against the EPP-ED resolution and abstained on the joint resolution .
There is an urgent need for all-party talks , a need to respect all political mandates , including that of Batasuna , and a need to end the ongoing political show trials against Basque left nationalist political activists .
Sinn Féin remains committed to supporting the Basque peace process , will continue to meet all political parties in the region and will offer whatever assistance those parties deem appropriate .
in writing . - ( FR ) Without prejudging the basis and the validity of the approach taken by Mr Zapatero 's government , it is not for the European institutions to adopt a position on a matter that , by its very nature - relating as it does to the status and the future of a province - falls within the internal policy of a Member State .
That is particularly the case when there is such intense internal debate between a parliamentary majority and opposition .
Because it asks the Council and the Commission to take appropriate measures , the joint resolution is obviously at risk of being abused .
The rationale of a number of the political groups that have signed the resolution and whose ambition it is to internationalise the conflict is dangerous and counter-productive .
The Spanish should be left to manage and settle this conflict between themselves .
In these conditions , an alternative resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats was fully justified .
I should , however , have liked the reasoning to have revolved around rejection on principle of the examination of a matter internal to a Member State .
That is why I abstained from voting on both resolutions .
Because the European Parliament has now been genuinely taken hostage by the Spanish Socialists , who initiated this debate , we initially considered abstaining from voting on the two resolutions proposed today .
If we have , in the end , supported the resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , it is because it states what is our own conviction , namely that ETA has not fulfilled the conditions for becoming a credible negotiating partner .
It hardly needs pointing out that ETA has offered no apology to the families of the 1 000 victims of the attacks and that it has never renounced armed conflict .
On 23 September , it was again committing itself to pursuing the armed struggle , written in blood .
We have voted against the resolution by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and by other groups , not because of its content - bland and unhelpful as it is --but because it is , to all intents and purposes , dictated by Batasuna .
ETA has always tried to internationalise the peace process .
Through the efforts of its political wing and thanks to the Spanish Socialists , this aim has now been achieved in a European Parliament deeply divided by a debate that ought never to have taken place here and now .
As long as ETA has not renounced armed conflict , it will remain a terrorist organisation to be fought and not a political force with which to engage in dialogue .
It is not right that problems of this kind - which have to do with a Member State 's internal affairs - be put on the agenda of this House .
With the exception of our Spanish Members , we are not given the opportunity to have a full debate on the subject , which - although certainly important - is thereby degraded to nothing more than a party-political dispute , for it would be absurd for the Members from other countries not to have entire confidence in their group 's Spanish Members where this issue is concerned .
In principle , though , I take the view that no region or minority ought , in striving for autonomy , to have recourse to violence , for that way of doing things runs counter to the European values that we have been defending for over sixty years , and this I say in full awareness of my being here as a representative of the German-speaking community in Belgium .
The Basques are in an exceptional position compared to most other European peoples .
At the start of the nineteenth century , Europe was carved up between a handful of large , multi-ethnic states .
The Vienna Congress in 1815 believed it could secure this division of states and relevant borders for ever .
From 1830 , two-thirds of today 's European states came about either by violent or by peaceful means , as a result of the democratic fight for government and education in the people 's own language .
Of the remaining multilingual states , Spain and Belgium have adopted a federal form whose administration recognises the difference in language and culture .
Unfortunately , within Spain , the Basque country is still split between the three major Basque provinces that form one region together , along with the region of Navarre , of which only the western half has a Basque majority .
The demands of the Basques are comparable to those of Catalonia , which have now largely been met .
The response to their demands should not be military or judicial oppression of the kind meted out by former Spanish governments and advocated by the present Right-wing opposition .
We rejoice to see that the independence movement and the Spanish state are finally seeking a peaceful solution together and that most groups in this House are backing this process .
in writing . UKIP have abstained on Resolution on the principle that this is clearly a nation state matter and thus wholly inappropriate for the EU to interfere in or pass judgement upon .
The territorial integrity of a Member State and their approach to tackling terrorism should be left to the discretion of the state , appropriately representing and accountable to their citizens who are directly affected .
UKIP abhors and opposes terrorism in all forms .
in writing . I oppose this EPP resolution criticising Spanish government efforts to negotiate peace .
If the criteria the EPP seeks to apply were applied initially to the Irish process , the IRA would still be engaged in its murder campaign .
As we know , doubts about the commitment of the IRA continued to exist , 10 years on .
But structures have evolved to pressure them and monitor their activities ; to ensure that they were disarming and completely committed to politics .
It can be said that , had the process not been in place , up to 1000 further deaths could have occurred in that period in Northern Ireland .
The Spanish government is dealing with one of the most difficult tasks - how to bring internal , politically driven violence to an end .
The view we are asked to endorse is that of the party in opposition in Spain .
This view is contrary to the considered position of the current democratically elected government of the Spanish people .
In the UK and Ireland there is cross-party support for the Irish peace process , even though from time to time parties have been critical of details .
This is one of the reasons it has been successful to date .
in writing . The vote on this resolution has put the PPE-DE Irish delegation in a difficult position .
The Irish Peace Process has been a success and we recognise the support of the EU for that process .
After more than 40 years of terrorism , violence and conflict all parties are now working towards a lasting peace in Ireland .
We would like to see a successful peace process in Spain also and an end to the use of violence for political ends .
However , there are dangers in drawing parallels between the Irish Peace Process and the situation that currently exists in Spain .
To begin with , the Irish Peace process has the support of two sovereign governments and the support of the vast majority of political parties on both islands .
In Spain there is still deep political division on how best to proceed .
It is unfortunate that the European Parliament is being forced to divide on such a fundamentally important issue for Spain .
However , with Spanish Members so deeply divided on the resolution before us , it has made it impossible for the rest of Parliament to form a united view on a subject that we really should not be divided on .
Fundamentally , we all want to support an end to political violence in Spain .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . I welcome this resolution on the peace process in Spain and very much regret that the right in the Parliament was not part of the coalition supporting the peace process .
It is sad that they have turned their backs on the very wise words of their own former Prime Minister José María Aznar , who in 1998 said " For peace , and its right , we must open our hearts to hope and forgiveness .
In our fight for peace , we will do our best with the help and hope of everybody . "
What a pity the EPP could not capture that spirit in today 's debate .
( DE ) Mr President , the MEPs belonging to the German Free Democratic Party did not participate in the vote on the motion for a resolution .
The motion for a resolution bears the legend ' European Parliament resolution on the peace process in Spain ' .
This we regard as a matter to be resolved at the national level , and believe that the European Union should not concern itself with matters over which it has no power and for which it has no responsibility .
We are particularly critical , in this context , of paragraph 3 of the resolution , in which the Council and the Commission are urged to take appropriate action , something that we regard as going against the subsidiarity principle .
It is for this reason that we have refrained from participation in the vote .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against the Socialist-inspired joint motion for a resolution on the so-called peace process in Spain .
I was so naïve as to believe that the European treaties had introduced the principle of subsidiarity , but no , Europe wants to interfere in purely domestic Spanish affairs .
I was so naïve as to believe that democrats would not get round the table with murderers and terrorists and bow to their blackmail , but no , it appears that this is the sort of practice Europe wants to encourage from now on .
This does , however , create a dangerous precedent .
It appears that the Left-wingers in this House , followed by quite a few ' useful idiots ' in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , consider it normal that the government of one of the Member States should negotiate with a terrorist organisation which is not even prepared to offer its apologies to the families of all the people it has senselessly killed over the years .
If , however , you realise that some of the group chairmen in this House who are tabling this resolution today have in the past personally given shelter to wanted terrorists , including Hans-Joachim Klein of the Rote Armee Fraktion , you should not be surprised by anything emanating from the Left and extreme Left , who are always prepared to take the moral high ground on every other issue .
' Chassez le naturel , il revient au galop ' .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to make a personal statement and ask the Member who has just spoken to apologise .
Members who do not vote as you do are not to be referred to as idiots .
( Replying to Mr Martinez , who heckles him )
Whether what was said was ' useful ' or ' useless ' idiot is scarcely relevant .
I know .
I have read as much Lenin as you , Mr Martinez
That being said , I would ask you , Mr President , to ask the Member of whom I was speaking to apologise .
I shall then offer my explanation of vote .
( Applause )
( Replying to Mr Martinez , who heckles him again )
I am familiar with Lenin .
Just because Lenin uses insults , that does not mean that you must do the same ...
Just a moment please , Mr Dillen .
I imagine that you did not wish to call your honourable friends idiots .
I would therefore ask you to correct or clarify exactly what you said .
( NL ) Mr President , I did not use the word ' idiots ' , but actually said ' useful idiots ' , which has been a frequently-used term in politics for over a century and which , as Mr Martinez reminded us a moment ago , was coined by Lenin .
It is a typically political expression which is often used in political debate and which was certainly not meant personally .
If this is what the speaker thought , then I should like to apologise .
It was simply a political attack and certainly not a personal one .
( FR ) Mr President , I do accept his apology , but I do not believe that the addition of an adjective reduces the import of the noun it qualifies .
A ' great ' imbecile is still an imbecile , is he not ?
I turn now to my explanation of vote .
Like my colleagues in the Union for French Democracy ( UDF ) , I voted in favour of the resolution in support of the peace initiative in the Basque country , adopted by the Spanish Parliament .
Through this vote , we wanted to declare our solidarity with the democratic authorities in Spain at a time when a delicate process is being entered into to eliminate violence and re-establish civil order in the Basque country .
However , we only voted in favour of this resolution because the new wording of paragraph 6 - which Mr Vidal-Quadras rightly called a substantial modification of the initial text - points out very clearly that this issue falls exclusively within the competence of Spain .
It would not have been right for the European Parliament to have set itself up as a supervisory authority for the Spanish Parliament in a matter that has to do with national sovereignty .
Parliament and the European Council are , however , playing their full role by giving the Spanish authorities the moral and political support that they are entitled to expect .
In this connection , it is , to Parliament 's ear , illogical , to say the least , for Spain 's People 's Party to denounce international interference in their country 's internal affairs while proposing a resolution outrightly and unequivocally condemning the vote in the Cortes .
In supporting the decisions taken by Spain 's legal authorities , Parliament is certainly showing more respect for Spanish sovereignty than it would have done in condemning those decisions , as it was asked to do by the Spanish opposition .
Rather than try to intimidate French MEPs in the centre of the political spectrum , as he did in this morning 's Le Figaro , Mr Rajoy would have done better to have questioned the coherence of his own approach and of the approach of his party in Strasbourg .
in writing . The Spanish peace process is a brave and necessary initiative .
While the government in Spain is seeking to end ETA bloodshed through dialogue and negotiation , it is incumbent on all democratic parties , both inside and outside Spain , to offer support to the process .
That does not prevent us from maintaining a critical perspective , with regard to the seriousness of the ETA organisation 's commitment to making the necessary compromises .
Incidents such as the kidnapping in Southwest France by the ETA organisation are a test of the process .
There may be other such incidents before the process is concluded .
In these circumstances , it is a matter for the government of Spain to judge whether such incidents indicate a deliberate breach of the ETA ceasefire and to act accordingly .
It is necessary to bear in mind the sensitivities of the victims of terror and their families during the process and in its conclusion .
But the process is primarily about preventing further killing and destruction .
Those victims of terror who support the current peace process are to be congratulated for their generosity and courage .
They , despite their pain , have opted to try and prevent others facing the same trauma in the future .
in writing . ( SV ) Terrorism , in all its forms , is a detestable phenomenon that , more often than not , hits innocent civilians .
A true democrat must , in all situations , reject and condemn acts of that kind .
Parliament has today debated motions for resolutions by the majority of political groups concerning the peace process in Spain .
The rejection of terrorism and the stand taken in favour of the peace process have , unfortunately , been permeated by a political power struggle that really belongs to Spanish politics .
The issue concerned is one that , in the end , must be resolved in the sovereign state of the Kingdom of Spain .
It is thus very depressing to see the opportunism with which different political forces in the European Parliament are trying to exploit this tragic chapter in Spanish history .
In accordance with the above reasoning , I have today abstained from voting on all the motions for resolutions concerning the peace process in Spain .
in writing . ( ES ) We are giving our opinion today on a motion for a resolution supporting the peace process in Spain .
The content of this resolution represents unreserved support for the peace process and the fight against terrorist violence in our country in the terms established by the Congress of Deputies in May 2005 .
In that statement , the Congress expressed its support for the Zapatero government 's plans to begin talks processes with those people who wish to abandon violence , while at all times respecting the law and democratic principles .
I voted against the adopted resolution for a number of reasons .
First of all , it is unacceptable , in my view , that ( these or any other ) initiatives aimed at putting an end to ETA 's terrorist activities are referred to as a ' peace process ' .
The choice of words is biased and disingenuous .
There is no war .
Rather , what we have is , on the one hand , a free , democratic country that respects autonomies and , on the other , a people that has suffered from the indiscriminate , unjustifiable violence of a terrorist group .
Secondly , I cannot vote for a resolution that fails to acknowledge clearly that it is impossible to negotiate with a terrorist group that refuses , prior to those negotiations , explicitly to renounce violence .
Lastly , I feel that it is for Spain and the Spanish people to resolve the issue of Basque terrorism as they see fit , but I refuse to support a resolution in Parliament on this issue that makes no reference to ETA 's unjustified and indefensible motives .
In addition to the methods to which they resort , namely terrorism , this organisation is worthy of our complete , unreserved condemnation .
In this case , we must condemn the substance of the terrorists ' claims , and should give them no succour in terms of a democratic vote .
The terms in which the motion for a resolution was tabled for discussion are offensive to most Spanish people and in particular to the victims of terrorism in Spain .
This has been made abundantly clear by the association that represents the overwhelming majority of the victims , which has referred to the process initiated by the Spanish Government as capitulation .
The very title of the resolution inaccurately suggests the existence of two legitimate sides engaged in a peace process , when what is actually at stake is talks between a government and a terrorist group responsible for murder , persecution and extortion , of which hundreds of Spanish citizens have been the victims .
It must not be forgotten that , following the cease-fire declared by ETA , its Members have issued threats , no weapons have been handed in and news has come to light of attempts at re-arming .
To open unconditional dialogue with terrorists who not only fail to condemn but actually justify the armed struggle and who show no remorse for the innocents they slaughter is tantamount to an incredible surrender on the part of the political authorities of a democratic country .
That is no cause for celebration .
I am appalled by the opportunism shown by the Zapatero government , which has sought to obtain internationally what it has failed to obtain from its citizens .
in writing . While I voted with the EPP and rapporteur on this , I would just like to draw attention to the case of the European City Guides , in which individuals , small companies and even schools have been sucked into a scheme where they have had money fraudulently extracted from them with no clear means of redress .
While I believe this report to be generally of benefit to European businesses , it must also be noted that it could leave the way open for an intensification of the kind of practices carried out by European City Guides .
in writing . ( SV ) The content of the programme can be brought into question .
In her justification at first reading , the rapporteur wrote that it ' will make an important contribution to the active citizenship of young people in society and thus enhance their feeling of being part of Europe , so that it is likely to deliver substantial European added value ' .
We question whether the programme really will make a substantial contribution to this objective .
International youth exchanges are a good thing , but they need to be funded through the efforts of civil society or by the Member States .
We do not believe that the EU should involve itself in this type of activity .
I supported the Gröner report , on which Parliament voted today , on the ' Youth in Action ' programme for 2007-2013 .
I particularly welcome the proposal to guarantee funding for youth-related activities throughout Europe .
This new programme provides for action under five headings : Youth for Europe , European Voluntary Service , Youth of the World , Youth Workers and support systems , and Support for policy cooperation .
In this way , Europe will continue to invest in a youth policy as a way of reinforcing its citizens ' sense of belonging to Europe and of developing its young people , on the basis of solidarity and mutual understanding among all people .
in writing . I welcome the Youth in Action programme , which aims at promoting experiences of European citizenship by young people .
This should contribute to solidarity and mutual understanding among young people throughout the European Union .
For the individual the programme should help promote a sense of initiative , creativity and entrepreneurial spirit .
Finally , it should contribute to fostering youth organisations and activities in all Member States .
in writing . I want to put on record my support for this report .
in writing . I welcome these proposals , which bring together the existing internal education and training programmes , allow for increased coherence and complementarity of Community programmes and should lead to more efficiency and flexibility in the Community 's actions in the field .
These programmes have demonstrated palpable success over their lifespan and have contributed to the modernisation of the educational and training systems in Europe .
As the new Integrated Programme is open to some third countries ( Iceland , Liechtenstein , Norway , Bulgaria , Romania , Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro , Switzerland ) , it has a huge potential for contributing to intercultural understanding .
The Integrated Programme is unfortunately , however , not open to all countries in the Union 's neighbourhood .
I believe that establishing and maintaining contacts with the peoples of the Union 's Southern and Eastern neighbours through education and training activities is of crucial importance .
I call , therefore , for the programme to be gradually opened to all countries covered by the EU 's Neighbourhood Policy .
I would also like to see the inclusion of the Erasmus Mundus programme in the Integrated Programme as of 2009 , when the present programme has run to the end .
in writing . ( SV ) I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the June List 's rejection at first reading in October 2005 .
It is true that the June List is a supporter of , for example , the Erasmus programme , but there are other parts of the draft component programmes that we need to examine carefully in order to establish whether they are justified on the basis that , under the Treaty , each Member State is responsible for the organisation and content of education and vocational training systems .
Overall , too much money has been appropriated to far too many projects .
We question why some of these projects exist and are funded via the EU .
in writing . I voted for this report and welcome the intention to replace the existing Socrates , Leonardo da Vinci , e-learning and other related programmes ( which expire at the end of 2006 ) with a new integrated lifelong learning programme for 2007 to 2013 .
I support the creation of four strands Comenius for general education activities in schools , Erasmus for higher education , Leonardo da Vinci for vocational education and training and Grundvig for adult education .
I believe this programme addresses important needs concerning the modernisation and adaptation of education and training systems in the light of the Lisbon goals .
( NL ) Mr President , I have voted against the amendments to the report on the Europe for Citizens Programme , because this programme , like its innumerable predecessors , is about as much use as sticking a plaster on a wooden leg .
Attempts are made to bring the citizens closer to the European institutions , but these will never be successful as long as policies are being adopted which , in some areas , are diametrically opposed to what the majority of the people actually want .
One example of this is enlargement policy , and , more specifically , the possible accession of Turkey .
A programme such as Europe for Citizens can be credible only if the European Union does something about the democratic deficit and the lack of accountability towards the European citizens .
What has now been approved by Parliament does nothing to change the essence of the problem , and is therefore yet another way of wasting money .
Even this programme is testimony to the scant attention that the EU pays its citizens .
For a start , the funding amounts proposed are very low , some 60 % down on the amount originally earmarked .
It is also true that the programme is ambiguous .
Although there are some worthwhile objectives - for example , the twinning of cities , civic projects , various surveys and studies , art events and conferences - there are others that are indicative of unacceptable political influence , such as excluding fascist crimes from support under new Action 4 - Active European Memory .
As regards the amendments to budget appropriations within the programme , the strengthening of education-related measures is to be welcomed , although such projects will hopefully be incorporated in such a way as to ensure that all opinions on the EU and its policies are heard , and not so as to transform it into yet another platform for propaganda .
We also welcome the inclusion of amateur sports organisations and hope that it is extensively applied .
in writing . ( SV ) I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate the June List 's rejection at first reading in April 2006 .
We very much reject quite a few of the positions adopted by Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education where this programme is concerned .
The work on this matter has primarily proceeded from an attitude of incomprehension regarding the low turnout at the 2004 elections to the European Parliament and regarding the fact that the Constitutional Treaty was rejected in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
The ' Europe for Citizens ' programme has no contribution to make to changing the political situation .
The work involving local amateur sport organisations within the framework of this programme is redolent of contempt for Europeans .
We also note that it is important for the peoples of Europe not to neglect their memories in relation to dictatorships and tragedies in the histories of their countries .
However , this should be done at national level .
It is not something for Eurocrats in Brussels to get involved in .
The June List has therefore rejected the amendments tabled by the Committee on Culture and Education to the result of Parliament 's debates on this matter .
in writing . - ( FR ) As early as at first reading , in April 2006 , we came out against this report , so significant were the absurdities that it contained .
This proposal at second reading is no worse .
It is quite simply unacceptable .
With a total budget of EUR 190 million , this programme is , indeed , a new propaganda tool in the service of the European Union .
We could , without a doubt , find better uses for this sum - I am thinking , in particular , of the social sphere , agricultural aid and business creation - than to allocate it to this vague and artificial notion of European citizenship .
Couched entirely in black and white terms , the document concerned is brilliant at pointing out to us what is desirable , namely to be an enthusiast of active European values ; what is bad , namely to be a passive citizen ; and what is worse , namely to be a Eurosceptic .
Whatever happens after the inevitable approval of this report and the wasting of all that money by various associations , we shall all remain , above all , nationals of one country or another and proud to be so .
The Europe for Citizens programme is aimed at bridging the gap between the citizens and the EU , and will be provided with instruments to promote active European citizenship .
It fosters cooperation among citizens and their organisations from different countries , so that they meet , work together and develop their ideas in a European atmosphere that transcends a merely national outlook and respects diversity .
I voted in favour of this report , which will help to improve the Europe for Citizens programme , with the two following amendments :
Firstly , a reduction of the budget earmarked for Action 1 ' Active Citizens for Europe ' from 47 % to 45 % will make it possible to raise the appropriation for Action 2 ' Civil Society in Europe ' , which is particularly well-suited to funding projects on Europe , its values and its cultures .
Lastly , as regards the programme 's overall objective , I welcome the rapporteur 's idea of integrating the idea of strengthening tolerance in order to ensure that projects funded as part of this programme will contribute towards the kind of active citizenship that promotes mutual respect and intercultural dialogue , and combats racism , xenophobia and discrimination .
in writing . I voted for this report , which seeks to address a major challenge facing the EU : how to connect the EU with its citizens .
The ' Europe for Citizens ' programme ensures the continuity of the civic participation programme established for the period 2004 to 2006 .
The programme provides the Union with an instrument to promote active European citizenship .
It responds to the need to improve citizens ' participation in the construction of Europe and encourages cooperation between citizens and their organisations from different countries in order to meet , act together and develop their own ideas in a European environment which goes beyond the national vision .
I welcome this .
in writing . I want to put on record my support for this initiative .
Perfluorooctane sulphonates ( PFOS ) are toxic , persistent and bioaccumulative substances present in applications such as chromium plating , waterproofing and fire resistance .
This report , in contrast with the Commission 's original proposal , proposes the gradual phasing-out of PFOS from the market , with a view to eliminating their use .
Furthermore , some derogations initially laid down - cases of chrome plating of metals and fire-fighting foams for which there are now safer viable alternatives - are to be removed .
By means of a compromise amendment , the administrative threshold has been lowered from the 0.1 % proposed by the Commission to a new threshold of 0.005 % .
The report also proposes that each Member State draft inventories of all products in which PFOS are used in order to prevent these substances from being released into the environment .
I particularly welcome the amendment proposing that current derogations can only be maintained where there are no safer substances or technologies that are technically and economically viable , and where the best techniques available are put in place in order to minimise PFOS emissions .
The Portuguese Social Democrat MEPs welcome the amendments aimed at preserving the quality of the environment and accordingly endorse Mr Schlyter 's report .
in writing . I voted in favour of this proposal , which aims to restrict the marketing and use of perfluorooctane sulfonates ( PFOS ) , substances widely used in materials such as textiles , carpets , paper and general coating .
Studies conducted by the OECD , the UK authorities and the Scientific Committee on Health and Environment Risks have found evidence that PFOS are persistent , bioaccumulative and toxic .
It seems right that the EU should act to get rid of another substance of high concern .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over two years have passed since we joined the EU .
Yet internal border controls in the EU remain , and that is a cause of profound dissatisfaction for us .
As a representative of the Czech people , I am not particularly interested in the technical and legal problems involved in the introduction of the SIS II system , to which the Commission has recently referred .
The new Member States and their citizens must become fully-fledged members of the EU , with equal rights , at the earliest opportunity .
In this context , any delay to our entry into the Schengen area is utterly unjustifiable .
I therefore voted for the adoption of the Coelho report on the Schengen information system , because its smooth , quick adoption will lead to the fulfilment of the four fundamental freedoms that lie at the very core of the EU .

( DE ) Mr President , much as I would like to see improvements to the Schengen Information System , I have nevertheless voted against the Coelho report , believing as I do that an emergency solution to the immediate extension of the Schengen area - as mooted by the new Member States of the EU - needs to be firmly rejected .
My reason for saying this is that the security of the public must take precedence over any sensitivities on the part of Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic , who , as we know , are bringing a great deal of pressure to bear in this regard , for the ability of the new Member States to actually secure the EU 's external border to the east is very much in doubt , not least by reason of the large number of illegal immigrants caught on the eastern border of Austria , the country from which I come .
Premature participation on the part of the new Member States would promote illegal immigration and criminal tourism on a massive scale and should therefore , I believe , be rejected .
in writing . Although the UK is not part of the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , I welcome this package of three reports for two reasons .
Firstly it is the very existence of SIS that has allowed internal borders in the Schengen area to be removed and this new system SIS II will allow new Member States to be linked up to the system and subsequently allow them to dismantle their internal borders and thus allow their citizens to gain the advantages of full free movement .
Secondly , I welcome this from a UK point of view because , while not taking part in the Regulation , I hope the UK will eventually have access to its information for purposes of security .
The adoption of the Coelho reports created the legal basis for the practical implementation of the second-generation Schengen Information System .
By means of its new electronic interception network on the new eastern borders , SIS II makes the EU a safer place .
Among the new characteristics of SIS II , its storage capacity has been enlarged to accommodate 27 Member States ; it facilitates the storage of biometric data and the European Arrest Warrant , the correlation of data and persons , together with , moreover , the improvement of data protection standards .
SIS II opens up new options for the police and the justice system when it comes to searching for wanted persons and also creates the conditions for the free movement of European citizens in a larger area of freedom , security and justice .
For all these reasons , I have voted in favour of the adoption of Mr Coelho 's reports .
I voted in favour of Mr Coelho 's reports because I feel that they are of paramount importance in protecting our citizens ' interests and security .
The SIS II system will enable the Schengen area to be enlarged to cover the new Member States as quickly as possible , by updating it , increasing its capacity and introducing the new possibilities offered by the most recent technological developments .
The bottom line , however , is that this system offers greater security in the management and control of personal data , without people 's fundamental rights being overlooked , and in so doing guarantees our citizens that effective measures are being taken to combat organised crime , illegal immigration and other crimes that undermine their security and interests .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Schengen Information System ( SIS ) is a police cooperation tool , the purpose of which is to centralise , and facilitate the exchange of , information relating to persons and vehicles , or other items , jointly sought by Member State police services .
Some 13 million items of information are at present stored in the current system .
It is proposed that we create a second-generation SIS - SIS II - which would be extended to the new Member States .
That is something to which we cannot subscribe , any more than we subscribed to Schengen I , which arranged for the free movement of persons by removing the Member States ' internal borders .
The problem is not one of having a super-computer capable of making an inventory of all the people or goods sought by the police .
It is one of ensuring that each nation state is able to establish an area in which security prevails .
Each day , the immigrants arriving in huge numbers on the coasts of Europe prove that what we need to protect are our borders and that it is because these are so porous that we are faced with illegal immigration and lack of security .
What this means is that all the computers in the world could collect as much personal data as is available without altering the fact that the main source of the problems of illegal immigration , lack of security and trafficking of all kinds is the lack of effective control of the European Union 's internal and external borders .
The purpose of this report is to broaden the characteristics of SIS beyond its original scope . It seeks to develop new features , extend access to new authorities , interlink alerts between those authorities and introduce new categories of data , such as the arrest warrant and biometric data , and the visa information system , a technical platform for sharing information .
This extension to the previous system brings additional risks to citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees , given that further elements are added to a database that is also shared by more bodies and accessible to more people , with no guarantee that these data will be able to remain confidential .
There are further worrying aspects in this proposal . For example , records may be ' kept longer if they are required for monitoring procedures which have already begun ' .
The question that thus arises is who defines what is ' necessary ' and the vague notion of ' monitoring procedures which have already begun ' .
Another all too vague area is that of sharing data with third countries , as provided for by the proposal .
The fundamental objective is to make SIS compatible with the new circumstances arising from enlargement and from the dangerous , unacceptable objectives of the current securitarian crusade in the EU .
The report , as formulated with the agreement of the political mouthpieces of capital ( Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , social democrats and liberals ) , adopts as acquis communautaire the creation of a gigantic mechanism for monitoring and keeping files on every European or foreign citizen inside or outside the borders of the ΕU .
The SIS II system abolishes every guarantee of protection for citizens ' personal data by granting the right for personal data , including biometric data such as photographs , fingerprints and distinguishing marks , to be recorded and for any person who , in the arbitrary and uncontrolled view of the forces of repression , is suspected of committing crimes or who , according to information from the secret services , is a threat to national security , to be put under surveillance .
These personal data may be kept for an indeterminate period of time by decision of the prosecuting authorities and will be accessible , in addition to the police and judicial authorities , to the secret services , Europol and Eurojust , who will have the right to pass them to third countries or organisations ( such as the CIA and so forth ) .
The famous area of freedom and security of the ΕU is now revealing its repellent and nightmarish form as an area in which basic human rights and fundamental freedoms are throttled , an area of uncontrolled action by the forces of repression to protect the power of Euro-unifying monopolies from the peoples ' resistance and the workers ' and grassroots movement .
in writing . ( SV ) The establishment of SIS II is seen by forces critical of the EU as a further step towards building a common EU police force and as part of the web that , in specialist area after specialist area , is forming an EU state .
The EU is in the process of being turned into the ultimate closed ' big brother ' state that , at the time of Sweden 's accession , many Swedes feared it would become .
This is happening with the blessing of politicians on both the left and the right who , with populist messages concerning , for example , external border controls and the fight against crime , are helping to construct a non-fictional Orwellian society .
The June List is in favour of cross-border police cooperation .
It is necessary to confront contemporary international crime , but this has been done successfully for decades by the international police body , Interpol .
To find the money for a further information system , and one that only applies within the European Union , would , then , be superfluous .
The June List is very sceptical about allowing the Member State bodies responsible for issuing registration certificates for vehicles to have access to very sensitive personal data .
That type of information should be handled by the individual nations .
All the Member States must be able to guarantee their citizens protection against unauthorised access to their personal data .
The June List is thus voting against all three reports on SIS II and access to the system .
in writing . The assassination of Anna Politkovskaya bring shame to Russia and I hope that at every level the Russian authorities will spare no effort to bring those responsible to justice .
in writing . The murder of Anna Politkovskaya should be condemned , as should all killings of journalists , human rights campaigners and others who seek to expose the truth .
" Freedom of Expression " is still met with death in too many places in our world .
Russia is still a country where freedom of expression is a myth .
The Russian authorities must bring the perpetrators of this crime to justice .
Greater pressure must be placed on the Russian authorities to guarantee the freedom of the media and human rights organisations on Russian soil .
in writing . I fully support this motion and abhor the fact that , although the EU guidelines for breast cancer screening were first drawn up in 1992 , mammograph screening is currently only offered nationwide in 11 Member States ( Belgium , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Finland , France , Hungary , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Sweden , Spain and the United Kingdom ) .
For me it is particularly unacceptable that in Ireland , which has recorded the highest economic growth rates in recent years , about 600 women are victims of breast cancer each year , and a sizeable number of those deaths could be prevented if periodic screening and diagnosis identified the problem early enough .
It is a disgrace that in Ireland we are still waiting for the rollout of a national breast screening programme .
However , we do expect that rollout to be completed in 2007 , although the cervical cancer screening programme won 't be completed until 2008 at the earliest - some 15 years later !
All Member States must introduce - urgently - nationwide breast screening .
The Commission should now work with the new Member States and accession countries to assist them in using the European Regional Development Fund and the pre-accession funds to create a comprehensive health care infrastructure .
in writing . Members of the UKIP-delegation regard EU initiatives of any kind as an undemocratic abuse of power and will not vote for them under any circumstances , even when they seem well-intentioned .
In this case , the EU is attempting to intrude its influence into the sphere of health service provision , which , like all spheres subject to EU intrusion , should remain under the control , which only nation-states can provide , of democratically-elected governments .
in writing . ( SV ) Are EU measures to combat breast cancer more effective than similar measures within the framework of established , internationally recognised organisations with broad expertise , such as the World Heath Organisation ( WHO ) ?
The June List 's answer to that question is ' no ' .
The European Parliament must not dictate to what extent the Member States are to implement significant measures such as breast-screening , information campaigns about breast cancer , research into breast cancer , the setting up of cancer registers and the establishment of centres designed to provide information about breast cancer .
It is better for urgent coordination and cross-border cooperation to take place within an organisation such as the WHO than within the EU .
I have thus voted against the current resolution .
in writing . Every year 275,000 women in the EU are diagnosed with breast cancer and the wide discrepancy in care and treatment standards they receive is simply unacceptable .
That is why I voted in favour of this resolution calling for Europe-wide standards for early detection and treatment of the disease .
Breast cancer patients often suffer discrimination in the workplace and I hope that , following Parliament 's overwhelming vote , the Commission will now draft a charter for the protection of breast cancer patients at the workplace .
I believe if this report was fully implemented we could improve the quality of life for surviving breast cancer patients and significantly reduce the estimated 88 000 deaths a year in the EU from Breast Cancer perhaps by as much as 35 % thus saving 30 000 women a year .
in writing . Breast cancer is the leading cause of death in women aged between 35 and 59 .
The earlier the diagnosis , the greater the chance of survival .
Most women with breast cancer do not want ' tea and sympathy ' but concerted action to improve treatment and tackle the causes .
One simple action which could be taken is to minimise the wait from tests to diagnosis .
From talking to women with breast cancer , it is the waiting which is the most worrying .
We must do all that we can to help and improve the treatment of women at that most concerning time .
Member States must do more to share best practice .
The work of Europa Donna is essential in helping all European women and I want to place on the record my support for this pan-European organisation .

( DE ) Mr President , although I have to say that delivering a statement of vote to an empty Chamber is a new experience for me , I would nonetheless like to state why I abstained from voting on the Muscardini report .
Following the demise of the quota system , which had been in place for ten years , there has been , since 2005 , a marked increase in the quantity of Chinese leather shoes exported to Europe , as we are all aware , and there is now , understandably , a hail of criticism raining down on the punitive customs duties from China and from those entrepreneurs who benefit from Chinese supplies .
It may well be the case - as the critics of the punitive customs duties suggest - that we will lose for good the European shoe industry , in which , for years , fewer and fewer workers have been taken and more and more workshops have moved to countries outside the EU , but , that notwithstanding , we surely cannot look on and do nothing while a whole industrial sector heads for destruction .
That being so , we should , during the two years during which the punitive tariffs are to apply , use the opportunity to seek out solutions to this major problem for European employment .
We are here to listen to you because an explanation of vote is an opportunity for a Member to explain something he cannot explain with a ' yes ' or a ' no ' .
Your point is something for the record and not really for the other Members .
It is understandable , but we are here to listen , as long as there are explanations of vote .
( DE ) Mr President , I am in complete agreement with you and am obliged for your attention .
in writing . - ( FR ) Globalisation has been imposed on the peoples of Europe with the assurance that , in the end , they will be the winners because it promotes exports and opens up our competitors ' markets just as much as it does ours .
It is quite clear , however , that this globalisation is far from being a ' win-win ' situation , and that so-called ' fortress Europe ' is full of holes , but that it allows the construction of real fortresses all over the world , particularly in the most promising markets .
The problem , as Mrs Muscardini 's report explains , is that the European Union 's responses to the improper trade protection practices of certain third countries towards the EU , which are nothing more than disguised , unfair protectionism , are weak , inappropriate or completely lacking .
Mrs Muscardini quite rightly emphasises the need to strengthen the EU 's trade defence , but the specific solutions put forward are not up to the challenges , so unshakeably dogmatic is people 's faith in the benefits of ultraliberal globalisation and in the virtues of multilateralism .
This system has now reached its limits : the WTO is no longer the solution , but the problem .
It is because the proposals do not reflect the accuracy of the analysis that we are going to abstain on this report .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that free trade is a good thing because it leads to an increase in prosperity for everyone involved .
It is worth noting that , until it joined the EU , Sweden was one of the countries in the world most sympathetic to free trade .
The EU at times conducts a very protectionist policy in order to protect those sectors that are not competitive in the international market .
This approach is exemplified by agricultural aid , whereby agricultural products are subsidised with the result that similar products from other countries - in many cases , developing countries - cannot be sold in the EU market .
An efficient world trade system is extremely important if free trade is one day to become a reality .
The Muscardini report is , however , redolent of protectionism , which is why I voted against it in today 's vote .
This report promotes the liberalisation of trade and the principle of reciprocity , and proposes the imposition of retaliatory measures .
Its entire ethos is one of a battle for market quotas in the name of competition , rather than one of cooperation , in which trade has a role to play in development but is not the be-all and end-all .
Anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures are tantamount to interference in the internal decisions of each country and threats that could be imposed by the WTO .
The losers are the developing. and the least developed , countries .
The report also defends the WTO and the dispute settlement mechanism , and seeks to speed up all of the most offensive ( anti-dumping ) and defensive ( safeguard ) trade defence mechanisms .
Speeding up the dispute mechanism and giving it more power will serve to beef up the influence of the major powers in the WTO , because they are the ones with the strength to impose rules .
The crux of the matter is that trade liberalisation runs counter to the idea of fair development .
Each Member State should have the right to decide its economic and social development model , to industrialise and to protect its industries .
This is an alienable , sovereign right , which calls into question the approach of promoting exports and free trade .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union is worried that the industrial powerhouses of China and India are taking protectionist measures against our exports by using trade defence instruments .
The United States , therefore , is no longer Europe 's only economic competitor - we are also up against Brazil , other countries in South America and Australia .
The WTO , which should be acting as a global regulator , is not only powerless but complicit .
Thus , the bubble of ultraliberal globalisation is about to burst .
Unlimited , unregulated speculation on goods , commodities and people has now reached its limit .
Having achieved spectacular economic growth , the emerging economies are now consolidating and protecting themselves , with a view to overtaking us one day if we do not react quickly enough .
During this time , the ultra-Europeans in Brussels have been recommending that we open up our borders more and more and keep helping the whole world blindly and with no checks and balances , forgetting our fellow citizens .
We must follow the example of the new world powers by establishing protection and Community preference in Europe and protection and national preference in France .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report , which analyses the use of trade defence measures against the EU by third countries and makes sensible recommendations on how the Community should react , especially in cases where those measures are a disguised form of protectionism aimed at unlawfully restricting access by EU products to foreign markets .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
I would now like , on behalf of the whole House to extend a warm welcome to our visitors in the official gallery , namely Mr Igor Dodon , Minister for Economic Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Moldova , together with a delegation from the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova .
( Applause )
The delegation from Moldova will be attending our sessions today and tomorrow and will be joining with this House 's delegation in a session of the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee .
I am delighted to see you there and hope that you will find our debates of interest .
Moldova ( Transnistria ) , Georgia ( South Ossetia ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on Moldova ( Transnistria ) and Georgia ( South Ossetia ) .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , recent developments in Moldova 's geographical and political situation have had an impact on the basic state of the Transnistrian conflict .
Ukraine 's initiative to resolve the conflict in Transnistria since the Orange Revolution , the involvement of the European Union and the United States in the peace negotiations , and the activities of the EU Border Assistance Mission ( EUBAM ) have strengthened Moldova 's unity .
Transnistria has reacted to this by holding a referendum on 17 September .
According to the Transnistrian authorities , the referendum resulted in overwhelming support by the people for independence and joining Russia .
The international community , including the European Union , has not recognised this or the earlier referenda in Transnistria .
This was expressed clearly in the declaration by the Presidency on behalf of the EU on 18 September , and also in the EU 's positions stated at the meeting of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in September and within the framework of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in July .
In its declaration , the EU condemned the referendum , regarding it as contrary to Moldova 's regional integration and its internationally recognised sovereignty .
Moreover , the EU openly cast doubt on the idea that the outcome of the Transnistrian referendum actually reflected the will of the people .
The EU has also discussed the referendum with Russia on several occasions .
Although the public statements made by Russia have given rise to other interpretations , Russia has assured the Union that it respects Moldova 's territorial integrity and has denied supporting the referendum .
The activities of the EUBAM are an example of how the Union can best lend real support to the conflict resolution process in Transnistria and bringing the control of the Moldovan-Ukrainian border closer to European standards in general .
Both Moldova and Ukraine have shown gratitude for the transfer of know-how to their border authorities .
It is essential for efforts to resolve the conflict that the EUBAM should have helped to steer the supervision of Transnistrian foreign trade in the direction of the Moldovan authorities .
This , too , contributes to Moldova 's national unity .
The decision by Ukraine to start implementing the Ukrainian-Moldovan customs cooperation protocol in March has done much to improve the EUBAM 's prospects .
It is the parties themselves which have the key roles in the Transnistrian peace process .
The European Union hopes that the parties to the peace process will return to the negotiating table .
The EU 's chances of making an effective contribution to the process are bolstered by the Union 's Special Representative , who participates in resolving the Transnistrian conflict in accordance with agreed EU policy objectives and in close coordination with the OSCE .
The European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan between the EU and Moldova is the instrument that will enable the Union to lend purposeful , long-term support to Moldova .
Ultimately , Moldova 's development towards a politically and economically stable state may be the key to resolving the Transnistrian conflict .
To achieve this , Moldova must , for example , improve its capacity for administration , extirpate corruption and foster a climate for investment .
Moldova must make itself attractive to both foreign investors and Transnistrian businesses .
The EU is committed to supporting Moldova in these efforts .
Now I will move on to the other topic of our debate .
It has to be said that the European Union is extremely concerned about the tense relations between Russia and Georgia .
This crisis is also affecting the situation in the separatist conflict zones in Georgia , South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
At the informal summit in Lahti last Friday , President Putin even warned that the situation might escalate into bloodshed .
He blamed Georgia for preparing for war .
In its conclusions of 17 October , the EU appealed to both Russia and Georgia to do their utmost not only to improve their bilateral relations but also to concentrate their efforts on finding a peaceful settlement to the conflicts .
The Union also urged the parties to comply fully with earlier agreements .
The current situation in South Ossetia is tense .
On 12 November a referendum will be held in the region for the purpose of consolidating the region 's independence .
As with the referendum on independence in Transnistria , the European Union does not recognise this referendum .
It may increase tension in the region further .
The European Union and the international community are aiding the resolution of the conflicts in Georgia in many ways .
Through its observer status , the European Commission has an important role to play in the Joint Control Commission , the conflict resolution mechanism for South Ossetia .
On many occasions Georgia has expressed the wish that the EU 's role should be further strengthened .
It also wants the JCC format to be changed by involving the EU and the United States of America , following the Transnistrian peace process 5 + 2 model .
More recently , Georgia has called for the peace negotiations to be continued bilaterally between Georgia and South Ossetia .
Additionally , Georgia is demanding that the Commonwealth of Independent States peacekeepers , who in practice are all Russians , be replaced with an international operation both in South Ossetia and Abkhazia , with special emphasis on police activity .
The view of the Georgian Parliament and Government is that these troops are not fulfilling their mandate and that their continued presence is questionable .
The EU is at present discussing internally the question of strengthening its role , but Georgia may have unrealistic expectations of the Union .
The EU is encouraging the Georgian leaders to show restraint .
Hasty decisions on the peace processes in South Ossetia and Abkhazia are best avoided , for they might be a risk to the presence of the United Nations and the OSCE in the region .
This , in turn , would create a vacuum in the regions .
Georgia should undertake not to resort to force .
The EU Member States and the Commission made a significant contribution to the Donor Conference on Economic Rehabilitation for South Ossetia , which was held in Brussels in June .
The conference was held on the basis of a needs assessment conducted by the OSCE .
A significant international programme on economic rehabilitation will be started in South Ossetia this autumn , using funds collected at the conference .
Russia has an important part to play in both South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Support from Russia is needed in order to achieve results in the peace processes .
The latest espionage scandal , however , has acutely exacerbated the already strained relations between Georgia and Russia .
The EU has on many occasions sent strong messages to the leaders of the two countries , most recently to President Putin at Lahti , on the importance of normalising relations , and it has also offered its services to help reopen their dialogue .
At the end of October , the EU will discuss internally the progress of its role in the resolution of the conflicts in Georgia .
Special Representative Semneby will have an important part to play in maintaining political dialogue between the EU and Georgia .
He may also be able to promote the re-establishment of contact between Georgia and Russia .
During its visit to Tbilisi on 2 October the EU Troika also stated that the EU is prepared to help Georgia resolve its conflicts by means of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
A joint ENP Action Plan between the EU and Georgia has just been drawn up , which the EU-Georgia Cooperation Council will adopt formally at its meeting in Brussels on 14 November .
The ENP Action Plan also contains a separate section on the resolution of the conflicts in Georgia .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , since our last debate there have been substantial developments , to which President-in-Office Lehtomäki has just referred .
I visited South Caucasus in early October as a member of the Troika , when the ENP Action Plans with all three countries were finalised .
They will now be officially signed and adopted in November .
I think that this is a basis for strong operational cooperation .
Before I talk about EU support , I think it is important that we also recall the impact of our relations with Russia .
During recent months , we have seen gas price increases for Moldova , import bans on Moldovan and Georgian wines and water , the de facto support given to Transnistria in the referendum , and the strong reaction to Georgia 's expulsion of Russian military officers .
These issues were addressed with President Putin in Lahti and I personally raised some of these issues with Foreign Minister Lavrov only a few days ago in Moscow .
The forthcoming Foreign Ministers ' Permanent Partnership Council on 3 November and the EU-Russia Summit in Helsinki on 24 November will enable further discussions to be held on these issues .
Let me also mention that the OSCE played a very helpful role in refusing to observe and recognise the referendum in Transnistria and also in returning the Russian officers from Georgia to Russia .
I shall now say a few words specifically about Moldova and Transnistria , and then on Georgia .
I would also like to highlight the very successful EU Border Assistance Mission , EUBAM , which has played a very important role in introducing a new customs regime between Moldova and Ukraine .
This programme was allocated EUR 20 million for two years and over 70 customs officials and border guards were seconded from our Member States .
All major Transnistrian companies have now registered in Chisinau and are working under this new regime .
Combating customs fraud will thus crucially cut the illicit revenue currently enjoyed by the Transnistrian leadership .
While we are happy that high-level talks between Russia and Moldova have recently resumed , we have been concerned about Russia 's support for the Transnistrian leadership .
In a recent statement , Minister Lavrov called for ' political recognition of the results ' of the referendum in Transnistria , which neither the European Union nor the OSCE recognised .
I think this could complicate the task of finding a solution to this conflict .
We are also worried about the insistence by Transnistria and Russia on the need for a so-called transit protocol between Moldova and Transnistria that would recognise the latter as an independent international economic actor .
This issue is the stumbling block in the settlement talks which resumed after a silence of more than six months , albeit not in the full 5 + 2 format , but with only mediators , with each of the two sides separately , in other words 5 + 1 .
This approach is unacceptable , as we have made clear to Russia on several occasions .
More than that , developments on the ground , with all major Transnistrian companies now working legally with Chisinau , show that such an approach is increasingly out of touch with reality .
We were also worried that the new Ukrainian Government would change track on this issue .
I was very pleased when Prime Minister Yanukovich assured me of the ongoing support of the Ukrainian Government .
We will continue to stress the importance of Ukrainian cooperation at the forthcoming summit in Helsinki in a few days ' time .
Some have pointed to the ongoing discussion on railway issues between Moldova and Ukraine as further proof that Ukraine might abandon its earlier position .
The facts , however , do not bear this out .
We therefore strongly encourage both sides to find a mutually advantageous solution to this situation as soon as possible .
Our presence on the ground through the EU Border Assistance Mission provides us with an excellent instrument for following the situation and giving advice and assistance to both sides .
Let me add that under the new ENP instrument , Moldova will see a substantial increase in our funding .
It will also receive a grant under the macro-financial assistance programme to help it address the shocks caused by increased energy prices and the Russian ban on Moldovan wines .
We are highly concerned about the crisis in relations between Georgia and Russia , especially the continuing tensions between the two countries .
We are particularly worried by the expulsion of large numbers of Georgians from Russian territory , which appears in direct contradiction to Russia 's commitments under the European Convention on Human Rights and to the 1975 Helsinki Final Act .
I also raised this issue recently with Mr Lavrov .
Georgia also bears its share of responsibility .
During our recent visit to Georgia in the Troika mission , I urged President Saakashvili to display moderation and encouraged him to rebuild trust .
Let me say a final word on South Ossetia .
I think it is disappointing that the recent meeting of the Joint Control Commission for South Ossetia was inconclusive .
We understand Georgia 's wish to renew and review the Joint Control Commission 's composition , but existing peace mechanisms should be fully utilised until new ones are in place and the recent Needs Assessment Study and the June 2006 international donors ' conference show that there is scope for a constructive dialogue .
We are pleased that this rehabilitation programme is continuing despite the crisis .
We have made a significant financial contribution to assist a peaceful settlement , including a EUR 9.5 million economic rehabilitation programme in South Ossetia .
Funds for rehabilitation have also been earmarked under the new EC financial assistance programme for the period from 2007 to 2010 .
I think the European Union as a whole has a very important role in supporting any peace settlement .
But the most immediate need is to get relations between Russia and Georgia back on a normal track , on a diplomatic track .
We will certainly continue our efforts to achieve that objective .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , tomorrow we shall be voting on the resolution on the Moldovan region of Transnistria .
We know that Moldova is the poorest country in Europe .
In September a so-called ' referendum ' took place in the Moldovan region of Transnistria , aiming at the region 's possible unification with the Russian Federation .
This referendum and its outcome were not accepted by the international community and the conflict between the separatist authority of Transnistria and the central government of Moldova has largely contributed to the instability of the whole country and its economic and social development .
Earlier this year we also witnessed the failure of negotiations concerning the status of Transnistria in the 5 + 2 format as the Transnistrian authorities withdrew from these negotiations .
We are also aware of the fact that the so-called Russian peacekeepers are still in Transnistria .
In this context , we , the European Parliament , should denounce the so-called referendum in the Transnistrian region , which contradicts the internationally recognised sovereignty and territorial integrity of Moldova and can be seen as provocation , which increases the existing tensions and jeopardises the chances for a peaceful settlement of the problem .
We should also call on Russia to discontinue its support for the Transnistrian regime , which threatens Moldova 's territorial integrity , and to fulfil the OSCE Summit decision of 1999 to withdraw its troops and arms from the territory of Moldova .
We especially regret the lack of significant progress in the EU talks on visa facilitation and the readmission agreement with Moldova .
The Council and the Commission should speed up the procedure , leading to the conclusion of a visa facilitation agreement with Moldova and ensure its implementation , as the current situation is unfair and discriminatory when Transnistrian citizens holding Russian passports are benefiting from the possibility to travel to the EU more easily than Moldovans .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we are faced with a number of ongoing , frozen conflicts in the common neighbourhood which the European Union shares with Russia .
Unfortunately , it is apparent to us that , years on , we are nowhere nearer resolving them , despite the EU 's commitment to a negotiated political solution in a multilateral framework .
We view recent developments in that region with great concern , since a possible escalation cannot be ruled out .
On 17 September , there was a referendum in Transnistria on separation from Moldova , while , last week , the tension between Georgia and Russia surrounding the status of South-Ossetia escalated into a diplomatic crisis of the first order .
Both events are incompatible with the commitment to finding a political solution to these conflicts within the framework of the OSCE .
I think that the EU should hold firm to a plan of negotiations in a multilateral framework whereby the territorial integrity of Moldova and Georgia should be taken as read .
We emphatically condemn unilateral steps , such as organising a referendum or so-called referendum , because we have not seen any evidence of a democratic plebiscite in a free and open environment .
The use of threatening political rhetoric back and forth , or the unilateral announcement of sanctions are just as counterproductive .
They do not bring us any closer to a solution and counteract the effort which the international community is making to encourage the parties to sing from the same hymn sheet .
It has to be clear to all players that a sustainable solution can only be based on a political dialogue , with respect for democracy in the countries and regions involved .
For the European Union , it is a necessary investment to give this process a shot in the arm .
The European Union cannot solve these conflicts on its own .
As long as we decide in favour of multilateral strategy , we can reasonably expect the other parties involved to move within these boundaries and to adhere to previous agreements , such as in Istanbul in 1999 .
Moreover , we can expect Russia to exercise a certain degree of caution , since it plays a crucial role in each of these conflicts .
The active support Russia is giving the regime in Transnistria and the referenda , as well as the support to the separatist movement in South-Ossetia and Abkhazia do not , unfortunately , fall within this category .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) As Deputy Head of the Moldova Delegation , I keep a close eye on developments in this part of the world .
The unconstitutional and internationally unrecognised referendum on Transnistrian independence which was recently held in that province was a serious step backwards for all parties concerned .
On 10 October , Transnistria rejected a compromise plan put forward by the OSCE , under the leadership of the Belgian Foreign Minister , Karel de Gucht .
The proposed plan envisaged granting the whole of Transnistria a relatively independent or semi-autonomous status within a Moldovan Federation .
I personally regret the rejection of this compromise because an opportunity to create peace and stability throughout the whole of this unstable region has been lost .
Instead , the deadlock between Transnistria and Moldova will continue to threaten both political and economic stability in this part of Europe .
With the accession of Romania to the European Union in 2007 , the borders of the European Union will extend as far as Moldova , so it is in our vital interests to invest the necessary time , energy and commitment in future negotiations .
Finally , I would like to call on the Council and the Commission to bring their political clout to bear on fresh negotiations .
Likewise , I call on Tiraspol to sit back down at the negotiating table and put an end to its delaying tactics .
At the same time , I also call on Moscow to espouse more progressive policies in settling this dispute , because a more constructive approach on its part would demonstrate that Russia is serious about establishing a responsible and reliable partnership with the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , not long ago we were applauding the peaceful revolution in Georgia and encouraging its young leaders to establish true democracy in their country .
Today , as we know , Georgia is experiencing difficulties in resolving conflicts with its separatist regions , and the escalating provocations from both sides are certainly not helping to resolve those conflicts peacefully .
What is worse , armed intervention could embroil the entire Caucasus , which is something of which we are all conscious .
That is why we must strongly urge the Georgian authorities to take a conciliatory approach and to constructively relaunch the peace process in South Ossetia .
However , there are extenuating circumstances in Georgia : its neighbour , Russia , is not playing the conciliation game .
For example , when , in Lahti last week , he compared South Ossetia to Kosovo , Mr Putin was adding fuel to the flames in the Caucasus , at the very time when he was expected to re-establish trust by normalising relations with his neighbours in Georgia .
Whatever Russia may say , it certainly is involved in this conflict .
Did it not issue Russian passports to the Georgian population of South Ossetia ?
How valid can a referendum be if 80 % of the participants were Russian citizens ?
How neutral can we expect the peace-keeping forces in South Ossetia to be when they are predominantly Russian ?
I will not even mention the unilateral Russian embargo or the ongoing deportations of Georgians in Russia , which are evidence of a desire to destabilise Georgia .
So , then , the neighbourhood policy and greater cooperation with Russia are , of course , tools for us , but you will forgive me if I cannot share the Council 's position on the replacement of the peace-keeping forces .
I think , ladies and gentlemen , that we really do need to ask ourselves how the neutrality and impartiality of these forces can be guaranteed .
We should perhaps - or should I say , definitely - be prepared to make a contribution , should it prove necessary , to the replacement of the peace-keeping forces .
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , what is required above all else , when the security and stability of a country or region are at issue , is that all the parties concerned , with their various interests , should do nothing that might make the situation worse , and if the Moldovan constitution makes no provision for referendums , it goes without saying that any referendum that actually is carried out cannot be recognised .
That much is abundantly clear .
Since Transnistria has always been a part of the Republic of Moldova , it follows that it is absolutely justified to demand of our Russian partners - with whom relations are far from poor - that their troops should be withdrawn from the region .
If we do not want matters to get worse , it naturally follows that we must promote trade - and with trade , change - rather than imposing bans on exports or imports .
The Commission and the European Union have taken the line that we insist on the 5 + 2 negotiations being continued in full , or , indeed , on their resumption , and from this line we must not deviate .
Fair partnership - and I am talking here about ours with Russia - also involves being able to tell one 's partner , to their face , with what one is happy and with what one is not .
It may well be that , in the past , thinking of certain of the European Union 's own interests , we did not always do that with the necessary firmness .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union we believe in , the European Union of our dreams , the European Union the citizens of Europe want must surely be a Union that defends certain specific values , and does so on the international stage .
As a matter of principle , therefore , we must condemn Russia 's behaviour towards Georgia in recent weeks .
I would like to call on all competent European Union bodies to make statements , take action in this matter and to defend Georgia 's independence .
I also call on these bodies to stand up for the fundamental principles of international law , such as independence and non-interference in each other 's affairs .
We are aware that Russia is inciting separatism in Georgia , but the events of the last two weeks are particularly worrying , as we have noted a tremendous increase in chauvinistic , nationalistic and anti-Georgian statement in Russia .
In the last few days , we have learnt that works by Georgian artists exhibited in Moscow are being damaged .
The hysterical tirades directed by the Moscow media against Georgians living in Russia mean that they do not feel safe on the territory of the Russian Federation .
I call on the European Union , and on this House , to show unequivocal support for an independent , self-governing Georgia , which has every right to feel safe in a united Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak on behalf of the new Italian Socialist Party .
The tensions in the southern Caucasus serve only to strengthen the argument for the urgent opening of multilateral negotiations in order to find a solution to the issue of the territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
The conciliatory message that the European Union has recently sent to the Russian Federation regarding stepping up relations on various levels is not , and must not be , separate from an invitation to dialogue and to implementing all possible measures to try to resolve the worst crisis of the post-Soviet era without causing casualties .
Mr Putin 's statements on the alleged preparation of a Georgian military intervention , as well as the embargo on agricultural products from Georgia and Moldova and the interruption of key services , from transport to banking , cannot fail to affect the Georgian people , whether those who have emigrated to Russia , of whom a large proportion has been undeservedly and forcibly repatriated over the last few days , or those who live in Georgian territory and are often economically dependent on family members who have emigrated .
Europe must not confine itself to playing the role of arbiter in this matter .
Mr President , in 1996 I was a member of the Lithuanian delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe when Russia made a solemn commitment to withdraw its troops from Moldova in 1997 .
Therefore , 2007 offers us an opportunity to celebrate the ten-year anniversary of that unfulfilled European commitment by Russia - one of many , of course .
That could be a good time to write and publish a big book of Russia 's unfulfilled international commitments .
That is my first proposal to this House as it strives to obtain new commitments .
Russia 's policies in partitioning its smaller neighbours have caused loss and suffering to the people and several nations are still asking us to help .
Can we continue to utter empty mantras in the style of the United Nations , while washing our hands of the hordes of refugees expelled from Abkhazia by invading Russians ?
It is worth noting here the small note in Security Council Resolution No 1666 of 31 March 2006 , on the eventual changes in the mandate of the CIS peacekeeping force in Georgia .
In reality , the force is Russian and has little to do with peacekeeping , but is helping in the annexation of a population given en masse the passports of one foreign country before the land is subsequently annexed .
If you really want peace in that part of Europe , we need real , possibly European , peacekeepers in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The alternative should be to rename these current peacekeepers ' criminality keepers ' .
That is my second proposal to Parliament : to make a choice between real peacekeepers and official ' criminality keepers ' .
( DE ) Mr President , there are people in Russia - officials in particular - who , if they are listening to us , will get the idea that all we in this House want to do this week is bait the Russian bear .
That is not what we want to do , but we do want to make it quite clear to Russia that we should try to resolve the problems that present themselves to us , ranging from energy to the neighbourhood we share , that we should do this together , and that Russia should confirm its commitment to multilateralism .
When criticising America , we are often united when it comes to the unilateralism of that country 's actions , but , when a country takes action in its own backyard , it needs to do so multilaterally , and Russia has recently opted for a different approach , and that is absolutely unacceptable .
Firstly , we do , of course , need help from the countries involved .
As we said the last time we visited it , we would like to see Georgia sign the commitment to non-violence .
It is surely not enough to say ' we want to be able to defend ourselves ' , for that , of course , is something everyone is entitled to do .
Secondly , we would like to see a definite offer made as regards the reintegration into Georgian society of the people of South Ossetia , and of Abkhazia too , for , while we are committed to the concept of a single , undivided Georgia , we do believe that that has to involve specific things being offered to these sections of its population .
Even so , the main responsibility lies , just as it did before , with Russia .
I find it incomprehensible how Russia has still not yet grasped that you do not make friends by supporting small separatist movements , some of which have been infiltrated by criminals , but rather by helping your neighbours to maintain their stability , and that is something that Georgia would surely be equally willing to do .
What we absolutely must reject , though , is the expulsion of Georgians from Russia ; Arguing along the lines of ' yes , but they 're illegals ' has a cynical ring to it .
Expelling the Georgians - especially at a time like this , considering the things that have happened - is every bit as inopportune in terms of timing as the energy price rises in Ukraine before the elections and in Belarus after them .
It is absolutely indefensible and unacceptable .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , South Ossetia is one of those extremely vexing ' frozen ' conflicts , and I remember being occupied with it myself when I , Madam President-in-Office , was sitting exactly where you are sitting now , fully five years ago .
But that frozen conflict is now in danger of becoming a hot conflict .
There is an urgent need to calm things down , and my group backs the appeal to both Russia and Georgia to soften their language and their actions .
What has been done to Georgian citizens is wholly unacceptable , as is , of course , Russia 's decision to cut all communications with Georgia .

That President Putin has warned of the danger of bloodshed in the presence of Mr Vanhanen , President-in-Office of the Council , and Mr Barroso , President of the Commission , must have been deeply embarrassing and is , in any case , totally unacceptable ; so is the fact that Russia continues to issue passports to South Ossetians .
That Georgia has threatened to resort to violence is also unacceptable .
If the EU is serious about this matter , then it should be prepared to replace the Russian peacekeepers if that becomes necessary .
This is no light commitment and it should be weighed up very seriously .
But first let us use all the multilateral and European peace mechanisms that are in place .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , speaking as a member of this House 's EU / Moldova group , I would like to return to that problem and make it very plain that this conflict is not about minorities .
The social system in the Republic of Moldova is open both politically and socially , and characterised by co-existence and tolerance .
If conflicts with minorities are advanced as an explanation , then that is done only with the intention of legitimising support for a Stalinist regime , something that is - and I want to impress this on the Russian Government and on President Putin - both politically problematic and highly dubious .
The conflict over Transnistria is a conflict between Russia and the EU .
I do not believe that peace will return to the region unless the troops are withdrawn , and so the Commission and the Council must exert much more pressure on the Russian Government to get it to do precisely that .
The conflict in Moldova must not be sacrificed for the sake of our dealings with Russia over energy .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation in South Ossetia and Transdnistria makes it abundantly clear that Russia has not stopped thinking in terms of spheres of influence .
Sixteen years have gone by , but Russia still has not become au fait with the need to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent countries along its borders .
It resorts to trickery , spying , energy blackmail and to handing out Russian passports , in order to weaken Georgia and Moldova , its independent neighbours , and deprive them of parts of their territory .
Contrary to our expectations , Russia is not playing a stabilising role in the region .
The opposite is actually the case .
The more political power Russia wields , the more conflicts , tension and even wars there are .
Does all this amount to a policy that is acceptable to the European Union ?
Is it possible to develop an unconditional strategic partnership with a country that stoops to these methods ?
I trust that this is not the case , and therefore urge the House to support the joint resolution , together with the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .

( DE ) Mr President , the Republic of Moldova would , in nine and a half weeks ' time , be becoming a Member State of the European Union , had it not been for the Hitler-Stalin Pact under which it was separated from Romania , and that shows just how close to us this whole business is .
Georgia - which is a member of the Council of Europe - fell victim to Russian or Soviet colonialism on two occasions , the first time under the Tsars , and the second in the 1920s , when Soviet troops smothered the nations of the Caucasus at birth .
What we have today is a post-colonial situation in which Russia is unwilling to make restitution for what it did to the region in the days when it was a colonial power or when it was the totalitarian Soviet Union , and is instead engaged in a post-colonial policy of dominating nations and extorting their raw materials from them , which involves it in either exploiting conflicts between nationalities or , to some extent , artificially creating them .


It is for that reason that there is only one response ; as Mr Landsbergis said , we have to be prepared to have a structured , peace-keeping presence - be it international or European - wherever in the world conflict arises , whether in Transnistria or Abkhazia , South Ossetia or Chechnya , so that the situation can be brought under international control once and for all .
If Russia has an interest in allowing transparency to prevail , then that is the right solution , but that is not what Russia wants .
What Russia wants , now as in the past , is for its policy of dominance to be carried on in the shadows , and that is why I , too , find it regrettable that this report is being held after the summit rather than having been held before it , as we had wanted .
What Mr Putin wanted was for the spotlight to be upon him as he nurtured illusions , and , now , in the shadow of the summit , we are sweeping up the pieces .
All I can do is to appeal to the Council and the Commission to at length get round to talking about Russian policy in an unambiguous , frank , and rational way with explicit reference to human rights .
Let no bones be made about the fact that that sort of forthright talk is the only language Russia understands .
We have here not only enough material for a white paper on Russia 's broken promises , as Mr Landsbergis said , but also enough for one on the West 's self-deception .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Transnistria question is largely a question of the European Union 's relations with Russia .
The problem is in stalemate , but it is in Russia 's power to solve it , but if it is to do so , it must implement the promise it made at the OSCE Istanbul summit in 1999 ; that is , to withdraw its troops from Moldovan territory .
This is something it should have done as long ago as 2002 .
Good friends must be bold and forthright .
In Russia such friends are valued .
We here have been fearful and have beaten around the bush .
Thus , as of 1 January we will acquire a serious source of instability right beside the European Union .
I would like to reiterate three facts about Transnistria .
First of all , the Transnistrian regime does not seek independence , but rather union with Russia , which lies 800 km away .
The region has belonged to Moldova and Ukraine , but never to Russia .
Secondly , the inhabitants of Transnistria are not a uniform ethnic group .
Most of them are Moldovans , making up 40 percent of the population , with Ukrainians at nearly 28 percent , and the Russian ethnic group occupying third place .
Third , the inhabitants of Transnistria would certainly enjoy more democracy and freedom under the government in Chisinau than they do at present .
Chisinau has never persecuted the non-Moldovan population of Transnistria .
Russia will take no action without pressure from us .
We should not be afraid of exerting pressure . And our relations with Russia should be a two-way street that is mutually beneficial for both sides .
We may need Russian energy , but Russia needs favours from us too , not to mention our European market .
It is time to remind Russia of what we have given , and to demand favours in return .
Finally , the 5 + 2 negotiations must continue at all costs .
We have a good resolution , so let us adopt it .
Mr President , in my opinion , among all the reasonable political considerations referred to in the current text , there is one significant omission : the real-life situations of the individuals living in the areas concerned .
Those condemning the issue of Russian passports for the residents of these regions would do well to remind themselves of the circumstances under which these people found themselves as citizens or non-citizens of newly independent states formed from the former Soviet republics .
These are republics whose borders , in the case of the Caucasus , were arbitrarily drawn by Stalin , or , in the case of Transnistria , were changed under the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact .
After the dissolution of the federal state , the USSR , no sequential transition period was set out during which people could have resolved issues such as family reunification , citizenship , and so on .
These people mostly need Russian passports to travel to Russia , not to the EU , as was claimed .
. - ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , Russia 's desire to influence the fate of those of its neighbouring states that have turned to the Western model of development , is apparent both in its intervention in Ukraine 's internal affairs and in the case of Moldova and Georgia .
The European Union has an interest in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict between Russia and Georgia .
To that end , firstly , since CIS peace-keeping forces in South Ossetia are not able to carry out their task , they should be replaced by international peace-keepers .
Secondly , Russia ought to refrain from military exercises in the close vicinity of Georgia 's territory .
Thirdly , there must be an immediate end to violations of the rights of Georgia 's citizens , which are beginning to verge on ethnic cleansing , and also the blockade on Georgian goods .
Fourthly , respecting the integrity of Georgia 's territory , the lawfulness of the issue of Russian passports in Abkhazia and South Ossetia should be reviewed , in order to prevent a repetition of the Transnistria scenario .
Finally , both states should refrain from activities and statements which might foster any worsening of relations .
Mr President , as far as the background to this debate is concerned , we need a very strong EU commitment in the form of peacekeeping forces to try to prevent the spread of those dangerous conflicts .
Let us be clear : these quasi-breakaway regions , or frozen conflicts , are being systematically used as leverage by the Russian Government to retain its influence over the post-Soviet neighbourhood .
Without the continued presence of Russian troops - as has been stated by my colleague , Mrs Mikko - the conflicts we now have to deal with would probably have disappeared .
Part of the problem seems to be fear of the possible spreading of ' Rose revolutions ' and fear of genuine democratic change in Russia itself , which is long overdue .
We therefore need to react to acts by the Russian Government which defy all norms of international behaviour , such as cutting off communications , economic blockades and launching waves of xenophobia in Russia itself .
The EU of 25 should declare such acts absolutely unacceptable , especially by the country currently holding the Presidency of the Council of Europe .
In the European Parliament 's resolution we call on Russia finally to accept the new realities that have emerged after the end of the Cold War and to stop thinking and operating in terms of exclusive zones of influence .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to speak about Moldova .
Moldova is a country whose problems are due to historical factors , its geopolitical position and its current situation , which has arisen as a result of the balance of power within the country as well as external influences .
It should be clearly understood that the problems relating to Moldova 's security in its broadest sense , and also to its development , cannot be resolved by Moldova 's efforts alone .
A joint effort is needed , involving not only Moldova 's neighbours , such as Ukraine and Romania , but also vital aid from the European Union and the United States .
Of course , Russian goodwill is essential , too .
Clearly , the imposition of an embargo on the import of agricultural produce and the problems concerning the energy supply are clearly related to Moldova 's positive stance with respect to integration with the European Union .
Therefore , we cannot abandon Moldova .
Morally , it is entitled to our aid and we can certainly afford to provide it .
( PL ) Mr President , I fully support the draft resolution drawn up by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group concerning Transdnistria , which is part of Moldova .
I wish to express my admiration for the Georgian nation , which desires to independently decide the direction of its own foreign policy .
In this matter , it should and must rely on the solidarity of the Member States of the European Union .
The Georgian authorities are rightly demanding that the rights of their small nation be respected by the large Russian nation .
However , it would be good , and here I differ somewhat from the previous speakers , if these authorities also turned their attention to upholding the rights of minorities within their own country .
I have in mind religious minorities , for example .
Allow me to refer to the recent attacks on Catholics in Tiblisi .
There is no other way to describe the assault by 60 individuals on a brand new church built to serve the Assyrian , that is to say , the Chaldean Catholic community .
This assault was the work of members of the Orthodox Church , who mostly identify with Russian culture .
In another area of Tiblisi , members of the Orthodox Church are putting pressure on the authorities to prevent the opening of a Catholic church .
Sadly , there have been many instances of religious intolerance in Georgia in recent years .
The victims have included not only Catholics but also Baptists , Pentecostalists , and Jehovah 's Witnesses .
I trust the Georgian authorities will take strong action against these acts of violence that are damaging Georgia 's reputation on the international scene .
I am sure that most political groups in this House will be of a similar opinion .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , firstly may I say thank you for this wide-ranging debate .
We have been talking in this Chamber today since the morning on relations between the European Union and Russia .
The sheer scope of these relations is reflected in the fact that now even at this point in the proceedings it is EU-Russia relations that have figured prominently in Members ' speeches .
Relations between the European Union and Russia have a valuable feature : these days we are able to discuss everything round the table , including the difficult areas and the commitments made by Russia .
The next excellent opportunity for such discussions is in November , when the Permanent Partnership Council meeting of EU and Russian Foreign Ministers is held , and after that at the end of November at the EU-Russia Summit .
The summit held between the EU and Ukraine the day after tomorrow in Helsinki will undoubtedly feature talks on these issues .
As I said in my opening speech , Union action on Moldova and Transnistria is specifically intended to aid and firm up Moldovan unity .
In this the European Neighbourhood Policy is a crucial instrument .
As part of this cooperation we in the Council are expecting a Commission proposal to begin talks on visa flexibility before the end of this year .
Relations between Georgia and Russia were last discussed yesterday on the COPS Committee with reference to the proposals by the Special Representative to find new means of supporting a peaceful solution to this difficult situation in the best possible way .
Fortunately , there are encouraging signs that dialogue between Georgia and Russia is to get under way , as the countries ' Foreign Ministers intend to meet in Moscow at the beginning of November .
That is a very positive start to what will hopefully be the resumption of talks .
The basic principle that the European Union will endeavour to promote a peaceful solution to the crisis between Georgia and Russia and can do so in many ways applies to this crisis in just the same way as it does to many other crises around the world .
Unless the parties themselves actually commit to a peaceful solution , however , they cannot be forced to do so from the outside .
Mr President , that was a very interesting discussion on both subjects .
I thank Members for their comments , which we shall , of course , take into account as much as we can .
I think Parliament could enhance its efforts and thus complete and complement what we are doing concerning Moldova , with its counterparts in the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee .
We need to continue to encourage Moldova to press on with key reforms on democracy , the rule of law and human rights and to improve the business climate .
We must help Moldova to become more attractive for the population , even in Transnistria .
With regard to the question of macro-financial assistance , we have just prepared a package of EUR 45 million that will be allocated to Moldova , because it is highly important that we give them special assistance .
Let me say that since 1991 the whole assistance programme has amounted to some EUR 230 million .
Our annual assistance budget has increased over the last few years and will increase further under the ENPI .
On visa facilitation for Moldova , we are just working towards the proposals for negotiating directives and also for the readmission agreements .
We have encouraged the Member States to set up a joint visa application centre in Chisinau .
Once established , this should be an effective facilitation mechanism for Moldovan citizens , who would then no longer need to travel to neighbouring countries to apply for visas .
Let me also say that if there is a possibility of coming up with a mandate at the end of this year , then the visa fee would stay at EUR 35 and not go up to EUR 60 , which would be very important for the very poor people of Moldova .
On Georgia , we had a lengthy discussion with Foreign Minister Lavrov .
The most important thing is that both sides tone down their public rhetoric as a first step and then both sides try to come up with diplomatic dialogues -again , back to normal .
The Georgian leadership must avoid any actions that could heighten tension .
That is what we told Mr Saakashvili .
With the help of our special representatives and , of course , all of us , we hope that the situation will return to normal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 .
Export of toxic waste to Africa - Use of criminal law to protect the environment ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the
statement by the Council and the Commission on the export of toxic waste to Africa ,
oral question to the Council by Mr Florenz on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on environmental protection : combating crime , criminal offences and penalties B6-0438 / 2006 ) and
oral question to the Commission by Mr Florenz on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on environmental protection : combating crime , criminal offences and penalties B6-0439 / 2006 )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is very concerned about the environmental disaster that came to light some time ago in the Ivory Coast in connection with the vessel Probo Koala .
As the country to hold the Presidency of the Council , Finland believes that it is very important that this regrettable event be looked into thoroughly .
Once again the world is made aware of the serious threats posed by moving waste to the developing countries .
This is a problem that has to be addressed through decisive action .
The European Union has stated that it is prepared , in collaboration with the United Nations , to help protect human health and the environment wherever the effects of the incident are particularly serious .
Recent events in West Africa have also been a reminder to us of how important it is to implement agreements on transboundary movements of waste and the supervision of waste management effectively .
These are essentially the Basel Convention and the amendment to it tabled in 1995 , the Marpol Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , and local maritime conservation agreements .
The amendment to the Basel Convention banned the export of hazardous wastes from EU and OECD countries , as well as Liechtenstein , to other countries .
It is obviously just as important to monitor compliance with these agreements .
The Eighth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movement and Management of Hazardous Wastes is to be held at the end of November in Nairobi .
The European Union 's position at this conference is at present being drafted by the Council in respect of all the issues on the agenda . These include illegal movements of waste , the unloading of ships , funding the agreement , synergies between the waste and chemicals clusters and monitoring the strategic plan to implement the Convention .
Part of this preparation work took the form of a wide-ranging debate by the Environment Council on 23 October , that is to say the day before last , at the end of which the Chairman gave his conclusions on the EU 's preparations for the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention .
These take the view that it is important to intervene decisively and effectively in illegal transboundary movements of hazardous wastes .
It is important that , in addition to the countries that have now ratified the amendment regarding the export ban on hazardous waste , as many other countries as possible do likewise , so that it might enter into force worldwide as soon as possible .
As you know , the ban is already in force in all the EU Member States , because it was implemented in its entirety with the Regulation on movement of waste .
Almost all the EU countries have also ratified the amendment .
The reformed EU Regulation on the movement of waste , which comes into force next July , also contains provisions which may help improve cooperation on the implementation of the Regulation at both Member State and EU level .
A directive has also been issued on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues , compliance with which may also be relevant to the Probo Koala case .
In a debate the day before last , Ministers of the Environment also highlighted the fact that effective implementation of existing legislation is a primary aim of the EU .
Crucial to the prevention of illegal movements of waste is increased harmonisation of laws on the environment and navigation , especially at international level , and enhanced cooperation between authorities .
What is most important is that all types of waste are treated in a way that is environmentally acceptable , regardless of where this takes place .
This must be the priority goal too when vessels are scrapped .
The Chairman 's conclusions also stressed that developing countries need external help in their endeavours to implement the Basel Convention and manage waste in a way that is environmentally acceptable .
Developing countries also need to make waste management part of their strategies for reducing poverty and for sustainable development .
At the Environment Council meeting the Presidency also met a delegation from the Ivory Coast , which gave an update on the situation .
The magnitude of the catastrophe is staggering : in addition to the loss of many human lives , there is a huge number of urgent health problems .
The disaster also has major implications for the ecology , livelihoods , human habitation and community action .
At present , the key areas of importance are the cleaning up of polluted areas and sewage networks and attending to the damage caused to people and businesses .
In the Ivory Coast an international and national report are being compiled on what took place , including a criminal investigation .
Moreover , in certain countries , such as the Netherlands and Estonia , a criminal investigation has been started with a view to taking a thorough look at the circumstances connected with the Probo Koala case .
I will now move on to deal with the oral question put by Karl-Heinz Florenz , Chairman of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The Member States of the European Union think it important that laws and cooperation should be developed within the EU framework to prevent and investigate environmental crimes and enforce penal responsibility .
Environmental crimes are by nature international , because the effects of illegal emissions extend a long way across national frontiers .
As the honourable Member says in his question , the Court of Justice of the European Communities on 13 September 2005 , however , overturned the Council Framework Decision of 27 January 2003 on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
On 25 November 2005 the Commission submitted a communication to the European Parliament and to the Council on the consequences of the judgment passed by the Court of Justice .
The Court 's judgment and the Commission 's communication were discussed at the informal meeting of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs held in Vienna in January 2006 and they were examined by the Council in Brussels on 21 February this year .
In these discussions the Commission said it wanted to think more about how to proceed with regard to the framework decisions taken earlier by the Council , decisions that might need re-examining in the light of the decision by the Court of Justice .
This line of reasoning would also apply to the Framework Decision that was overturned by the Court already referred to .
That being the case , the Council is awaiting a reaction from the Commission .
It may deliver an amended version of the proposal it put forward in 2001 and of the proposal for a directive it amended in 2002 or it may put forward an entirely new proposal
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , the recent incident of the dumping of toxic waste in Côte d 'Ivoire has drastic consequences .
At least 10 people died and thousands were poisoned and needed hospital treatment .
Although the actual circumstances under which this repulsive environmental crime was committed have not yet been clarified , there is now an even more urgent need for the strict application of the ban on exports of dangerous waste to Africa .
The Commission , in cooperation with the Member States , the United Nations and the authorities in Côte d 'Ivoire , is seeking in various ways for the damage caused to be restored and for suitable action to be taken to combat the illegal activities which may have taken place .
When the incident occurred , representatives of the Commission - and special teams from the Member States - visited the scene in order to assist the victims and help to protect the natural environment .
The Commission is closely monitoring developments in Côte d 'Ivoire and is in constant contact with the country 's authorities .
On Monday I and the Presidency met the delegation from Côte d 'Ivoire , which included three ministers .
The institutions and the Member States of the European Union need to examine every possible means of supporting the victims in Côte d 'Ivoire and of doing the best they can to eliminate the pollution .
Criminal investigations are being carried out at the moment in various Member States , with which we are in contact .
I personally , following the return of the Probo Koala to the European Union , went to the port of Paldiski in Estonia on 28 September in order to support these investigations and obtain the latest information .
If we look beyond the incident in Côte d 'Ivoire , we shall see that there is a serious vacuum in compliance by the Member States with the European Union regulation on movements of waste .
This regulation contains clear rules banning exports of dangerous waste to developing countries .
These rules are to become even stricter and , as of July next year , the Member States will be obliged to conduct on-site controls and inspections and to cooperate in the event of illegal movements of waste .
However , the mere fact that rules exist does not mean a thing if they are not also correctly applied in practice .
The legal loopholes must be plugged with strict complementary measures pertaining to its proper application .
Environmental crime is one of the most serious problems which the Community is called upon to combat .
The environmental damage which may be caused is huge .
It is often part of international organised crime , which makes it difficult but imperative to stamp out .
Provision for effective sanctions , including criminal sanctions , is necessary for the proper application of Community environmental legislation .
That is precisely why urgent action is needed at Community level .
In 2001 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a directive on environmental protection through penal law .
The objective of this proposal was , on the one hand , the introduction throughout the Community of a minimum number of criminal environmental offences and , on the other hand , the punishment of such infringements with effective criminal sanctions in all the Member States .
It is a sad fact that the Council did not adopt the Commission proposal . The proposal was based on Article 175 of the Treaty and was to have been approved under the codecision procedure .
The Council did not agree with the legal basis and decided to issue a framework decision on the basis of the third pillar , rather than the directive we had proposed .
In the opinion of the European Commission , this choice of means was not legally correct and would have made it impossible to control the transposition into national law of the framework decision and the application of it by the Member States .
In clear opposition to the Council , the European Parliament fully supported the Commission proposal and also supported the Commission in the matter when it was referred to the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
I wish to highlight the particular importance of this good cooperation between our institutions and I trust that we shall continue in this way as the matter develops .
With the ruling by the Court of Justice , it has now been clarified that measures of a penal nature needed in order to safeguard the effective application of environmental policy may be adopted within the framework of the first pillar .
The Council 's framework decision infringed the Community 's powers on the basis of the Treaty and had to be reversed .
The European Commission is particularly satisfied with this ruling by the Court .
This is not a ruling regulating a simple technical point ; it is of decisive importance in clarifying the rules of the Treaty as far as the dividing line between the first and third pillars is concerned .
It has major institutional repercussions , because it clarifies that the measures at issue must be taken under the codecision procedure , which means the full participation of the European Parliament .
Similarly , within the framework of the first pillar , national application measures come under the control of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , which does not apply to third pillar measures .
A directive on environmental protection through penal law - within the framework of the first pillar - will provide better environmental protection and , at the same time , is a more democratic method in the legislative procedure .
Unfortunately , in the meantime , valuable time has been lost .
Environmental crimes are still being committed and we must adopt the necessary legal measures to combat them .
We have analysed and discussed in the Commission the various options for following up the Court ruling .
We examined two options in particular : for the Commission 2001 proposal to stay as it is and for us to call on the other institutions to continue the codecision procedure or for a new Commission proposal to be submitted .
We preferred the second option , in order to take account of the Court ruling .
The initial proposal dates from 2001 , since when numerous changes have been made to environmental legislation ; consequently , the proposal needs to be adapted accordingly .
Finally , there have been new developments in the field of European cooperation on penal law matters , which also need to be taken into account in the proposal .
We must ensure that the proposal is in keeping with other penal acts adopted at European level .
Today we are at the state of preparing the new proposal for a directive on environmental protection through penal law .
The first step was , as I said , to examine in detail the Court ruling and its repercussions and for a detailed comparison to be made of the various acts which already apply .
We then prepared an impact study comparing the pros and cons of the various options .
Following that , the proposal will be finalised and I hope that it will be approved before the end of 2006 .


author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the dumping of toxic waste on Côte d 'Ivoire is not only scandalous , but also a truly revolting act , and we are , of course , at liberty to do no more than commiserate with the victims and lament the serious injuries caused to people , but if we do not , in the same breath , ask questions as to what lies behind this , that is no more than hypocritical , and you can count me out .
That is why I want there to be no doubt about the fact that this is a humanitarian and environmental disaster and scandal .
I never cease to be astonished that , while we in this House have introduced the ' name and shame ' principle to apply to others , for example to those engaged in the production of meat , so that , if someone misbehaves , his name is made known and appears in the newspapers , the same does not happen with the Member States of the EU , and that is most remarkable .


The President-in-Office of the Council did , of course , put these things in their proper chronological order , while it was Commissioner Dimas who explained why Europe 's legislation does not work , the actual reason being that the Council is too timid , and when I say that I certainly do not mean the President-in-Office or her country , but I do mean to say that , in matters affecting more than one country , one must - as she has rightly recognised - summon up the nerve to take cross-border action with the aim of prosecuting and punishing offences .
If , then , the Commission makes a proposal to that effect , whilst the Council is graciously pleased to cast doubt on the legal basis for it , and both the Commission and this House are subject to it , since the Council , with its blocking minority , does not allow the law to come into effect , that is something that a representative of the people , that is to say one of those who are meant to keep an eye on what governments are doing , cannot but find extremely vexatious .
That must not be allowed to happen , and there must be no more timidity from the Council in this matter .
I really do implore you to tell your colleagues that the chairman of the committee is very angry , for complaints after the event are of no avail if we have not done our homework beforehand - which we have , yet you have , so to speak , drawn a line right through it .
That is not acceptable .
I think the Council would do better in future to concern itself once more with the transposition of European regulations .
I have now been a Member of this House for a very long time , and in that time we have discussed and adopted a very large number of things , but when it comes to actually implementing them , we seem to lose our nerve .
I live on the border with a neighbouring country , that loveable place called the Netherlands , and it took us an incredibly long time to come to an agreement as to how we might catch criminals .
We have , fortunately , moved on from that , but , where the prosecution of waste crime is concerned , we have not yet emerged from Noah 's Ark , and that , Madam President-in-Office , is something you must not be content with .
You need to use the last months of your presidency to get seriously stuck in to supporting the Commissioner and motivating him to do something about this .
There are many areas in which implementation and transposition are lacking .
I would very much like to know whether the country in which the toxic waste was dumped actually gave its consent to that being done , for if it did not , this poisonous stuff ought not to have been brought there in the first place .
There are so many rules and regulations applicable to this , and all that is needed is for us to implement them with courage and understanding .
It is also worthy of note , by the way , that this is a scandal not only as regards health and the environment , but also in terms of competition .
If we do not close this loophole in our own laws and in the Basle Convention , we will thereby be encouraging people who are less than particular about compliance with the law to make the contamination of the environment an exportable commodity , and to do so is hypocrisy , for while we in Europe talk about our high standards , we also open up any number of loopholes that make it possible for this stuff to be exported , and it is Commissioner Dimas - the poor chap - and , with him , the Commission , who has to carry the can for it , even though I have to tell the President-in-Office that the Commission , in this instance , is quite utterly blameless .

Our two institutions were on the right track .
We would ask you to act on the suggestions that the Commission and this House have made in this matter , for they are good ones .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Ivory Coast is an unstable country that has been made more unstable by environmental crime which has flowed from our continent down to Africa ; with a Dutch ship and Dutch port authorities , a Greek-owned ship flying the Panamanian flag , then Ivorian companies and trucks dumping petrochemicals , killing - according to the United Nations - 12 people , and resulting in 104 000 people - again according to the United Nations - having medical care needs .
That ship unloaded 500 tonnes of chemical waste into trucks which dumped it in 15 separate sites around Abidjan , a city of 5 million people .
The United Nations Environment Programme has said that this is clearly a crime , although they say they do not yet know who was responsible , or the actual nature of that crime .
What we do know is that the Basel Convention should have stopped this crime and has failed to do so , and we need to know why .
The Ivory Coast is a long way away ; most countries in Africa do not have strong laws to protect human and environmental health from the effects of hazardous waste , but that is no reason for us here in Strasbourg to walk away from this case and its lessons .
We want safe disposal , not toxic parcel-passing .
We want - and I say this directly to you , Commissioner - those countries that have not yet ratified that convention , to ratify it ; they include Greece , Ireland , Italy , Malta and Slovenia .
I hope you will pursue them and I hope the Council will pursue them , too .
Crime and responsibility and judgment are matters for the courts , but investigation and the plugging of legal loopholes are our responsibility ; so is helping ACP countries to meet high standards in hazardous waste disposal ; so is helping the victims of these appalling events - we think particularly of the children in the Ivory Coast who have been made to suffer because of them ; so is ensuring that the Commission and the Dutch authorities and the EEA and the Government of the Ivory Coast all do their best to identify and pursue the perpetrators of this crime .
If the law is defective , then it must be amended .
If the law is adequate , then it must be enforced .
We know , though , that the law is flouted in too many cases .
We know that it is too easy to avoid the cost of responsible safe disposal by dumping , by going outside OECD countries and by using national and international cowboys , and that is what we must ensure is brought to an end .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament warmly endorses the views expressed by the previous two speakers .
How is it possible that the Proba Koala was not stopped from causing so much pollution ?
Although this incident should have set all the red lights flashing , the Dutch Government , which should ultimately carry the can , is instead washing its hands in legal innocence .
It refuses to honestly admit to mistakes , is reluctant to set up a fund for the victims in Ivory Coast , is passing the buck , and is refusing to take moral and financial responsibility .
This is how the disappointing conduct of the Dutch Government can be summed up .
That is why I would ask the Commission whether it is prepared to bring pressure to bear on the Netherlands to grant legal support to Ivory Coast and also to ensure that , in consultation with the UN , an emergency fund is set up for the victims of this disaster .
My African parliamentary counterparts have the feeling that the Netherlands and Europe , despite the Basel Convention , failed to guard them from this criminal behaviour .
It is apparently acceptable to use Africa as a dumping ground .
This creates a sense of inferiority which undermines a credible partnership between Africa and Europe , and has dealt our relations a huge blow .
What steps do the Finnish Presidency and the Commission intend to take in the direction of Ivory Coast and the African Union ?
Is the Commission prepared to draft proposals for measures to put an end to this dumping if possible , and where rules apply , to get them implemented ?
Is the Commission prepared to draw up a black list , annually , of countries and transnational companies that are involved in the illegal dumping of chemical waste in developing countries ?
Are the Commission and Council prepared to make legislative proposals in order to plug the loopholes in the Basel Convention , among other things , with the obligation on ships leaving Europe to leave their bilge water with the responsible authorities in the last EU port at which they call ?
Finally , is the Commission prepared to take the necessary steps to assist developing countries in the identification of harmful substances and to guarantee that bilge water that is produced at sea is processed safely ?
I count on the Commission 's support and I hope that the Council will call the Netherlands to account about its responsibility ; the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety was right to do the same with the Council .
We have had plenty of fine words , now we want to see them translated into practice , and the laws enforced .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) This year , the European Union reviewed the Sustainable Development Strategy , which was adopted in 2001 and enhanced with an external dimension in Barcelona in 2002 .
The European Union 's cooperation policy in support of development enables poverty to be fought and developing countries gradually integrated into the global economy .
How do we pursue these objectives ?
What we want is the growth of developing countries , environmental protection and reduction of the greenhouse effect , but what do we do to this end ?
Due to toxic waste pollution in Ivory Coast , 85 000 people suffered ill-health and eight died .
Toxic substances were shipped from Amsterdam by the Dutch company Trafigura Beheer BV .
They , in Amsterdam , were aware of the waste 's toxic nature ; nevertheless , due to high costs , the cheap alternative of disposal in Ivory Coast was chosen .
Most African countries have no regulations concerning the protection of the environment against hazardous waste .
Used computers are stored in Nigeria , radioactive waste in Somalia and chlorine in Cameroon , despite the regulations adopted by the EU in 1994 and 1997 to prohibit the export of waste .
In 2002 , this House approved the Directive on the Protection of the Environment through Criminal Law at its first reading .
However , the first reading was also the last .
We must therefore resume debate on the Directive as soon as possible .
The Commission and the Netherlands must investigate the case of Ivory Coast , find the perpetrators , eliminate the effects and pay compensatory damages to the victims .
Without serious measures the EU development cooperation policy for the support and sustainable development of developing countries will be hard to implement , and the EU stands to lose face .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) It is a tragedy that has struck Côte d 'Ivoire , and we all express our sympathy and solidarity with the victims of the criminal behaviour engaged in by European companies .
The victims must be given all the support that can be offered to them as events unfold .
Ever since 1997 , we have had a ban on exports of hazardous waste to countries outside the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) .
It is time to ensure that it is properly implemented .
It is unacceptable that the Dutch authorities should not have taken responsibility when they had the chance to stop the vessel .
All credit to Estonia , which did what needed to be done .
I wish to thank Commissioner Dimas for quickly having realised how serious the situation was .
A proposal by the Commission is now needed quickly in the interests of more stringent compliance with the rules .
We need to make sure that every time someone undertakes to transport hazardous material , there is someone to take personal responsibility and to sign an attestation of liability .
The board of directors and managing director must also be given greater personal responsibility .
Otherwise , traditions with unclear and complicated conditions of liability will make it difficult to get to grips with irresponsible transporters and shipowners .
Africa has suffered enough under colonialism and slavery and from the exploitation of its natural resources .
If we are to call ourselves civilised , we must now put a stop to this latest form of neo-colonialism whereby we dump our waste in poorer countries .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) My group strongly endorses all that has been said so far , as well as the resolution that draws attention to the toxic waste scandal involving the Proba Koala in Ivory Coast , which has , so far , claimed dozens of lives and as a result of which tens of thousands of people were hospitalised ; the implications for the environment and public health are as yet incalculable .
There is still much uncertainty as to what will happen with the poison and the contaminated crew .
Scandalous practices of this kind that show no respect for the environment or citizens , and whereby governments and parties responsible , consciously or unconsciously , wash their hands of their obligations , must at any rate be addressed at every possible level .
Member States , in this case the Netherlands , must be called to account .
My observer , who travelled to Estonia on my behalf , totally agrees with Commissioner Dimas when he says that this is only the tip of the iceberg .
This type of toxin should never have left the European Union in the first pace , and European and international rules have been flouted .
Having been denied the opportunity to speak with the crew of the Probo Koala on several occasions , despite prior permission , I can only conclude that various authorities are playing a very underhand game with human lives .
Transparency is vital to the public .
Tough tit-for-tat policy is necessary in order to prevent , or discourage , repetition .
I would argue in favour of drawing up a black list of waste dumpers and publicising agreements concluded with developing countries in the area of waste processing .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I concur with the views of all previous speakers .
What came to pass in Ivory Coast with the waste from the ship Proba Koala is appalling and should never have happened .
What is beyond doubt is that this involved the illegal transport of waste .
The Basel Convention contains an express ban on the transport of harmful waste to non-OECD countries , which has thus been flouted .
That the adherence to current legislation concerning the transport of waste substances is leaving a great deal to be desired comes as no surprise .
Random tests in Great Britain and France show that rules are flouted in 75 % to 100 % of all waste transports .
For the European Parliament , whilst effective enforcement and stricter controls were a tough bargaining point during the negotiations in the run-up to the new resolution on the transport of waste substances , our wishes have only partly been granted .
At the moment , we are not so desperate for fresh rules or a European minimum penalty for infringement , as Commissioner Dimas suggests .
What we need first of all is the enforcement of existing rules .
The Commission and Member States would do well to do something about this once and for all .
( DE ) Mr President , we will soon be getting back several thousand tonnes of contaminated material along with the 500 tonnes illegally dumped in Africa , so that many times the original amount of toxic waste will be finding its way back to Europe , and this is something for which preparations need to be made .
Generally speaking , what is known as the Basle Convention appears to be working reasonably well .
Officially , we are told that there has been a considerable reduction in exports of toxic waste to Africa , but that is contradicted by spot checks carried out in European ports , in which half of all the declarations of the non-toxicity of loads of waste turned out to be false , and so what is called for in this area , if the problem of the black market in toxic waste is to be got under control , is more checks and more cooperation .
We will also have to grapple with the problems surrounding the burgeoning trade in electrical waste and maritime wrecks , for which as yet no international conventions exist .
In order to deal the ultimate blow to the waste mafia , we will no doubt have to have a blacklist of the businesses that are involved in schemes of this kind .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this toxic waste affair is certainly criminal - it is as if the South was the North 's dustbin .
And if we call it a crime , there must be guilty parties and punishments , but so far impunity and apathy are winning the day .
It is true that the EU has legislation on the transport of toxic waste - the export of such waste has been banned since 1997 , under the Basel Convention - but up to now this ban has been systematically flouted .
This laissez-faire attitude is criminal , and the dead of Abidjan are its victims .
The Union now needs to act , and act fast , to put a stop to the irresponsibility and the impunity .
It must enforce the existing legislation , in particular the directive of July 2006 that requires the Member States to establish inspection networks .
It must strengthen this legislation where necessary , to enable fast and effective sanctions , as both the Commission and the European Parliament have been demanding since 2001 .
Finally , it must help countries in Africa to draw up protective legislation .
Commissioner , we support your proactive statements , but we now have to move on to concrete action .
That is what we expect from the Council , in particular .
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , what a mish-mash !
The few citizens who take an interest in our debates will find it very difficult to understand why , this afternoon , we are mixing up a debate on pollution in Ivory Coast with another on a judgment that tramples over the subsidiarity principle .
The fact that the judgment of 13 September 2005 was issued on the subject of an environmental directive does not change the fact that it is actually worded as a judgment on the principle of the communitisation of criminal law .
This is tantamount to a constitutional revolution , because , as we know , at least nine other competences are in the process of being absorbed by the European Union , with no treaty , including criminal law on immigration and intellectual property law .
There certainly is pollution , ladies and gentlemen - the Court of Justice 's judicial pollution of the European treaties .
In this confused and ill-thought-out judgment , there are no textual references and no clear legal principles .
Far-fetched and poorly explained considerations of questionable relevance lead to a hasty and slipshod conclusion .
We know how it works : fuzzy conclusions demand the indefinite extension of the European Union 's competences , then justify the interpretation of the Commission , which , finally , legitimises the transfer of powers from the States to the Court .
Those who , like us , were wary of the substantial extension of the EU 's objectives in Article I-3 of the draft Constitution were quite right to be concerned .
The Commissioners and the judges have no intention of bending to the will of the people , and have decided to disregard their refusal to ratify a draft Constitution that transferred criminal matters into the ordinary Community legislative procedure .
This judgment is a distortion of the will of those who signed and ratified the European treaties .
It is a judicial coup d 'état .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are coming up to some important deadlines .
Our people are watching us and will soon be calling us to account .
Will there be any sincere democrats here to stand up to this shameless tyranny ?
( NL ) Mr President , it is forbidden to export waste to developing countries .
That is beyond question .
The ban does not , however , apply to normal ship 's waste and bilge water , but it is equally clear that the bilge water on the Proba Koala was not normal .
The fatalities , thousands of injured and the enormous upheaval in Ivory Coast are testimony to this .
It was already clear in Amsterdam that its bilge water was not normal , because someone had collapsed and there was an unbearable and unusual stench .
It is clear that the ship with its contents should never have left Amsterdam without warning the authorities at the next European port , which was in Estonia .
That is why a judicial inquiry is currently underway in the Netherlands , and rightly too , in order to find out how it was possible for the toxic ship to leave the Netherlands in the first place , and whether the port authorities or inspectorates are in any way to blame .
What we should now focus on , though , is the question as to how disasters of that kind can be prevented from happening in future .
I have three questions I would like to put to the Commissioner .
In Estonia , you stated that the dumping of toxic waste in Ivory Coast was only the tip of the iceberg .
What was the basis for this statement ?
Secondly , would you agree that ships that leave the EU should be obliged to surrender their waste water and waste at their last EU port ?
Finally , what measures is the Commission able , and willing , to take in order to tighten up checks on the export of harmful waste ?
( DE ) Mr President , Africa has for decades been undergoing a process of transformation into a hazardous waste dump as a result of the export of toxic laboratory chemicals , solvents , superannuated pesticides and sewage sludge .
There are a few people in Europe and Africa for whom the criminal trade in toxic waste is a very profitable business .
Knowing though we do , that the actions of this Dutch firm in Abidjan were quite manifestly contrary not only to the Basle Convention but also to EU law , we have to ask ourselves how quickly our European institutions can respond if this is not to happen again in future .
We take a favourable view of Commissioner Dimas ' announcements , and we hope that this time the Member States and the Council will see how serious the situation is and realise the necessity of taking real action on this front instead of always merely regretting these things after they have occurred .
What is really required of the Member States of the European Union is some evidence of their willingness to do something about them .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to express my congratulations on this initiative .
We note with concern that the Basel Convention is infringed at least 10 times a year , with toxic waste being sent to Africa .
The recent incident involving the Probo Koala pricked consciences in the European Union .
The Union needs to proceed with the criminalisation of illegal practices in connection with movements of toxic waste .
At the same time , the attention of the European SeaPorts Organisation needs to be drawn to the strict application of rules governing movements of toxic waste by its members .
In particular , the need should be emphasised for information for the public , internal agreement and information between the departments involved and the operation of the register for recording qualitative and quantitative data and quantities of waste moved and produced .
All this must be transparent and accessible to whomever it concerns , in order to prevent the tendency for the economies of Africa to develop into various toxic waste industrial management sectors .
( NL ) Mr President , what we are actually talking about today is an example of environmental crime of which we are unsure whether it will be prosecuted or not .
Moreover , I would say to my fellow MEPs that I would not like to be in a Green-Leftwing alderman 's shoes when discussing the Proba Koala file ; the question is therefore whether prosecution will follow and if so , whether it will also cover Member States .
This is the very reason why we have insisted on legislation with regard to criminal law if we want to enforce environmental policy effectively .
We therefore feel that condemnation is certainly called for but that the Member States should be able to decide for themselves in what way those sanctions should be imposed .
That is how we would like to go forward .
A legislative proposal was submitted six years ago .
At the same time , the Council produced its own framework decision , which the Commission and this House suggested should be thrown out , which is exactly what happened a year ago .
Last Monday , the Commissioner announced he will produce a fresh proposal , but perhaps the Commissioner could be more specific as to this proposal 's exact content , for this was left a little vague last Monday .
I should also like to know from the Council - as I used to be rapporteur - whether the Council is happy to accept a fresh proposal to address environmental crime , for that is the most important question on the agenda here .
As there are plenty of examples , a proposal does indeed appear necessary .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , questions of the environment are extremely important and a priority area , and for that reason it is good that we have been able to discuss them here today in Parliament .
The Council takes a very serious view of illegal movements of waste and the risk which they pose to the immediate environment and people 's health .
The prevention of such illegal movements is a very demanding task , as has been made very evident in this debate .
It requires very diverse sorts of action and effective cooperation at many levels , the limits of competence exercised by the authorities notwithstanding .
We must also honestly recognise the fact that there is much room for improvement in the way movements of waste in the European Union and away from it are controlled , according to the surveys that have been conducted .
We also have to remember that , as regrettable as these individual events that attract so much public attention are , the recent incident involving the Probo Koala in the Ivory Coast being a case in point , we must remember to give attention too to the everyday incidents and situations that cause harm to health and the environment , of which there is still an abundance .
An example is the scrapping of ships in unsatisfactory conditions in developing countries .
Work is to continue with regard to these important questions at the Eighth Meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention in Nairobi at the end of November .
We should also see , recognise and acknowledge that there are considerable differences in national criminal laws on the environment between the Member States .
In some Member States there are some very up-to-date penal provisions for environmental crimes , while in others there might well be a need to review such provisions to reflect the current risks and counter them .
Actually , one might say that there is still a lot to do in all the Member States in the area of implementation of these penal provisions and , especially , increasing the likelihood of catching offenders .
The Council takes a very serious view of environmental criminality and its prevention .
As for the proposal being drafted , it is obviously difficult for the Council to take a position on something that does not yet exist .
We first have to look at the proposal and then adopt a position .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Heath and Food Safety , Mr Florenz , and all the other speakers for their very positive contributions to today 's debate .
I would like to add to the list of nationalities that Mr Bowis referred to .
This was a Greek-owned ship , under the flag of Panama , but it was time-chartered to a Dutch company , which operated it from Switzerland , with a Russian crew , financed by British and international banks and with a variety of nationalities on the board of the company and as shareholders .
Happily , it was blocked by Greenpeace in Estonia and the Estonian authorities thoroughly investigated the case .
I should like to assure the rapporteur that first proposal , which contains a minimum level of penalties , will be merged with the framework decision of the Council and basically it will be along the lines of what you proposed , with certain amendments at first reading .
With regard to the question of whether a ship carrying hazardous waste is allowed to leave a European Union port , if the waste is hazardous it is not allowed to go to a destination outside the OECD .
That also applies to slops - the ship 's own waste water - that contain hazardous substances .
I will continue to follow closely all developments in the criminal investigations and proceedings that are currently being conducted in the Netherlands and Estonia regarding the toxic waste dumping in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The Commission is also in the process of collecting any information available in other Member States concerning the vessel Proba Koala and its journey .
I hope that we will soon be able to draw conclusions from that and find the best way forward in preventing such incidents in the future .
We must keep in mind that the tragic incident in Côte d 'Ivoire is just the tip of the iceberg .
We know that is so from inspections carried out in Member States by their network of implementation and enforcement agencies , IMPEL .
In 2005 , 51 % of the waste shipments checked were found to be illegal .
Most of the cases do not make big headlines but they can , nevertheless , pose a serious risk to the environment and human health .
We must make it very clear that our society does not tolerate environmental crime and that we are determined to take all possible steps to fight it .
But legislation that we have adopted to better protect our environment and the health of our citizens will not achieve its objectives if we do not take the necessary measures to ensure that it is properly enforced .
I can assure you that the Commission is determined that environmental legislation should be properly applied throughout the Community .
We are already taking a number of specific initiatives in order to ensure that the European Union waste shipment regulation is correctly applied and illegal waste shipments are prevented and reduced .
This includes the preparation of guidelines to be adopted in connection with the application of the new waste shipment regulation next year and the organisation of awareness-raising events in Member States .
The Commission meets representatives of national authorities responsible for waste shipments on a regular basis .
This takes place within a well-established framework and includes multilateral meetings in Brussels , as well as bilateral contacts , but these initiatives need to be supplemented by measures to establish effective sanctions .
One of the many measures taken by the Commission for this purpose was to propose a directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
As I have already said , it is regrettable that the Commission 's proposal was not taken up by the Council , due to a difference of views on the correct legal basis .
Now , however , the Court of Justice has confirmed that the Commission 's views were correct .
The Commission is preparing a new proposal for a directive which will give effect to the Court 's judgment and should be adopted soon .
It has taken some time to produce the amended proposal , because the Commission has very carefully analysed the Court 's judgment and made a comparison of the original Commission proposal as amended after Parliament 's first reading and the Council 's framework decision .
In addition , an impact assessment is being carried out to analyse the various options for action .
The Commission thinks it is necessary to amend its proposal of 2001 after the Court 's ruling , to ensure that all criminal law measures necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the Community 's policy for the protection of the environment are included in the proposal .
The Court has made it clear that the parallel adoption of a directive and a framework decision , as was done in the past , is no longer possible .
Also , after five years , the Commission 's proposal needs to be adapted to legislative developments .
I would like to clarify that the Commission does not want to harmonise national criminal laws fully .
The aim is that only those steps which are necessary for the effective implementation of environmental policy should be taken at Community level .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasise again the importance of good cooperation between the Commission and Parliament in the forthcoming codecision procedure for the adoption of the directive on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
We have the same goals , namely to protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the sanctioning of environmental offences and to try to eliminate the possibility of safe havens for environmental offenders in the European Union .
Acting together , we can take a big step towards achieving these objectives .
Finally , as regards the ratification of the Basel Convention , I have sent letters to more than 50 countries around the world asking them to ratify the Convention .
To avoid any wrong conclusions , I should clarify that the Basel ban is mandatory , legally binding , for the European Union Member States , even those that have not ratified the Convention , because we as the European Union have signed and ratified the agreement .
To wind up the debate , I have received seven motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) and two motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .

The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The dumping of toxic waste by the Dutch firm Trafigura in the city of Abidjan in the Ivory Coast is a disgrace which requires full investigation and tough action .
There can be little doubt that this dumping was in breach of EU law and the Basel Convention .
This environmental crime will once again create the view that the rich North regards poor Africa as a suitable dumping ground .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statement which tries to counter this view , but statements are one thing : only action will convince Africans that we are serious about dealing with this .
Apart from all the other issues that have to be investigated we need to know how it was possible for this ship to leave Amsterdam .
Are the Dutch authorities reviewing their inspection methods ?
Will the Commission raise the whole issue of inspection and enforcement at next month 's Basel Convention Forum ?
What has occurred in Côte d 'Ivoire brings shame on the European Union .
In this Parliament we are often at the forefront of the campaigns for better environmental protection .
We are fond of stating that pollution does not respect borders .
And yet , in 2006 we are witness to a situation in which 500 tonnes of toxic waste is transported from an EU Member State and dumped upon the long-suffering people of Côte d 'Ivoire .
The immediate impact has been a number of deaths and tens of thousands of people needing medical attention .
We have all seen the grim estimates of what the longer-term impact could prove to be .
If our grand statements on environmental protection are to mean anything , then the Commission and the Dutch authorities must make a full investigation in pursuit of the culprits in this crime .
Clearly current legislation does not offer sufficient protection against unscrupulous people who care nothing for the people of Côte d 'Ivoire and other African states .
In the EU , we must act to ensure that our legislation on toxic waste is such that we can guarantee to people in Africa that their countries will not be dumping grounds for our hazardous waste .

( NL ) Mr President , the disaster in Ivory Coast calls for a rapid response from Europe , with compensation for the victims and for the damage done to the environment , whereby the polluter pays principle must apply .
If Europe wants to make headway , it will need to explain to its citizens where the added value for them lies .
The incident in Ivory Coast is a perfect example of where Europe clearly has a responsibility .
Shipping is known for its complexity in terms of ownership and management , and is almost by definition an international affair .
After all , over a two-month period , the Proba Koala called at the ports of Gibraltar , Algeciras , Amsterdam , Skagen , Paldiski , Dover and Venkspits .
Moreover , the ship sails under a Panama flag , is owned by a Greek company , is chartered by Trafigura BV , which has a postbox in the Netherlands , from Great Britain and has a Russian crew .
Something as complex as this requires clarity and transparency in legislation .
If the European Union wants to act effectively , it will need to meet these conditions promptly .
Only by adopting a firm stand can Europe demonstrate why further European integration is important to each and everyone of us .
EC-Syria Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs De Keyser on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs containing the European Parliament 's recommendation to the Council on the conclusion of a Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and the Syrian Arab Republic , of the other part .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am grateful to the Commissioner for her presence here today .
The EU-Syria Association Agreement is the missing piece in the Barcelona process , but it is also the Godot of the European Parliament : continually heralded , but never concluded .
The negotiations on this agreement started in 1996 , before Syria withdrew from Lebanon .
They were difficult , but they nevertheless resulted in a much-revised draft that laid down , for example , the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the fight against terrorism .
The agreement was signed in the Council in October 2004 , but the ratification process was interrupted by the appalling assassination of the former prime minister Mr Hariri on 14 February 2005 .
We all know what happened next .
People in Lebanon and all over the world immediately pointed the finger at the government in Damascus .
An investigation , led initially by Mr Mehlis and now by Mr Brammertz , was carried out in situ , and Resolution 1559 called for the withdrawal of Syrian troops and secret services from Lebanon .
The presumption of innocence is one of the pillars of our legal systems , but we must also bear in mind the precautionary principle .
Although Syria made haste to withdraw its troops from Lebanon , it was initially hesitant about cooperating with Mr Mehlis .
Europe therefore cautiously distanced itself from the Damascus Government .
Is this caution still acceptable today , when various events both on the international stage and within Syria 's internal political system should encourage us to reopen dialogue ?
The Council will be the judge of that , but I , for my part , am in favour of dialogue and the Committee on Foreign Affairs supported me in this by a large majority .
This dialogue could ultimately lead to the signing of the agreement , but that question is still premature and is not the purpose of the recommendation .
So , then , what are these events ?
First of all , there is the renewal of effective cooperation with Mr Brammertz 's investigation , as attested to in his latest report .
Next , it has become apparent that our isolation of Syria has been counter-productive in terms of democracy within the country , and has failed to weaken a strong government .
Our empty-chair politics have contributed to destabilising a reforming tendency that was cautiously raising its head .
What is more , the voice of Europe , which in the past has been raised to defend activists and political prisoners , is now hardly to be heard .
Finally , and this is my third point , the tragedy in Lebanon has been a terrible lesson .
The war between Israel and Lebanon was proof , if proof were needed , of the danger and uselessness of force .
It demonstrated the need to work politically with all those involved in this conflict , and we know that , behind the two protagonists , other influences are at work : the United States without doubt , but also Iran and Syria .
As Europe closed its doors , Syria found other allies , notably Iran , which provided not only oil but also a war-like ideology that does nothing to promote peace in the Middle East .
Europe has now made a strong commitment to the Middle East , and there have been successive diplomatic missions on a regular basis .
Support for the reopening of dialogue with Syria regarding the association agreement forms part of this preventative strategy , because another conflict in this region could be even more devastating .
Let us be under no illusions .
Syria will not break off from Iran in terms of trade , but its highest authorities claim to be prepared to distance themselves from Iran in terms of the Middle East peace process .
This is an important step .
This is a country with a strong and hardline government , where human rights are not sufficiently respected , and my report discusses these problems quite unambiguously .
Having said that , Syria is a great and civilised country that must be treated with respect , dignity and honesty .
It could be a stabilising influence in the Middle East and we need it .
When Mr Siniora was here , he put forward the scenario of a solution to the problem of the Shebaa farms , and there are other possible points of conciliation .
I would advocate that we open up all avenues .
I would like to thank my fellow Members from all parties for their valuable assistance in drawing up this recommendation .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Council I would like to thank Mrs De Keyser for an important report that covers the Syrian situation excellently .
The Council shares many of the concerns expressed in it with regard to Syria .
As Mrs De Keyser says in her report , Syria may have an important role to play in the Near and Middle East ' as a link between the parties in the peace process and a facilitator of a resolution of the regional conflict ' .
For this reason , the Council too decided in August to authorise High Representative Javier Solana and the Finnish Presidency to be in contact with all relevant parties that may influence finding a solution to the crisis in Lebanon and the situation in the Middle East more generally .
Unquestionably , these parties also include Syria .
Since the dramatic events of the summer , it has been important to stabilise the situation in Lebanon and regions close to it .
When Finnish Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja met with his Syrian counterpart at the end of August the message to Syria was a clear one .
We expect Syria to work to implement Resolutions 1559 , 1680 and 1701 .
Syria should support the national reconstruction process in Lebanon and do its utmost to stabilise the political situation inside Lebanon .
Equipping armies other than the Lebanese and the question of arms smuggling have a fundamental impact on whether a ceasefire can be built on a sustainable basis .
There are also questions that remain unanswered with regard to the demarcation of the border between Syria and Lebanon and the establishment of diplomatic relations .
Solving the complex problem associated with the Shebaa area will likewise require Syria 's cooperation .
Syria must also continue to show a desire to cooperate with the Brammertz commission which is investigating the Hariri assassination .
A question that is outside the scope of Resolution 1701 but important for stability in the region is the activity of Palestinian organisations with their headquarters in Damascus and Syrian support for them .
Furthermore , Syria 's relations with Iraq and Iran and its activities with regard to these countries have direct implications for the general situation in the Middle East .
The Council is also closely following progress in human rights in Syria .
Especially worrying were the arrests in the spring of those who are defenders of human rights and who signed the Beirut-Damascus Declaration .
The fact that some of them were recently released is obviously welcome news .
The EU will be closely observing how , for example , freedom of gathering in a public place and freedom of expression are being implemented in the country .
Obviously , Syria must also act in accordance with the principles of international human rights .
The reopening of the Civil Society Training Centre , which has EU support , is an important objective .
The centre was shut in the spring just a week after it had opened .
Continual links with Syria are being maintained , especially via Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
The meeting of Foreign Ministers in Tampere in November , which Syria has also been invited to attend , will provide an excellent forum for discussions .
Syria is an important actor in the Middle East .
It can choose : it can either be a troublemaker or a constructive partner .
Syria 's historically strong ties with Lebanon mean that it has an especially important role to play in implementing the UN Security Council Resolutions with respect to the situation in Lebanon .
The Union has continually stressed that Lebanon 's right to self-determination , territorial inviolability and political independence must be respected .
In order to bring stability to Lebanon and the entire region it is important that arms smuggling to Lebanon be prevented .
Syria needs to watch its borders to achieve this aim .
The Council has said that it is willing to improve relations with Syria , if the country 's behaviour seems to favour this .
The ball is now in their court .
Given the right circumstances , the Union could , for example , reconsider the possibility of signing the Association Agreement .
This would of course promote cooperation between the EU and Syria , especially financially , as well as reforms that are essential for Syria 's development , which is the assumption also made in the report .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , first of all I think this is a very timely discussion .
Thank you for putting it on the agenda .
I have followed closely the discussions in the AFET Committee on Ms De Keyser 's substantive and comprehensive report .
The report is a fair account of the internal and regional challenges facing Syria .
I welcome this reflection by the European Parliament on the way forward with Syria .
After the conflict in Lebanon and in the new context of United Nations Security Council resolution 1701 ( 2006 ) , it is indeed the right moment to reassess where we are with our current policy .
Syria is a long-standing partner under the Barcelona process and is a potential candidate for the European Neighbourhood Policy in the medium term .
I share your view that we have a strong interest in bringing that country closer to Europe .
Syria , as we all know , is an essential player for stability in the Middle East .
It is a key part of the puzzle when it comes to finding a long-term solution to the conflicts in the region and also in the implementation of resolution 1701 in full .
In this critical moment for the peace process , Damascus has the power to be part of the solution and not part of the problem .
This means that we expect Syria , as you have stated in the motion for a resolution , to pass the right messages to Hezbollah and Hamas , to prevent arms shipments into Lebanon , as our colleague from the Council has said , and to help with the settlement on the Shebaa Farms .
As I have indicated , I believe that re-engaging with Syria should be part of our strategy .
A different issue is then whether and how far we can re-engage here and now .
The first thing we need in order to re-engage with Syria is for its leaders to show their commitment and their interest in moving forward and taking positive steps on a number of issues .
As you well know , lately we have gone through difficult times in our relationship with Syria .
Ms De Keyser 's report addresses a number of the political divergences .
Overcoming the political deadlock depends on the leadership 's ability to translate some of its words of goodwill into deeds of goodwill .
Syria has a new opportunity at this critical time for the peace process to demonstrate that it is serious about contributing positively to regional stability .
In the absence of an association agreement , we have limited scope to tackle matters of concern .
Nevertheless , we have tried where we can , and where we feel it is of interest for the people of Syria .
We have tried to continue programmes in those areas that directly benefit the citizens of Syria .
For example , on human rights , the European Union uses diplomatic channels to address the most serious violations , including , for instance , the cases of prisoners of conscience .
We have also reacted to the limitations on freedom of expression and the wave of arrests that accompanied the publication of the Beirut-Damascus declaration last May .
But it is not by cutting off contacts that we will achieve much progress .
With no dialogue , we have no influence .
We should therefore turn the situation around , give a positive perspective to relations with Syria and set out the areas where we expect progress .
We do so in part through our cooperation programmes .
Syria now seems to be well engaged on the road to economic transition and we welcome the approval of Syria 's national agenda for reforms sponsored by Deputy Prime Minister Dardari last May .
Support for the implementation of the reform process , including progressive steps to political opening , could be the focus of our action in the next few years , if things go well .
Cooperation under the ENPI - the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument - will allow us to give Syria the medium-term prospect of full participation in the Neighbourhood Policy .
The ENP will then bring additional benefits and , we hope , a more interesting package for them , when the time is ripe .
As for the association agreement , it is still on the table .
We have finalised all technical preparations and we have initialled the agreement .
Now , it is pending a decision on signature from the Council .
Signature is a process .
So far , political circumstances have not been right .
Member States still expect Syria to take more positive and credible steps to make signature possible , including on regional issues such as Lebanon and Palestine .
Syria 's recent statements to facilitate the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 may be encouraging signs in this respect , as are President Assad 's calls for resuming peace talks , which have had some positive echoes in Israel .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission is a strong believer in dialogue .
Therefore , I very much hope that the positive messages that we have received from Damascus lately will be transformed into deeds and that we will be able to restore a strong relationship with that country .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs De Keyser on the draft recommendation that she has presented and on all of the work that she has been doing on relations with Syria .
I believe that it is important for us to consider and place this debate within its most appropriate context , Mr President .
That context , as the Commissioner has said quite rightly , should be an assessment of the situation , on the journey towards an Association Agreement , without forgetting that we must also promote dialogue , parliamentary dialogue in our case , with Syria , given that country 's strategic importance within the region 's complicated context , as others have emphasised .
I believe , however , that it is also important to stress - and the text of the resolution makes this very clear - that this is not the time for Parliament to pronounce itself in favour of the Association Agreement .
The resolution - the draft recommendation - states quite clearly that the conditions have yet to be met : there must be very clear progress in a number of areas .
Syria 's conclusion of a defence agreement with Iran is not good news .
There must be substantial progress in terms of respecting the European Union 's traditional thinking in the field of democracy and human rights .
The United Nations Security Council Resolutions and the territorial integrity of Lebanon must be respected and Syria must cooperate in clearing up the assassination of ex-Prime Minister Hariri . It must also make progress in relation to the abolition of the death penalty , respect for religious minorities , etc .
I therefore believe , Mr President , that there is still a long way to go .
There is some good news , such as Mr Dandari 's appointment as Deputy Prime Minister .
I had the privilege of meeting him following a mission in Lebanon .
I believe that only on this basis , as the Commissioner said a moment ago , must we turn this list of good intentions into concrete actions , so that the European Union can give the green light to this important Association Agreement between the Union and Syria .


Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mrs De Keyser for her outstanding report , and also Mr Salafranca for his good cooperation , which has made it possible for a report such as this one to be adopted by a large majority .
Syria is not a straightforward country , but a problematic one in a problematic region .
If , though , we want to establish stability and peace in this problematic part of the world , we need Syria to cooperate with us .
Where Lebanon is concerned , it really ought to dawn on Syria , once and for all , that a politically stable and economically strong Lebanon is to its own benefit and does not constitute a danger to it .
Moving on to Iran , we have no objection to make to friendly relations between that country and Syria , for such is only right and proper among neighbours , but this friendship should bear fruit in a constructive contribution , in a peace process , rather than in a blockade .

I do indeed understand that Syria is demanding that Israel return the Golan Heights , but Syria must acknowledge that Israel has security interests that it cannot renounce , and should help facilitate peaceful developments in Palestine and , in particular , in the Gaza Strip , not only in the shape of peace between one Palestinian and another , but also between the Palestinians and Israel .
It is vitally important that we engage in this dialogue , and in that connection I should like to remind the House of an expression that the Commissioner used , namely ' leadership ability ' .
I would like to see the President of Syria pay less attention to those whose whisperings in his ear have caused Syria , over recent years , to be led into isolation , but rather to those of his advisers who want to take his country back to a dialogue with the international community , especially with the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , a crucial obstacle on the road to ratification has arisen , namely the ever-worsening human rights situation in Syria .
Observers regularly denounce the arbitrary arrests , the acts of torture , the blatant discrimination against minorities , the barriers to freedom of expression and of association , and the harassment and imprisonment of people who work peacefully to enhance freedoms in Syria .
I refer in particular to Michel Kilo , Anwar al-Bunni and Mahmoud Issa , who are still being detained for having signed in May the Beirut-Damascus Declaration calling for the normalisation of relations between Lebanon and Syria .
Michel Kilo should have been released on 19 October , but a further charge has resulted in his prison term being extended .
Mr Issa was released on 25 September but was re-arrested just two days ago .
These examples , among many others , demonstrate the lack of a genuine desire on the part of the Syrian authorities to undertake the necessary democratic reforms .
Under these circumstances - as you said , Mrs De Keyser - there is no question of the European Union concluding an association agreement with Syria .
As the Resolution states , an improvement in the human rights situation and respect for democratic values must be a prerequisite for the conclusion of any agreement .
Moreover , it is also important to put in place an effective control mechanism as part of the application of the ' human rights ' clause .
This approach should also be applied , inter alia , to Russia and to Turkmenistan , and to a good many other countries too .
The same goes for the consistency of the positions adopted by Parliament .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , the purpose of the De Keyser report is dialogue and the future normalisation of our relations with Syria .
We see the Association Agreement as a part of this political process .
I stress the word ' political ' because , from an economic point of view , the Agreement is much more beneficial for Europe than for Syria .
The suspension of relations with Damascus was a political mistake .
Europe should not have blacklists and should not blindly follow North American ideas on the axis of evil .
Regardless of its regime , Syria is a country that is vital to peace in the region .
Europe must learn to respect the complexity of Syrian society and the many shades of opinion there .
The regime is politically authoritarian , yet has a liberal attitude to the economy , religion and customs .
Pluralism is stifled and constrained , yet it exists in society and in the institutions .
The less the western powers intervene in the region , the more pluralism will be allowed to flourish .
It is a pity that the final version of the report suffers from shades of the colonial era on a number of issues .
For example , it is not up to us to say who is and who is not trustworthy , because we ourselves , rightly , do not accept such opinions from third parties .
It would also be better if it did not cast far-fetched aspersions over non-existent relations between Damascus and Al Qaeda and Sunni fundamentalism .
This ignorance does us no favours . We owe it to ourselves to be consistent , as well .
Diplomatic relations cannot hinge on the outcome of a criminal investigation .
Evidence pertaining to the crime of the horrific assassination of Rafiq Hariri must be heard in court . Otherwise , our policies run the risk of violating the principle of the presumption of innocence .
In any event , the report is clear on the important issue ; it seeks normal relations and that is a good thing .
It is good that the issue of human rights should be at the heart of this normalisation process , but Europe needs to apply the same policy to all other countries , including Israel .
Lastly , it supports the restitution of the Golan Heights to Damascus , an area Syria has never resorted to violent means to recover ; this is a proposal supported in UN resolutions .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , like the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I too will be emphatically voting against the De Keyser report during the plenary vote .
Anyone in this House who advises the Council to conclude an association agreement with Syria is giving support to a ruthless minority regime about which it is sufficient to say that the only entities it regards as strategic partners in its region are the Islamic Republic of Iran and Hezbollah .
The present resolution misjudges once again the true nature of the Assad regime where literally everything revolves around the preservation of power .
As a consequence , the rapporteur has succumbed to illusions of possible positive effects of the association agreement on Damascus ' internal and external policy .
If I could catch Mrs De Keyser 's eye , I should not like to keep from you the opinion held by a recognised Syria expert from my country who has made many visits to that country over the years ; he told me , only the other day , in plain words , that ' democracy is considered to be a deadly threat by those in power ' , and that this is something that has become obvious to him in recent years in discussion with sources within the regime , including with the oh-so-liberal Mr Dardari .
What is so absurd about this report is that the document is full of cautionary words against following the diplomatic false scent in the direction of Damascus .
This is food for satirists rather than for politicians .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , we are today discussing an Association Agreement with a country whose significance must be clear to everyone in this House .
This is a country concerning which we have a great number of objections and reservations .
There is no mistaking that Syria is directly or indirectly involved in the smuggling of weapons to terrorist organisations .
There is no mistaking that Syria has close links to Iran .
It is a fact that we have very serious concerns about the standard of Syria 's respect for human rights and civil rights .
The question arises as to which instruments the European Parliament and the European Union should use .
Will this agreement promote democracy ?
Will it make the instruments at our disposal for bringing pressure to bear on this government more efficient , or will it weaken our position ?
I believe that mutual understanding and the possibility of exerting pressure will strengthen our position and that the agreement in question should be supported .
I believe this should be based on the premise that our stance and our opinion as the European Parliament requires respect for human rights and civil rights .
This must be made abundantly clear at every opportunity .
Ceasing to support terrorist activity has to be a sine qua non .
It is essential to apply pressure of this kind , otherwise we shall be infringing our fundamental principles .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , we have to be clear in our own minds about the fact that the crisis in the Middle East - not only where Lebanon is concerned , but also the Middle East problem as a whole - is capable of resolution only if Syria is brought on board , for it , at present , maintains links with Iran and Hizbollah , and thought must be given to how , if at all , these links can be dismantled , and in such a manner that it is in Syria 's interests .
Syria is a Sunni and secular state , with relatively little in common , ideologically speaking , with Shiite fundamentalists .
This is what would make it possible for us to make use of an association agreement , provided that improvements are made in the observance of human rights and a solution found to the question of how we and it can join together in combating terrorism .
What is certain is that supplies of weapons to the Lebanon cannot be wholly stopped without Syria 's consent , and that must be seen to be a factor .
Such a solution is also conditional upon the problem of the Shebaa farms being resolved .
That is of the utmost importance if Hizbollah are to be denied the excuse that they need to have weapons in the area , since it is Israeli-occupied territory .
For all these reasons , both the situation within Syria and that country 's relations with the European Union need to be improved .
The initiative on the part of the Mrs De Keyser and the Committee on Foreign Affairs - of which , it is my impression , both the Council and the Commission take a sympathetic view - makes an important contribution towards Syria being offered the opportunity to secure its own interests and thereby make a constructive contribution to the peace process in the region .
It is evident that the Syrian regime is no friend of democracy , that it violates human rights , that people - both Syrians and others - must be set at liberty and that a stop must be put to the cooperation with the military arms of Hizbollah and Hamas ; even so , I do believe that a dialogue of this kind is possible and that the offer of an association agreement , within this framework , can be an effective means to that end .
( FR ) Mrs Lehtomäki , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs De Keyser for this excellent report .
The conclusion of an association agreement between the European Community and Syria would constitute a very encouraging political sign in terms of establishing peace in the Middle East , which is something that we all so earnestly desire .
Association agreements are an excellent way to put pressure on countries .
Thus , in return for our economic and commercial cooperation , we must ask Syria to become a democratic country that respects fundamental freedoms ; to stop interfering in its neighbours ' affairs ; to strictly delimit its border with Lebanon ; and to stop supporting the Hezbollah militias or the Hamas fundamentalists that it is sheltering .
Syria must release the intellectuals , human rights defenders and political prisoners that it is holding in its prisons .
It must also respect the right of the minorities living on its territory , especially the Kurds , to whom it must offer citizenship , since they do not have it .
If Syria renounced its Greater Syria project and if it turned to allies other than Iran , the entire region would benefit .
Syria , more than any other country in the region , is able to play the role of governor and peacemaker , particularly in relation to the Iraqi and Palestinian issues .
Europe must make every effort to include Syria among its strategic allies in the Middle East .
If the wind of change rose in Syria and if the country practised a policy of openness , then all of the populations in the Middle East could finally start to free themselves from the yoke of dictatorship and theocratic populism .
Madam President , this report asserts that an EU-Mediterranean agreement would give decisive impetus to the political , economic and social reforms needed in Syria , yet the report also deplores the signing of a military agreement between Syria and Iran , which the Syrians say will increase cooperation against what they call the common threat presented by Israel and the USA .
Since 1995 the European Union has given Syria EUR 259 million .
The EU pays millions of euros to support the tyrannical Syrian regime in the hope that somehow it will make them believers in democracy , civil liberties , human rights , etc .
The Syrians , on the other hand , now find that they have enough spare cash to be able to afford a military alliance with Iran that will inevitably make the world a more dangerous place .
EU taxpayers ' money should not be spent in supporting tyrannical and murderous regimes which are the enemies of democracy , freedom and peace .
Madam President , the EU 's strategic interest with Syria is maintaining peace in the wider Middle East so that oil flows , and to steer the dispute between Israel and the Palestinians towards a durable two-state solution settlement , as detailed in Mrs De Keyser 's report .
Isolated Syria has for some time been helping Iran launch a combined pan-Islamic offensive on Israel , and Syria seeks to keep the Lebanese Government weak by strongly backing Iran 's proxy Hezbollah , which Syria believes will also help re-establish its influence in Lebanon .
Nevertheless , Syria has one redeeming feature : it is a secular country that recoils from Islamic fundamentalism , and parts of the ruling Ba 'ath elite worry about Syria 's deepening defence alliance with theocratic Iran and Islamist Hezbollah .
Syria no longer needs to cosy up to Iran in its old alliance against their common enemy , Saddam Hussein 's Iraq .
Regrettably , hopes are now fading that the EU can deal directly with the Palestinians under an intransigent Hamas , which refuses to recognise Israel or forswear violence .
The time is therefore now ripe to offer assurances to Syria that blocking Hezbollah 's re-armament , stopping jihadi fighters ' passage into Iraq and improving Syria 's appalling human rights record would bring valuable benefits , including the eventual ratification of the strengthened association agreement with the EU .
The EU , as a member of the Quartet , can also help broker an acceptable peace agreement between Israel and Syria over the Golan Heights and the Shebaa Farms where the US may be unwilling .
Israel would gain much by talking to its enemy , Syria .
Conscious of its vulnerability to rocket attacks , Israel knows that it needs a defensible state , safe from external aggression .
Removing Syria as a threat is a key element in achieving this strategic objective .
But I endorse the findings of the report and I am hopeful now that the European Union will look to using its considerable leverage over Syria to achieve these objectives .
( EL ) Madam President , I too should like in turn to congratulate my honourable friend Véronique De Keyser on the very important report which she has presented to us .
I believe that on the basis of the new geopolitical situation which has arisen in the Middle East , the European Union should formulate its own independent strategy .
Syria is a fact and its role continues to be instrumental to regional stability and security .
Europe must talk to Syria and must proceed with a coordinated institutional and political dialogue with the regime in Damascus .
I absolutely agree with everything contained in the report and with what my honourable friends have said .
However , no one has answered the question of how we shall get Syria to change its conduct and how we shall contribute to the democratisation process .
No one has answered that question .
I believe that , without the mechanisms of the association agreement and political dialogue , the potential for the European Union to contribute to the democratisation of Syria is non-existent .
That is why I believe that the European Union should not delay in signing the agreement .
For advocates of the isolation of Syria , of sanctions or even of the overthrow of the regime , the civil war in Iraq is the answer to their delusions .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , the decision to renew the ratification of the Association Agreement with Syria is a strategic one .
The situation in the Middle East is more a case of the glass being half-empty than half-full .
The lack of democratisation in Egypt has encouraged the growth of radical forces ; Lebanon is sliding into disarray ; and the chances of creating a State in Palestine have , for domestic reasons , disappeared .
Relations between the EU and Israel have unravelled since the summer attacks on Lebanon .
There is neither a European nor an Israeli policy , with Israel increasingly sinking back into regionalism , no longer capable of solving problems from a broader perspective .
Furthermore , as the latest decision on Iraq has shown , the USA does not have a serious policy in the region , either .
The end of the policy of playing off one side against the other has undoubtedly served to strengthen Iran .
Iran is the only player with a relevant , active policy .
Iran 's intermediary is Syria .
Parliament cannot take any relevant steps in relation to Iran .
That would require a joint approach from the EU , the USA and the Russian Federation .
What we in this Chamber can do is to try to draw Syria out of its submissive role as an intermediary .
That is the strategy .
The tactic is to offer incentives of an economic or international nature , and to do this as a matter of clear , common and uncompromising European policy .
We must make demands from Syria in a similarly clear and uncompromising way .
This is not a matter of appeasement .
The key issue is for Syria to sign up to a gradual lifting of martial law , to the creation of a civil society with full freedom of expression and to respect for minority rights and a transition to a democratic political system based on an open market economy .
Syria must of course cooperate on the investigation into the assassination of Hariri .
It must engage in constructive moves towards solving the peace process .
It must stop arming Hezbollah and supporting armed Palestinian groups , it must comply with Resolutions 1559 and 1701 and it must also complete the withdrawal of all armed forces from Lebanon and establish diplomatic relations .
We do not own the Association Agreement .
What is needed is for Syria to take ownership of it .
Our task is to establish , through the Agreement , a Syrian road map towards transition .
I should like to call on the Commission and chiefly the Council to give active support both to our strategy and to our tactics .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Barcelona Declaration enshrines the objectives of establishing a common area of peace , stability and prosperity through the reinforcement of political dialogue and security , economic and financial partnership , and a social , cultural and human partnership .
This objective has been implemented successfully in recent years , and there are already Association Agreements in place with almost all of the countries of the Mediterranean basin , except , of course , for Syria , for various , understandable reasons . The EU has always been mindful of the events of recent months .
It must make a genuine commitment to proper negotiations with Syria , with a view to securing the country 's firm desire to conclude the Agreement . Accordingly , Syria will hopefully develop into a democracy that respects human rights and religious freedom , that helps in the fight against terrorism , and that promotes dialogue and lasting peace in the region .
To this end , the Syrian Government must take action to end the state of emergency at the earliest opportunity , with the EU lending all possible assistance .
Syria is in a geostrategically vital location and has a crucial role to play in the Middle East peace process .
The EU must , once and for all , make clear its belief that strengthening democracy cannot be achieved by means of a policy of bombing or isolation .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Syria is a country that cannot be ignored in the context of the Middle East crisis .
Breaking off all dialogue means isolating the country and carries the risk of the regime becoming more radical .
It means pushing Syria even further into the arms of Iran , whose only aspiration is to destroy Israel and to destabilise the region .
If we are to resume talks with Syria now , though , we must be very cautious and lay down firm conditions in advance .
We must demand that Syria respect Lebanon 's sovereignty and that it comply with the Security Council resolutions calling on it to step up controls at the Lebanese-Syrian border and to stop supplying weapons to Hezbollah .
We must make respect for human rights and civil liberties a prerequisite for the signing of any agreement .
We must demand that it take concrete action in following up the conclusions of the investigation into the assassination of the former prime minister , Rafik Hariri .
I would point out that this is also a prerequisite for the continuation of the negotiations .
Finally , it must clearly outline to the international community the measures that it is taking to effectively and practically combat the proliferation of weapons and terrorism in the region .
By that , I mean that it must also stop all support to the Hezbollah and Hamas militias .
If the European Union plans to re-open negotiations with Syria , it must do so only if the latter accepts and respects these conditions .
Today , conditions for the signing of any association agreement have not been met , which is something that I deplore .
We must call on Syria to abandon its closed-shop mentality and confront this country with its responsibilities in a region in which all of the actors must work on establishing peace and stability .
Madam President , I should like to endorse the recommendations of Mr De Keyser 's report , in particular that it is time to review engagement with Syria by Europe and the world , not to compromise our principles but to advance them .
A strong message needs to be sent to Syria with regard to human rights and improving its record on freedom of expression , torture and abolition of the death penalty .
The human rights lawyer Anwar al-Buni , who , amongst hundreds of others , signed the petition calling for respect for Lebanese sovereignty , should be released from custody forthwith , along with hundreds of prisoners of conscience .
Labelling Syria part of an axis of evil has achieved nothing .
I welcome the fact that in the last month the Commissioner has authorised her representatives to hold discussions with Syria 's ministries for Foreign Affairs and Economic Affairs and that this week the European Parliament will offer the prospect of signing the association agreement if Syria genuinely chooses to work with Europe to achieve peace in the Middle East .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs De Keyser , for her hard work , and I should like to take this opportunity to express my concern in this area , for let us be honest .
We can hardly imagine the European Union , being a Union of values and standards , concluding a cooperation agreement with a rogue state such as Syria .
That , though , is the reality , when one considers the links with Hezbollah and Iran .
The only option is to use a cooperation agreement , and the associated negotiations , as an opportunity to prescribe a number of minimum conditions in the area of human rights , because there is increasing oppression against trade unions , journalists and religious minorities in Europe .
Syrian citizens belonging to religious minorities , as well as Assyrian Christians returning to Syria , are put behind bars almost without exception .
There is therefore every reason finally to bring the EU 's immigration policy and return policy to Syria into line with each other at European level , and to suspend return policy to Syria for the time being .
That appears to me to be a first step .

Secondly , we must demand firm guarantees for religious freedom ; the Syrian Government must stop interfering with religious minorities in Syria itself , for the various religious communities and ethnic groups are having a particularly hard time at the moment because of the way Syria is managing their interests .
Europe has , in this respect , a reputation to lose , because the European churches are based on the earliest churches that have spread their faith from Syria also in the direction of Europe .
This means that the European Union has the onerous task of ensuring , should a cooperation agreement prove to be the solution at this point , that firm guarantees are demanded for improvement in all these areas .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all thank you for this very valuable debate .
During it , it became clear that the same phenomenon is evident in this Chamber as in the international community and among the moderate Arab countries too , that there are slightly different views about what kind of policy on Syria is the best and most effective to make the country once again a constructive member of the international community .
The European Union has come to the conclusion that isolation will drive Syria in the wrong direction , and the Council specifically discussed this and laid down new policy on the matter at the start of August , so that we would be in contact with all the relevant players to resolve the Middle East question .
Syria is one of the relevant players .
Consequently , I can say , for example in reply to the hope expressed by Mr Swoboda that the Presidency must listen in particular to those that aim to build robust dialogue with Syria , that that is what we have also done .
One example of that is the approaching Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Foreign Ministers in Tampere , to which Syria has also been invited .
It is also certainly valuable to build and activate dialogue between parliaments , as Mr Salafranca mentioned in his speech .
The right circumstances and also the right timing are very important in the rewarming of these relations .
Obviously , in the measures that we ourselves are taking we will aim specifically to give Syria the opportunity to play a positive role .
It is very apparent from this discussion that in the search for a solution to the situation in the Middle East everything affects everything else .
Accordingly , over recent months we have actively tried to find a comprehensive , long-term and lasting solution to the Middle East question .
The search has been a very active one .
High Representative Javier Solana is in the region today in fact , and he intends to visit not only Israel and the Palestinian territories , but also Beirut , Jordan and possibly other places too .
In other words , contact with the various parties is very important .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , honourable Members , thank you for pushing forward this process of reflection on this strategically vitally important country in the Middle East .
I think this was a very important debate .
Allow me to answer a few very specific questions .
One was on human rights .
In the absence of an association agreement in force , the European Union has no platform for an in-depth dialogue on human rights with Syria where it could also discuss critical issues - and there are many to be discussed - such as the abrogation of emergency rule , the amendments to the laws on politically partisan NGOs , the granting of citizenship to stateless Kurds or the setting-up of a national council on human rights .
I do not think we should make total progress on human rights a precondition for signature .
However , we - meaning the representatives of the Commission and the Member States in Damascus especially - use our political instruments such as démarches and political declarations to denounce the most severe abuses of human rights .
For instance , we raise with the Syrian authorities the situation of prisoners of conscience , detainees , on a very regular basis ; and we also systematically observe the trials at the state security court .
In addition , through our cooperation programmes we are supporting the emergence of an open civil society in Syria .
The Commission therefore launched six micro-projects in January under the European initiative for democracy and human rights .
These target Arab lawyers , women 's organisations , refugee organisations , the Kurdish minority and the media , and also promote women 's and children 's rights .
However , in the present situation of tightening control by the security services , those projects and most training activities have had some difficulty in getting off the ground .
The authorities challenge the legality of these projects in Syria , political NGOs are sometimes tolerated but not always authorised , and we are therefore investigating solutions to these problems .
Of course , we have also raised individual cases directly with the Syrian Government .
With regard to questions of assistance , EU financial assistance has not gone to supporting the regime , as was mentioned earlier by some colleagues here .
It has gone , for example , to supporting the private sector and also the small and medium-sized enterprises .
We have helped the people directly , for instance through health programmes , and we have targeted help at getting reforms to open up the economy and trade , competition and investment - things that will be very important for the future development of the country .
Finally , I would like to reiterate a point I made earlier .
We are in favour of a dialogue with Syria with a political and economic perspective .
We are trying to maintain a positive perspective , building on progress that has already been made , for example in supporting the reforms the government is undertaking to open up the economy that I have just mentioned to and decentralise power .
But at the same time , as I said before , we will be looking at practical action on regional issues such as the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 , and playing a positive role , for instance in Palestine .
This will determine how fast we can proceed with our future engagement , and I see that a great majority in this debate also seems to lean in that direction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0437 / 2006 ) .
We will be taking the following questions to the Council .
Subject : Provision of services and freedom of movement for families with children
European families are protesting in increasing numbers against the discrimination to which they are subjected in connection with the provision of services and exercising their right to freedom of movement within the EU because they are accompanied by children under the age of 15 .
Recent articles in the Greek press have taken a positive view of the exclusion of children from commercial public premises such as hotels , restaurants , etc .
What measures will the Council take to eliminate discrimination and age ' racism ' against children , adolescents and their families ?
Are there plans to harmonise the requirements in regard to the provision of services and guaranteeing freedom of movement within the EU to prevent the infringement of the rights of young Europeans and their families ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , in reply to the question the Council would first like to remind everyone that Article 18 ( 1 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community states : ' every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States , subject to the limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect ' .
As the honourable Member certainly knows , the Commission , as the body that monitors the Treaty , must ensure that the provisions of the Treaty and the rules and regulations made by the institutions pursuant to it are complied with .
That being the case , the question by the honourable Member should really be put to the Commission .
In July this year the Commission published a communication aiming at an EU strategy on children 's rights with the purpose of promoting and protecting children 's rights effectively in internal and external policies of the European Union and supporting measures taken in this area by the Member States .
Decisions on child and family policy proper are taken at national level .
( EL ) Madam President , I too wish to take my turn in reminding the Council representative that the Commission may design the strategy , but the application of it is undertaken by the Member States .
In the Council , all the Member States must establish what the situation is and what the problems are of families moving with children ; that is why I put this question to the Council , in knowledge of the Treaties and the new Commission communication .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , we all have laws to prevent discrimination against all population groups and ages , such as the Racial Equality Directive and the Directive on discrimination in employment and occupation .
They incorporate rules on such areas as the prohibition of discrimination in many everyday situations .
As for the examples given of , for example , restaurant culture by the honourable Member , we do have to remember that citizens of the Member States , in addition to the Council , have , as consumers and , when it comes down to it , those who are paying for these services , also have considerable powers of influence on what sort of culture should evolve from the perspective of families with children .

( DE ) Madam President , I just wanted to draw your attention to the fact that this is a problem not only in Greece , but also in Austria , where it is positively prevalent , and where hotels count it as one of their main selling points that they allow no children , or will not accommodate families with them .
What I would like to know is whether something can be done about this , at any rate as regards advertising .
There are , after all , other areas in which advertising can be restricted , and that might be one possibility .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , it is Council Regulation of 26 October 2004 establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union that provides for the establishment of Frontex and its tasks , structure and the requirements pertaining to its financial administration .
Under the Regulation , the Council is given information concerning the Agency 's action programme , the general and special risk analyses that it prepares , an annual general report and the Agency 's budget .
Measures to amend the Regulation 's provisions may only be proposed by the Commission .
It is primarily the task of Frontex 's Management Board to approve measures relating to its organisational structure , staffing policy and action programme , and the Council takes no part in it .
It is still the responsibility of the institutions of the EU to evolve Community policy on the control of external borders and relevant legislation .
Close coordination between the agency and the institutions must therefore be assured , and there are arrangements in existence for this purpose under the Frontex Regulation .
Regarding this , I would refer you to the relevant Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a mechanism for the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
Its purpose is to enhance operative activities undertaken by the Agency and promote solidarity between Member States and the Community during a crisis .
The European Council proposed last December that the Member States , the Council and the Commission should take certain measures before the end of the year to improve practical cooperation among the Member States .
These included strengthened control and monitoring of the EU 's southern maritime border and the Medsea study on the Mediterranean Coastal Patrols Network , which Frontex has now completed .
In recent months the Council , for example in its session on 24 July and at the informal ministerial meeting in September , has been paying particular attention to improving operative cooperation between the Member States and Frontex , and , in particular , the situation in the Mediterranean region and Africa .
On these occasions such themes as Frontex 's role and its participation in operative activities , especially in the Mediterranean and with regard to the African situation , were discussed .
The Council was satisfied with the measures implemented by Frontex and the Commission and stressed that operative cooperation should continue to be developed further .
At the end of October the Council also adopted its conclusions on strengthening the external maritime border in the south .
In its conclusions it urged Frontex to promote a feasibility study on the establishment of a European Surveillance System which , in its initial phase , would cover the whole of the southern maritime border of the Community and the Mediterranean Sea .
The Council also asked Frontex to consider setting up regional centres with links to one another , which would be at Frontex 's disposal in operational matters in different maritime areas or sections thereof .
The Council , however , does not have to propose that appropriations should be granted for Frontex 's budget for additional action .
According to Article 33 of Council Regulation establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union and the Hague Programme , the work of Frontex will be assessed with reference to a Commission evaluation before the end of next year .
( ES ) Madam President , the Council 's reply has reassured me , and I am going to say something surprising : Frontex has worked .
Despite being at an experimental stage , its work in the Canary Islands , in the large area of sea surrounding the Canary Islands , has been effective .
The concern is the precariousness of the institutions and the lack of economic and financial resources .
The Presidency has referred to that , but the specific question I would like to ask is whether you believe that it will be possible to continue the Frontex operation in the Atlantic after 1 January , and whether the Council believes it is worth spending money on resources , on maintaining this Agency , which , I would repeat , has worked , is still working , and is proving to be effective .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , first it is obviously encouraging to hear that Frontex has been successful .
While we admit that it has also had some problems , or at least challenges , we have to remember that the Agency is still very young and , at the same time , it has its administrative structure and tasks to attend to .
Moreover , it has already been involved in very many operations both in the Mediterranean Sea and elsewhere .
Obviously , whether the scope and effectiveness of this operation can continue also depends on additional financing .
( DE ) Madam President , the President-in-Office of the Council spoke about how difficult it is to get funding for Frontex .
Frontex is being supported .
Is the Council also considering doing something to relieve the burden , for example mounting information campaigns in the countries of origin , in order to make potential migrants aware of the possible consequences of illegal immigration or of the other options available for legal immigration ?
Is it also considering reducing the load by taking action that would make it impossible , in future , to legalise illegal immigrants in the way in which they have been ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , one very crucial question , which relates generally to illegal immigration or immigration as a whole , is obviously the extent to which we cooperate with countries of origin and transit .
Recently in the Union the aim has been to focus special attention on points of contact between immigration itself and development , working on the notion that we should be able to enhance cooperation with countries of departure so that the pressures on people migrating are also lessened in those places .
Of course , one area of this cooperation with countries of origin is to provide information on what is actually possible and what is not .
In November the next high level conference between the EU and African countries will be held in Tripoli and the main theme there will be immigration .
I have two points .
First of all , a few months ago we were hearing about problems around the hosting of the agency in Poland : inadequate provision of accommodation and so on .
Have those problems been resolved ?
Secondly , will the Finnish Presidency pledge to support and to persuade other Member States to accept the amendments that the European Parliament is about to vote to the budget of FrontEx ?
This is Amendment 836 , to restore the sum as proposed by the Commission , i.e. , not to follow the Council cuts and to put even more resources in reserve .
Will the Finnish Presidency support that increase in resources ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium with a view to the adoption by the Council of a Framework Decision on the recognition and enforcement in the European Union of prohibitions arising from convictions for sexual offences committed against children of November 2004 is at present being debated by working groups in the Council .
Most recently it was discussed by the criminal case cooperation team in October , just a week ago .
An examination of the initiative also forms part of the discussions which the Council working groups are holding on other proposals , such as that for a Framework Decision on taking account of convictions in the Member States of the European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings and that for a Council Framework Decision on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from criminal records between Member States .
There are thus two other proposals for framework decisions on the table .
The aim which these instruments have in common is to create structures to ensure that details on someone 's criminal background are available generally and readily .
When all the Member States have eventually implemented these acts in their national legislation , it should be easier to prevent a convicted individual from working with children or committing crimes against children once again .
The Council is therefore continuing to debate these proposals for framework decisions .
It seems to me that the Council is going nowhere fast on these proposals .
Nearly two years ago we had an ambitious programme from the Commission in response to strong public interest in ensuring that criminals , like sex offenders , are not the ones who exploit borders and profit from them .
It seems to me that Member States are not getting their act together on this .
I do not understand how we can tell our public that the EU is effective in combating crime if the Council is so slow in deciding on these top-priority measures to make sure that criminals are truly tracked , wherever they go .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the protection of children , especially from the possibility of new assaults by those convicted of sex crimes , is obviously vitally important .
There are , however , many very practical problems , as well as problems relating to principles , attached to these proposals for framework decisions , for example , the fact that this ban on occupation principle does not even exist in all the Member States .
We therefore need to look for a way of dealing with the problem which can be applied in all the Member States of the Union .
( PT ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , thank you very much for the information .
My question is very precise and direct , so that we can judge your position .
Does the Council , that is to say , the Finnish Presidency , not believe that citizens having access to personal data on those convicted of paedophilia or sexual violence against young people is an excellent tool in the fight against crime of this nature ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , this is an aim we all share : children can be protected from convicted individuals and there are different ways of doing that in the Member States .
For example , in my country there is a system in place where an employer has the right to obtain the criminal records of those seeking or applying for certain kinds of job and to use them to consider whether the person is suitable for the job .
Such jobs , however , are very precisely defined .
There are different ways of doing this in the Member States , and that is one reason why progress in this matter has been slow in the opinion of many Members of Parliament .
I should like to refer to a specific case as a means of illustrating that the sharing of information is not enough .
Paul Hunter Redpath is a convicted paedophile who served the custodial part of his sentence in my constituency of Northern Ireland and then recently took refuge in the Republic of Ireland , in breach of the probation part of his sentence .
He can now live there freely , and is unable to be arrested , whereas in Northern Ireland the penalty for breaching his probation order would be an immediate return to prison .
Is this case not a clear indication that full extradition arrangements are needed , otherwise justice will be evaded and full protection not afforded to the vulnerable ?
Can the President-in-Office accept that proper extradition is the optimum requirement ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , this Question Time slot is obviously not about what I can personally endorse , but what sort of discussions and decisions the Council should aspire to .
The Council , however , now intends to proceed in accordance with the assimilation principle , which means that a Member State would be obliged to attach to convictions in a foreign court legal effects that are equivalent to those which they attach to national convictions , although this is ultimately very much to do with wider cooperation on justice and home affairs and how we can otherwise make progress in the area of mutual recognition of convictions and judgments and the matter of extradition .
Since its author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .
Subject : Aviation sector
Can the European Council outline what new measures it intends to pursue to improve passenger safety on European airlines in light of the ongoing threat of international terrorism ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , Regulation ( EC ) No 2320 / 2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing common rules in the field of civil aviation security represents the Community 's current legal framework in the area of civil aviation security .
The Regulation , which was made as a result of the September 11 terrorist attacks , has been in force since January 2003 .
To correct the problems which emerged in the implementation of this Regulation , the Commission put forward a proposal in September 2005 to replace the Regulation with a new one .
In March of this year the Council adopted a general approach on the Commission proposal .
In June the European Parliament adopted its position at first reading , which contained 85 amendments .
On the basis of this , the Council achieved political consensus on the proposal on 12 October .
The adopted text is to be formally reinforced as a common position in a future Council session and submitted to the European Parliament , so that consensus can be swiftly reached at second reading .
In consideration of the security problems experienced by the United Kingdom in August this year , the Council hopes that the institutions will reach consensus on the new Regulation as quickly as possible .
The impact of the new security measures recently introduced by the Commission and its committee for civil aviation security should , in addition , be monitored continually .
Is the Council satisfied that there is enough cooperation between EU Member States in the fight against international terrorism ?
Do you agree that Europol and the EU Anti-Terror Office are being adequately funded ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , naturally we can always improve our efforts in the fight against terrorism .
A lot of measures have of course been taken , especially in recent years , but there is always definitely room for improvement .
( LT ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , most of us arrive here by air .
I cannot remember even one case over recent years when aircraft were not delayed by a half-hour or an hour .
Usually , the reason given is security issues .
Could the reason be - and perhaps this really is the case - poorly organised and performed work ?
Will we still be able to verify whether security requirements are truly being applied after adoption of this document ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , as well as decision-making it is obviously very important that we monitor implementation and also continuously monitor changes in the operational environment .
It is also vital , of course , that we are able to establish identical rules for different airports and different Member States .
Obviously , good predictability will definitely enable us in everyday practical circumstances to tell beforehand how much time security checks , for example , will take up and thereby reduce the amount of inconvenience caused to passengers .
I nevertheless think that we who travel very regularly also need to get used to the fact that air travel has become a more challenging occupation than before .
( DE ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I would like - in my capacity as rapporteur on the extension of the powers of the European Air Safety Agency - to report to you that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has , with reference to this subject , also discussed the possibility of entrusting the EASA with security functions .
I would be interested to know what the Presidency of the Council thinks about that idea .
Now for my second question . Something that has struck me personally is that the privatisation of security checks at airports has had the consequence that these are less able to deal with extreme situations than , for example , the police .
Would it not make sense to reverse this privatisation and have security checks carried out once more by state agencies ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , at the request of the Irish Government , the Council altered the rules on language in June 2005 and added the Irish language to the list of official and working languages of the European Union institutions .
The Council decided that the institutions would not have to draft all legal provisions in Irish or publish them in this language in the Official Journal of the European Union .
This decision is therefore a departure from the rules .
It will remain in force for five years and that period may be renewed .
It was also decided that the derogation would not apply to the regulations made in the codecision procedure .
In accordance with the decision to add Irish to the list of working languages , the Council has taken all the necessary practical steps to ensure that there is due implementation of the decisions as from 1 January 2007 , when the Regulation comes into force .
I thank the President-in-Office for her reply .
Can I take it that , apart from the derogation mentioned , the Irish language will be given equal treatment with all other languages of this Parliament ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , as I said , the Irish language has been added to the list of the official and working languages of the European Union on the strength of the derogation which I have just referred to .
Parliament will itself also have the right to decide how it will in practice implement this .
When I said , however , that the Council has taken all the necessary steps to implement the decision , that refers to many sorts of practical issues and in my first answer I did not want to describe in detail everything that will be taking place there , but everything that this decision requires .
- ( LT ) I have a question for Mrs Lehtomäki concerning the future ; while having 21 official languages in the European Union does , of course , reflect our precious national diversity , it is , on the other hand , becoming costly and increasingly complex .
What do the Council and the country holding the Presidency think about the future ?
Will this circle continue to expand or will some measures perhaps be applied to simplify language-related procedures ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , like the honourable Member , the Council is worried about tighter press censorship in China .
At all the rounds of the EU-China human rights dialogue held twice a year , the European Union has systematically and repeatedly urged China to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which contains rules on freedom of expression .
It has also encouraged China to lift travel restrictions on foreign journalists and made other demands that relate to interviewing Chinese citizens .
This issue was raised at the round of talks on 19 October in Beijing as part of the EU-China human rights dialogue .
( NL ) Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , when the freedom of the press is curbed in some poor African country , then the Council is the first to denounce this in the sharpest terms and to threaten sanctions .
When it happens in China , people simply express their concern .
This has all the hallmarks of double standards .
My question is specifically : will the violation of the freedom of press in China once again feature on the agenda at the next EU-China summit ?
Secondly , what specific measures will you be taking in order to actually demand that China 's freedom of press and human rights in general be upheld ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , at its meeting in June 2006 the European Council welcomed the progress that had been made in talks relating to the proposal put forward by the Commission in July last year for a Regulation establishing a European Agency for Fundamental Rights and a proposal for a Council decision empowering the European Agency for Fundamental Rights to pursue its activities in areas referred to under the third pillar in the Treaty on European Union , which is to say cooperation on justice and home affairs .
The European Council asked for the necessary measures to be implemented as soon as possible , so that the Agency could be set up and so that it could start operations on 1 January 2007 .
In accordance with the European Council conclusions , the Finnish Presidency held a number of bilateral meetings in July , August , September and October with the aim of resolving the main question still unanswered , namely extending the work of the Agency to areas covered by the third pillar in the Treaty on European Union .
At a Council session in early October the Presidency presented a review of the talks that had been held and asked for support for the idea of extending the work of the Agency to areas covered by the third pillar in the Treaty on European Union , but in a more restricted format than in the Commission 's original proposal .
The majority of the delegations that presented their view supported this approach by the Presidency , although some wondered whether a proper legal basis for the move would be found .
The Presidency is continuing to look at the options and will put forward an interim proposal to the delegations in the near future .
As regards the Agency 's competence , the aim of the Agency is to provide advice and expertise on fundamental rights to Community institutions , bodies and agencies when they are applying Community law , and in this way help them guarantee a respect for fundamental rights when they implement measures or determine policy within the context of their competences .
There is general consensus that establishing such an agency would create added value for EU policy on human rights and increase its coherence .
The Agency will also be the main point of contact in the European Union for matters relating to fundamental rights .
It will discharge its duties , complementing the work of the Council of Europe and in synergy with it , if the decisions on establishing it are taken .
The points you have raised reflect the concern that many of us in Parliament have that , once we propose this agency , the initial role we had envisaged for it will be diluted until it ends up as a think-tank or a contact point that would merely be distributing information from one Member State to another , rather than taking a leading role in defending fundamental rights .
Maybe you could enlighten us as to whether that is a true interpretation of what you have been outlining concerning the bilateral meetings .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , first it has to be said that it is intended that this Agency should be an advisory , expert body .
We also of course believe , however , that it would be difficult to justify to our citizens the establishment of a Fundamental Rights Agency which would be denied the right to exercise the key competences necessary to do its job and undertake action under the third pillar .
Accordingly , the work on this issue continues .
It seems to me that the Member States are muddling their way through to creating an agency that will not have within its responsibilities the very subject area where EU action is most likely to cause problems with regard to human rights .
I have a further question : does the Council not agree that we seem to be creating more and more agencies , like confetti sprinkled around the Member States , so that everybody has one , rather than when there is a real need - not so much this one , perhaps , but many of the others that have been created ?
All of them have a top-heavy structure with a management board with representation from every Member State and an administration that is sometimes smaller than the management board .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the Council is committed to doing more to build long-term relations with Iran based on trust and cooperation .
Improved relations will mean progress in all the problematic issues , among which are human rights , terrorism , Iran 's attitude to the peace process in the Middle East and local matters there , and Iran 's nuclear programme .
In the matter of Iran 's nuclear industry , the Council has many a time said it was committed to a diplomatic solution , which would take account of the international concern about Iran 's nuclear programme , but at the same time confirms Iran 's right to the peaceful utilisation of nuclear power in accordance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Regarding this , the Council stated on 17 October that it greatly valued the perseverance with which High Representative Javier Solana has since June encouraged Iran to respond to the demands of the International Atomic Energy Agency 's governing board and the UN Security Council and continued talks on long-term arrangements .
The EU views seriously the IAEA 's evaluation that it has not been able to make any progress in almost four years of continued close monitoring in its efforts to confirm the accuracy and scope of Iran 's announcements regarding the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme .
The EU is also very worried that Iran has not ended all its uranium enrichment and reprocessing activities , as the IAEA 's governing board and the UN Security Council have asked .
The Security Council stated in its Resolution 1696 that it intended to implement relevant measures under Article 41 unless Iran complied with the demand .
The Council accordingly is of the opinion that , if Iran continues its uranium enrichment activities , the Union will have no other alternative but to back talks on these sanctions .
The Council this month stated that the door to the negotiating chamber was still open for Iran , and urged the country strongly to opt for the positive approach that had been proposed for it .
The EU 's High Representative put forward to Iran on 6 June proposals drawn up by six countries .
These far-reaching proposals would form a basis for a long-term agreement and would give Iran everything it needs to develop its current civil nuclear energy sector , and they also take account of international concerns .
Opting for this positive approach would prepare the way for new relations with Iran , which could be based on mutual respect and extended cooperation in politics and economic matters .
The Council hopes that progress can be made along this enlightened path .
I can see that you are trying to have confidence-building measures between Europe and Iran , to try to better relations between the two of them and act as honest broker in this serious situation ; but the idea of sanctions does not really work .
It did not work in Iraq and it is not going to work in Iran .
It is quite a wealthy , oil-rich country and they will just carry on .
It may affect them somewhat , but it is not going to affect them that much in the long run .
There are certain issues that you touched on yourself .
One of these is the shipment of heroin out of Afghanistan through Iran , and considering that there are about three million heroin addicts in Iran and they have lost about 3000 troops on the border trying to stop this going on ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the Council agrees that trade could have major significance in bringing India and Pakistan closer together .
In its conclusions in February 2004 the Council repeated that it supported efforts to promote regional cooperation within the framework of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) and especially the agreement on establishing a free trade zone in South Asia by the year 2006 .
The EU is pleased with the recently signed South Asia Free Trade Agreement ( SAFTA ) , but understands that some Member States of SAARC still have unresolved bilateral issues .
Resolving these would give the Member States of the Association the opportunity to derive full benefit from the agreements they are signatories to .
Generally speaking , the EU still supports all the efforts being made to facilitate trade in multilateral contexts as they are an important way to strengthen trade and investment links between the different countries .
The decision by the SAARC ministerial council to confer on the EU the role of observer is a splendid opportunity to develop cooperation between SAARC and the EU .
Cooperation between the two was discussed at the Seventh EU-India Summit in Helsinki on 13 October .
The EU wants to improve the practical support it gives to SAARC .
The Commission has already drafted a programme on economic cooperation with SAARC .
The programme covers facilitation of trade , standards and cooperation between new businesses .
The aim is to promote trade within the region by aiding the implementation of SAFTA , and this , it is hoped , will provide the impetus for improved political relations in the region .
The SAARC Secretariat and the Member States of the EU intend to adopt this programme in the near future .
The Union is encouraging broad dialogue between India and Pakistan and hopes that trading and other relations will develop favourably , because that would promote stability in the whole region .
We welcome the fact that there have been moves to increase trust between India and Pakistan recently , as a result of which freer contacts between people , direct bus and train connections and visits by members of parliament and sports teams have become possible .
The Indian and Pakistani presidents met in Havana this September .
Relations between the two countries were discussed at general level at a summit meeting held on 13 October .
First of all I would like to thank the Council Presidency for the very detailed response to the question I tabled .
I would , however , like one further specific piece of information .
This goes back to my original question as to whether the particular issue in relation to Pakistan / India and Kashmir was actually specifically discussed at the EU Summit with India in Helsinki .
The reason I ask that is because both those nations are having detailed discussions at Foreign Secretary level on 14 and 15 November .
Is there a specific message to them from the Council ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , I was indeed present most of the time at this summit , but I do not remember how the Kashmir question arose .
I have had it confirmed to me , however , that this question was touched upon as part of the issue of regional stability and the situation in the region .
( LT ) Madam President-in-Office , I have a question in relation to next week 's visit of the delegation of the European Parliament to Kashmir by invitation of the Indian government .
What do you think the major states , primarily the United States and Russia , contribute to solving the problem of Kashmir and what else could the European Union do in this context ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the honourable Member raises an important issue in this question .
The Council , and the Council since the amendments made to the Treaty , together with the European Parliament have delivered an extensive Community code in the area of safety and security at work .
The Member States are responsible for implementing this code .
The Council welcomes the fact that in the case referred to in the honourable Member 's question , the Italian and Polish law enforcement agencies cooperated to close down the work camps referred to .
Although we , like the honourable Member , are concerned about this , it has to be said that responsibility for overseeing implementation of Community legislation in the Member States lies with the Commission , not the Council .
( PL ) Madam President , I have a question for the Presidency .
Would it not be possible to activate mechanisms , perhaps through EUROJUST , that would facilitate the creation of a special monitoring unit , particularly in cases of suspected cooperation between local authorities , and even local police , and the organisers of criminal activities , such as the labour camps for citizens of Central and Eastern Europe ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the Community code that exists for this sector and the secondary legislation that has been added to it demands a guarantee of equal treatment of nationals of other Member States with regard to working conditions .
It is a question of monitoring it , which is the task of the Member States ' own authorities .
In accordance with the principles of the rule of law and good governance , in the Union we have to expect these supervisory bodies also to act in accordance with the regulations , and insist on it .
- ( LT ) Mrs Lehtomäki , I would like to ask whether such camps in fact create a source of restriction for the free movement of persons .
This is the situation the old Member States were in after the introduction of a transitional period for the new ones .
By applying such a transitional period in Romania and Bulgaria , is it not encouraging illegal work ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Madam President , the Member States take decisions on whether to apply transition periods for new Member States regarding the free movement of the workforce .
There were also Member States which applied a period of transition in the previous round of enlargement , but no longer do so in this new round .
The reason is the perception that it is still better for a workforce to move within the framework of common European rules than create arrangements for derogations .
As I said in my answer to a previous question , equal treatment of the workforce is very well regulated , but of course we have to pay more and more attention to implementation and supervision .

( DE ) Madam President , my criticism is not directed at you , for I hold the way you run Question Time in high regard , but I really would like you to cast your mind back to Monday , when we determined the order in which business was to be conducted this week .

The Conference of Presidents envisaged that Question Time would last one and a half hours ; then the President reduced it to an hour .
Several Members protested at this , and there was no vote on it , and so I have worked on the assumption that we have available to us for Question Time the hour and a half that we are rightly due .
I would like to ask whether the Council might remain for another quarter of an hour or twenty minutes , or is there a trade union for Council presidencies that forbids them from answering questions after seven in the evening ?

Questions to the Council used to begin after 9 p.m , and that worked like a dream , with the Council staying until the following day .
To sum up , I think there is something wrong with this way of going about things .
Mr Posselt , much as I am delighted by your compliment , you are wrong about our debate on Monday , since it concerned the agenda rather than the Rules of Procedure , and it was the agenda that was the subject of a vote .
You can check that again in the Minutes .
We should all take Question Time seriously - or more seriously than we do - as an important prerogative of Members , and we should all work together to ensure that it is not dropped from the agenda too frequently .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Nairobi Conference on Climate Change ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Karl-Heinz Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Nairobi Conference on Climate Change B6-0440 / 2006 ) .
Μember of the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , the twelfth conference of the contracting parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Nairobi is the first such conference to be held in sub-Saharan Africa , the poorest area on the planet with which the European Union maintains particular political relations .
It is therefore only natural that the conference should focus on the needs of developing countries .
The European Union will stress in particular that combating climate change may be combined with fast economic development and , furthermore , that policies to reduce emissions must be incorporated into decision-making procedures in crucial sectors .
The development of the economies of the countries of Asia , Africa and South America , a secure energy supply and improved air quality are , for example , important - parallel - benefits of actions to combat climate change .
I believe that improving the understanding , at international level , of the dangerous repercussions of climate change and the show of interest in addressing the needs of developing countries will increase the potential for us to reach an agreement on the period after 2012 .
The European Union has four specific priorities in Nairobi .
Firstly , to achieve agreement on the institutional framework for the Adaptation Fund .
The fund will be financed from levies on the clean development mechanism and is expected to disburse more than EUR 350 million between 2008 and 2012 .
Secondly , to achieve agreement on the list of activities within the framework of the five-year programme of work on adaptation .
The programme contains a series of activities aimed to improve our adaptability , such as further improvement of our knowledge about the negative repercussions of climate change , its socio-economic repercussions and the weak points of our economies and societies to climate change .
Thirdly , to facilitate greater access to the clean development mechanism by the poor countries of Africa and other areas of the planet .
We need to address the question of the fair distribution of projects under the clean development mechanism , because only a small percentage of all the projects are destined for Africa .
Fourthly , the debate on the period after 2012 , which will continue , without being completed in Nairobi .
I truly believe that we still have a great deal of work in store .
There are various opinions as to what should be done .
The developing countries do not feel comfortable with the prospect of having to step up their efforts to combat climate change .
At the same time , numerous developing countries continue to hesitate to take the necessary measures to reduce emissions which are required in order to help limit the average rise in temperature on the planet by two degrees Celsius .
In Nairobi , the European Union will justifiably continue to maintain that the fight against climate change and the millennium development goals , are not only mutually compatible but also mutually dependent .
In Nairobi we hope to secure , on the one hand , a clear , specific and balanced approach and stable progress in the ad hoc working party on Article 3 , paragraph 9 , on the dialogue being held within the framework of the convention and , on the other hand , agreement on how the Kyoto Protocol will be revised on the basis of Article 9 .
However , we need to look beyond Nairobi , given that Europe needs to step up its efforts in order to persuade its partners throughout the world to continue efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions after 2012 .
It is very positive that 10 members of Parliament will be joining the delegation and I personally look forward - as over the last two years - to close cooperation with them .
I shall ensure that they are fully informed and shall pass all the available information on to them immediately .
We shall address the media together and I hope that the Members of Parliament will have contacts and dialogues with delegates from other countries during the conference .
In this way we shall be able to transfer to a global audience our ambition and joint vision for a sustainable future for mankind .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his well-chosen words here this evening .
I am delighted to be one of the ten MEPs in the European Parliament group in the EU delegation .
We are all members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and we will be led by our colleague , Mr Blokland , as our vice-chairman .
I had expected my colleague , Mr Florenz , to be leading on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , but I do not see him .
Part of his question was to put down yet again a marker in the sand about the fact that the members of the European Parliament 's delegation , as part of the EU delegation , will be treated as second-class citizens .
I know the Commissioner will tell us the tale about interinstitutional agreements , the Council , the Commission , precedence and practice .
Frankly , we are all sick of hearing that and we do not want to hear it any more .
The Commissioner is always excellent on these occasions and gives very generously of his time , as do his officials .
They brief us extremely well after the event , outside the door , but we are never let in , not even as observers at the high-level meetings .
I should like , on behalf of my PPE-DE Group colleagues and , I suspect , all colleagues , to be treated on a par with both the European Commission and the Council delegates who will be there .
If the Commission calls it an EU delegation , then the three EU parties who are present should be treated equally .
The Commissioner told us at a recent briefing that he does not expect spectacular breakthroughs .
This will be another interim COP , COP 12-MOP 2 if you like , but it is very important , as this is the first meeting on sub-Saharan Africa .
The Commissioner mentioned the need to extend CDMs .
At the moment only 2.5 % is spent in Africa in this area and that is mainly in Morocco and South Africa , and none in the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa as such .
A lot of work needs to be done there .
I am very interested in looking into the creation of a carbon fund for Africa , as the Commissioner has suggested , and where that will take us .
Who will finance the Adaptation Fund ?
The argument is about whether GEF will be the main source of funding and where that is going to be .
In Montreal it was agreed that there would be two tracks in the negotiations : one for the UNFCC framework and the other for the Kyoto Protocol .
I believe this clarifies where different countries stand .
Together we can make progress , bring in more of the developing countries and persuade more of our friends in the United States in particular to join us in the very important task of reducing carbon emissions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Al Gore has been travelling the world , spreading his message , for some time .
The climate is changing quickly , more quickly than expected .
Ice caps are melting , sea levels are rising and we will soon reach the point of no return .
That is when a political answer is expected .
We should not simply cry in Al Gore 's arms , but also start looking for a solution .
Nairobi presents us with an opportunity for meeting this challenge head-on .
When we discuss the energy crisis and climate problems , we should not be overcome by pessimism , because solutions are possible .
Where can we find these solutions ?
First of all by trusting our own measures .
I should like to take this opportunity to express once again my support in favour of the emissions trading system , even if it is far from perfect .
I am , above all , talking to the Commission , who should ensure that the national allocation plans are credible and that over-allocation is a thing of the past .
In the longer term , we must consider auctioning emission rights as an option , because this is how we can prevent the windfall profits in electricity companies and the all too generous allocation of free emission rights .
Secondly , I would argue in favour of a large-scale investment in the development of new , clean energy .
Apart from existing initiatives , there is much scope for innovation .
There is the blue energy , harnessed by mixing salt and fresh water , that can produce energy .
Or the ladder mills with high-level kites that work as windmills and generate energy .
Other alternatives include energy-producing greenhouses and houses , geothermal energy and solar mirrors ; so much can be done .
We must capitalise on these possibilities by means of technological innovation .
This must be funded by governments but , in time , also by auctioning emission rights .
Thirdly , we must be pro-active in cooperating with countries such as China , which opens a new power station every month and needs clean coal technology , which we must supply .
Thanks to the transfer of technology , China may well take on board obligations after 2012 .
If China joins in , participation from the US will also be more likely .
Fourthly , we must invest generously in the adjustment fund .
Europe has the historical responsibility of climate change , and it is up to us to help the developing countries to adjust to its implications .
Climate change is not always a popular subject in developing countries .
A leader of a developing country - Mr President , I had been given an extra minute , because Mrs Ferreira had generously given me her speaking time , which gives me a total of three minutes - once said to a Dutch environment minister : ' First , we will become as rich as you , and only then will we worry about climate change as much as you do . '
I think that things could be done differently . They could become rich without CO2 emissions .
Europe has the duty to help them achieve this , and we must , in Nairobi , show them that we really mean it .
Commissioner , I am looking forward to an excellent group effort during the Nairobi conference .
Needless to say , I wholeheartedly support Mrs Doyle 's appeal .
I think that we must be involved in all negotiations as much as possible and have maximum access to the meetings , and I know that you will do your level best in this respect .
I should like to close by repeating that I hope for good cooperation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for coming to speak to such a packed house about the most important subject facing the planet !
You suggested before that this conference of the parties in Nairobi is a bit of a marking-time sort of meeting , that the lateral events might be as important as the main ones .
But we have often heard that , with every month that passes , the problems become greater and more difficult to resolve .
So perhaps we cannot afford to have any more intermediate events : the stakes have to be raised and you have to try and extract everything you can from every possible meeting .
I would like to raise three particular issues .
First of all , transport emissions within the European Union .
According to current figures , five of the major car manufacturers are going to reach the voluntary agreement target of 140g of CO2 by 2008 , but 75 % are not on target to reach that .
Just remember what that means .
They signed a voluntary agreement with the Commission , with the European Union .
In their own private boardrooms they have looked at the figures and recognised that they could make more profits out of SUVs and four-wheel drives , and they have deliberately decided that they are not going to fulfil that commitment .
They have torn it up , they have not shown good faith and it is now time for the Commission to clamp down really hard .
We know from the five who are meeting the target that there is nothing special about 140g .
You need tough action , and I hope that will be forthcoming in the next few months .
Secondly , the national allocation plans .
I know that you are sending the national allocation plans back to the Member States and saying that a 15 % margin between allocations and real CO2 emissions is far from good enough .
This is an impossible situation .
You know that this is the most important instrument .
You need to be tough and to use every resource the Commission has at its disposal to emphasise that national governments have to act on the fine speeches they make in Council .
Finally , looking ahead to the post 2012 emissions trading scheme , how are you going to make it work in future ?
Free allocations were a good start , but proved pretty weak in practice .
Auctioning will still give windfall profits to some of the major power generators .
You think you have to start looking at benchmarking , which is very difficult .
But you need to tell industry now across the whole of Europe that we are going to reward best practice and it should start investing now in making a difference to our planet .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the message that we are receiving from the world of science is becoming ever more serious : the more recent the study , the more serious the message from science is on accelerated climate change .
We are approaching a threshold , past which major disasters are unavoidable .
That is what British Foreign Minister Margaret Beckett said and she went on to say we are heading for climate chaos .
At the same time the economic analyses show that very ambitious emission reductions are very reasonable in terms of cost and they will of course be a lot cheaper than letting climate change run riot .
Public awareness of this is growing , reflected , for example , in the opinion expressed by the European Trade Union Confederation ( ETUC ) that Europe must reduce its emissions by 75 % by the middle of the century and it cannot wait about for the others to follow .
Even in the United States of America public opinion is changing .
That is evident from the huge success of Al Gore 's film , long articles in the big newspapers on climate change and its possible solution , and , most recently , the latest issue of Scientific American on energy without coal .
In this situation what we really need is leadership on the part of the EU .
In the United States too , those who desire responsible climate protection look to Europe , and what Europe does encourages them .
We must be worthy of this trust .
Neither can we be content in the context of international talks with waiting and wasting time .
We have to draft our own constructive proposals on what the world should do after 2012 .
Within Europe too , we have to make our own emission reduction commitments and take action in line with the aim to prevent the world from heating up by more than two degrees .
We also need to implement our own commitments under Kyoto , and , with regard to that , the emissions trading system is very important .
I urge the Commission to be strict .
It is not enough that emissions are traded ; emissions trading must also result in a reduction in emissions in the way described in the Kyoto Protocol .
Business also needs European leadership .
So that it can invest wisely it needs long-term emission reduction targets .
The wrong investments will become very expensive .
The lifetime of a power plant is 40 years .
Power plants that are hostile to the climate should no longer be built at all .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , there is no doubt in anyone 's mind that climate change is for real .
The average temperature is rising every year , and this year , unfortunately , was no exception .
That is why last week , Prime Ministers Balkenende and Blair wrote a letter to the Council Presidency requesting for practical action .
I quote from their letter : ' We only have ten to fifteen years to take the steps that are needed to prevent us from going beyond the point of no return ' .
I should like to find out what steps we can expect very shortly , as time is pressing .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the Commissioner for the energy efficiency action plan that was published last week , although I should like to add in this connection that the target percentage of 20 % is , first of all , too low and secondly , will never be met if it is not combined with reduction targets for the Member States .
As Mrs Doyle and Mrs Corbey have already said , the delegation from this House insists on the climate conference pledging that we finally be admitted to all the meetings that are organised by the EU delegation .
Commissioner Dimas knows this and we count on his support in order to achieve this .
We are an official EU institution and are therefore just as much entitled to attend those meetings as are the others .
Mr President , as we prepare for the next conference on climate change in Nairobi , what is most urgently needed is honesty .
It is true that we are proud of the progress we have made so far , but what is the outcome in terms of overall emission reductions ?
The world needs efficient climate policies that deliver and not unfounded complacency .
We all know and agree that we need to move from one-sided EU climate politics to a global front , as only truly global action will lead to efficient emission reductions .
Therefore , for the sake of the climate and to really win the battle , let us be honest when analysing the problems arising from the Kyoto Protocol , as well as from the EU ETS preparing for Kyoto .
I am afraid that the headlines have already been written : ' Nairobi was a success and the EU leads the way ' .
But is this the right way ?
Understandably for the EU , it is politically important to stand in the front line and to show a good example , encouraging others to follow sooner or later .
However , unless the front cannot be widened , the EU efforts will be like taking a few drops out of the ocean or having a haircut to lose weight .
What makes this especially challenging is the effect that one-sided efforts have on the markets .
In the global markets , this means giving the competitive advantage to the polluter , as the cost of environmental investments and emission rights cannot be included in the prices .
The temptation is for the international capital of the global markets to be invested where there are neither emission restrictions nor environmental norms .
A pollution shift is not a pollution cut .
Interestingly , the last conference on climate change in Montreal was publicly described as a victory .
Looking at the results , however , there is not much reason to celebrate .
In terms of emission reductions , not a single step forward was taken in Montreal .
There is no implication that the mitigation front would be widened .
With the Kyoto Protocol , only a quarter of global emissions are controlled .
That is not enough .
Mr President , Commissioner , climate change is no longer speculation , it is a fact .
As is the prospect of a countdown to unprecedented catastrophe for further generations if the present unacceptable situation continues .
The time has come for brave and bold decisions that will bring about drastic measures which can secure significant results .
The EU has in the past taken a leading role in this field , and the UN Nairobi Conference presents our opportunity and our duty to press for concrete and effective action .
We no longer have the luxury of waiting for those who still need convincing , or continuing to tolerate those who simply do not care .
In my view at least , the following two points must be included in our Nairobi strategy : firstly , strict emission reduction targets must be set and severe penalties must be envisaged and implemented for those who fail to meet them ; secondly , the international community must isolate those countries that have not signed the relevant conventions and are not willing to cooperate in the joint fight against climate change .
Here I am referring particularly , of course , to the United States , which alone is responsible for one third of global carbon dioxide emissions .
The stance of the USA is represented by the extraordinarily selfish and inconceivably arrogant way the US State Department 's spokesman , Adam Ereli , commented on the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by Russia in 2004 .
He said , ' We do not believe that the Kyoto Protocol is something that is realistic for the United States and we have no intention of signing or ratifying it ' .
It is about time we stood up to the US and told it straight that if it does not sign and ratify the Kyoto Protocol forthwith , our transatlantic relations will suffer a very heavy blow indeed .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to express my appreciation for the opportunity to respond to some of the questions raised in this debate and to express my thanks for all the positive contributions .
If Nairobi is a success , it will mean that we have made the right decisions and the right agreements .
The Commission recognises the need for the European Union to maintain its leading role in not only international but also domestic efforts to fight climate change .
I agree that it is important to assist developing countries to adapt to the adverse effects of climate change and to help them in deploying sustainable technologies .
A few days ago , the Commission proposed the new Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund .
The anticipated total initial funding from public and commercial sources is EUR 100 million .
This new initiative aims to boost climate-friendly technologies in Africa in particular .
In addition , we have the Adaptation Fund .
We hope it will be agreed in Nairobi to make this operational .
The fund will be financed by 2 % on the proceeds of the clean development mechanism .
We expect about EUR 350 million to be available for investments in developing countries and in Africa for the period 2008 to 2012 .
The European Union can only be credible in its leadership role when it achieves meaningful reductions in domestic emissions and complies with international commitments under the Kyoto Protocol .
The second national allocation plans of the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme will be a decisive test .
If Member States put more allowances into the European market than companies are likely to emit collectively , the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme would fail .
Mr Davies said that collectively the first 17 plans notified propose a total allocation that exceeds 2005 emissions of these Member States by about 15 % , which is really a lot .
I am determined that we shall not permit the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme to fail and the Commission will assess all the National Allocation Plans in a consistent and fair manner .
All the Member States will have to contribute to the success of the Emissions Trading Scheme in the period 2008 to 2012 .
I agree that we should try very hard with our public relations and the possibilities for influencing our governments , but also your involvement and action is important in this crucial phase of the Emissions Trading Scheme .
I would ask you that together we ensure that , in all the capitals of the Member States and in Brussels , this debate on the allocation is about how much more we should reduce , rather than how much more we can emit .
In the next few days , a communication on the Emissions Trading Scheme should be adopted by the Commission , launching a review of this important scheme .
This will address its scope , how to make it simpler and more predictable , strengthening compliance and linking up with Emissions Trading Schemes elsewhere .
As regards tackling transport emissions , which contribute to about 22 % of the emissions in the European Union , this year the Commission will put forward a legislative proposal to include the aviation sector in European Union emissions trading .
Also this year , the Commission will review the possibilities for further reductions of carbon dioxide emissions from cars after 2008-2009 , with a view to meeting the Community target of 120g of carbon dioxide per kilometre by 2012 .
That will , of course , require legislation .
The Commission is also exploring options for a legal framework in the European Union to allow the safe capture and underground storage of carbon dioxide from industrial installations , provided that that is considered appropriate .
The Commission also intends to promote adaptation measures , helping the regional and national decision-makers to deal with increasingly evident impacts of climate change .
On the basis of a Green Paper on adaptation to climate change , to be launched at a conference in Brussels on 1 December , the Commission will begin a public debate on the need to adapt to unavoidable climate change .
Most importantly , we will have to further frame the international debate after 2012 .
Next January , the Commission is planning to release its energy package .
A core part of the package will be the strategic European Union energy review .
This will put forward an alternative energy scenario for the European Union that is in line with the European Union 's long-term climate change objective .
Close to the adaptation of the energy package , the Commission will also be releasing a Green Paper on the European Union 's views on further action to tackle climate change .
This Green Paper will respond to the European Council 's request to develop a European Union strategy to limit global warming to 2 ° C , compared to pre-industrial levels .
It will identify concrete proposals , both within the European Union and internationally , for achieving that objective .
One of our main objectives will be to bring on board the United States and other fast-developing countries like China and India in a common but differentiated way , as provided for by the United Nations Convention on Climate Change .
The Commission will ensure that the energy package and the Green Paper put forward a climate and energy strategy for the European Union that is coherent , coordinated and sustainable .
I believe that since last year in Montreal there is a certain new momentum in the international debate on climate change .
While we need to keep up the pace in domestic efforts , in the international process we will have to remain patient and continue to build trust .
Finally , I would like to say that Al Gore has really helped a lot in raising awareness in the European Union and I had the honour to introduce him to a packed theatre in Brussels about a month ago .
I have received one motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Inland waterway transport ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Wortmann-Kool , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the promotion of inland waterway transport : NAIADES , an integrated European Action Programme for inland waterway transport .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to convey my heartfelt thanks to the Vice-President of the Commission for ' NAIADES ' , the Action Programme for inland waterway transport .
Parliament is your ally , because inland waterway transport must be given a prominent place on the European agenda .
Our report has received unanimous support from the Committee on Transport and Tourism and I should like to extend warm thanks to my fellow MEPs , the shadow rapporteurs , as well as the staff for their efforts .
Mr Vice-President , although Parliament backs your goals , we do think that more ambition is called for if they are to be capable of being achieved .
In the report , Parliament underlines , above all , the importance of reliable inland waterways .
This is , after all , the key to their success and to their expansion .
Reliable inland waterway transport hinges on sound infrastructure and transhipment facilities , and the current maintenance backlog of the inland waterways infrastructure in Europe is one of the most urgent problems to be resolved .
In this respect , the new Member States , with their specific problems , must receive special attention .
Prime responsibility lies , of course , with national or regional authorities , which give too little priority in this area .
This House also wants to see more funding within the framework of the TENs , especially where priority projects are concerned , and we are still waiting for the appointment of a TEN coordinator .
Could you promise that you will come up with a proposal shortly ?
Parliament would also like greater priority and a higher preferential rate of 20 % for all inland waterway projects of common interest , which will make it possible to back many small infrastructure projects , for the bulk of the funds have , so far , in fact been diverted to rail and road , which has to change if we take the NAIADES Programme seriously .
River information services projects must also be considered for a contribution from the multi-annual programme .
This is something Parliament will be voting in favour of tomorrow , and is also what the Finnish Presidency has proposed in the Council .
If you can give it your backing therefore , things are bound to fall into place .
Parliament is also ambitious where the environment is concerned .
We hope that the Commission will present regulations for cleaner fuel as quickly as possible .
Last Friday , we received additional information from your offices , for which we are indebted .
Clearly , much research has been done , also into the technical and economic impact .
The results appear promising , and that is why I should like to ask you to table a sound proposal when the directive is reviewed .
It is important not to lose track of the prospect that IWT will be just as clean as road transport .
This is also something the sector itself is in favour of .
I have read in the paper that the sector believes it could achieve more via the Central Consultancy Register , since the Commission is said not to want to rush things .
I hope you will be able to put my mind at rest about this .
Much has been said about the innovation fund , which , in my view , is a wonderful instrument to flesh out this fine Action Programme .
The sector has good ideas of its own , and EUR 40 million have been set aside in Brussels .
This House is of the opinion that the Commission and Council should also show commitment and should match the same amount , so that EUR 120 million would become available .
The Council has produced little in the way of concrete commitment , but would you be in a position to convince them ?
Even more importantly , would you be prepared to make these EUR 40 million available over the next few years ?
I consider this to be a test case to demonstrate whether you really want to implement the Action Programme .
The Action Programme contains various other points we are very happy to endorse : a funding manual , guidelines for state support and the announced screening of existing legislation , which is desperately needed in order to trim down the administrative burden .
I should , in this connection , like to draw your attention to problematic environmental legislation .
It is not for no reason that I have left the institutional issue to last , something for which I have set out a clear course in my report .
We must focus on cooperation , take into consideration the current competences of all participating parties and capitalise on the expertise of international organisations .
A battle over powers will only have a delaying effect .
We must start implementing the Action Programme as a matter of urgency .
Finally , the Commission will also need to show a real commitment to action .
By rolling up their sleeves , the Commission will prove that it is really taking inland waterways to heart and only then will the time be right to consider , if necessary - and I am not convinced of this yet - the institutional relations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Wortmann-Kool on this excellent report .
The Resolution shows that there is broad agreement between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on the promotion of inland waterway transport .
Inland waterway transport is safe , low-polluting and energy efficient , and offers great reserve capacities .
Despite the advantages it offers , inland waterway transport is under-used : it represents scarcely 6 % of the total overland goods transport in the Union , even though , in a few Member States , its modal share stands at 40 % .
Today , Europe has 36 000 km of inland waterways .
We are talking here about a genuine trans-European network .
We need a European approach in order to promote this mode of transport .
It can achieve a far greater modal share if , as you just pointed out , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , our approach is accompanied by concrete action .
I am grateful to Parliament for the support that it has given me via this report by Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
I am going to confine myself , Mr President , to a few remarks about the main points , starting with the improvement of market conditions .
We must develop new multi-modal , innovative services , so as to enable inland waterway transport to play its role among the large seaports and the big cities in the Hinterland .
More than 70 % of the inland navigation sector is made up of small businesses , often owner-boatmen .
We need to create conditions that will help strengthen their position in the market : for example , improved access to funds through the removal of any regulatory and administrative barriers and clear indications as to what State aid is available .
The Commission is going to start work on State aid for this sector .
These guidelines will be published in 2008-2009 .
That is all I have to say on market conditions .
As regards the modernisation of the fleet , inland waterway transport must improve its logistical efficiency and its performance in relation to the environment and safety .
Innovations must be focused on the construction of boats - for example , the engine and the propulsion system - and on information and communication technologies for what are known as river information services .
A regulatory framework already exists , but we must ensure that the system is actually implemented .
That also applies to the standards applicable to fuel intended for inland navigation .
Stricter standards , which we should propose by the end of the year , will enable us to further improve the environmental quality of inland waterway transport .
I now come to the promotion of employment and skills .
Inland waterway transport suffers from a dearth of crews and a worsening shortage of candidates to take over businesses .
The strategy must be focused on an improvement to onboard working and living conditions and on professional training .
I plan to propose harmonising the requirements relating to crew members and to boatmasters ' certificates in 2008 via the mutual recognition procedure .
With regard to the image of waterway transport , we must correct the one that inland navigation currently suffers from .
We must make people aware of the real potential of inland navigation by implementing a network to promote inland waterway transport , as exists in certain regions .
With regard to waterway infrastructure , there are , within the network , bottlenecks that curb the competitiveness of inland waterway transport .
We must therefore remove the existing obstacles .
That is primarily a responsibility of the Member States , but the Community can help thanks to the trans-European networks .
In this context , the Commission prioritises the development of the two major waterway routes : the Rhine-Meuse-Danube route and the Seine-Scheldt link .
In the new financial regulation submitted for Parliament 's approval , we have proposed a 30 % rate of support for the waterway projects and the inclusion of these projects in the multi-annual programme .
I hope that the Council , like Parliament , will support our proposals .
The contribution of intelligent transport systems is vital .
We are preparing to implement river information services , by which , in practical terms , we mean a system for managing information concerning inland waterway transport , which will enable boatmen to plan their journeys better , to reduce the time they wait at locks and to constantly monitor transport .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool , you mentioned the appointment of a TEN coordinator .
I must say that we welcomed the positive results obtained by the six coordinators who have already been appointed .
Mr Costa , for his part , has also called for the appointment of a coordinator for both inland waterway transport and maritime transport .
I can tell you that my intention is indeed to select two coordinators over the next few weeks .
The NAIADES programme provides for a range of very different actions : harmonised legislation , strategic promotion and coordination measures .
All of these actions will only be effective , however , if the institutional framework is suitable .
The fact is that , today , we are faced with fragmented resources and efforts spread over different levels .
We therefore need to adapt the framework to the demands of an enlarged European market .
We are in the process of analysing different options .
The results of this analysis will be discussed with all of the parties concerned , with the Member States and with the international river commissions .
To conclude , we need this NAIADES programme to be a success and , to that end , we need to be able to rely on the support of decision-makers at every level : national and regional authorities , river commissions and businesses .
I am grateful to Parliament and to you , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , for sending out , with this report , a strong signal in favour of the promotion of inland navigation , which Europe needs now more than ever .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Vice-President Barrot has sketched a wide-ranging programme concerning inland waterway transport , on which we can only congratulate him .
Speaking from the perspective of Parliament , we consider this parliamentary report , prepared by Mrs Wortmann-Kool , to be a worthy statement and report on this wide-ranging programme .
On this matter our intentions perfectly match those of the Commission .
From among the various strategic ramifications , I would like to underline a single issue , that of infrastructure .
Recent floods have demonstrated that in terms of infrastructure , and within that , specifically with regard to trying to improve navigability , we have to proceed cautiously in order to guarantee navigation on a permanent basis .
Floods render navigation unreliable and unpredictable ; therefore , the most important goal of the NAIADES programme is paying close attention to flood control .
I would like to stress the programme 's environmental considerations - which require special emphasis - such as the creation and conservation of floodplains .
I believe that we have to act with care and in harmony with respect to environmental and navigational requirements .
Just a brief comment on another point .
For the navigability of the Danube , it is important to be able to count on high quality shipping conditions along its entire length .
Among the third countries concerned , I would like to highlight Serbia .
For Serbia , the value of the Danube as a waterway has increased considerably , and therefore , I suggest close cooperation on this matter among the future Member States of Romania and Bulgaria as well as the Black Sea region .
All these proposals are put forward in the report , for which I express my thanks to my fellow Member , Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , a moment ago I was saying to the rapporteur , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , that , so far tonight , all of the speakers in this debate have been women .
Then they will say that transport is only of interest to men .
Perhaps NAIADES inspires us , and perhaps the Commissioner should take note and appoint two women coordinators for NAIADES .
Let us return to serious issues though , and the report by Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
In principle , we formally support the Integrated European Action Programme for Inland Waterways , known as ' NAIADES ' , and the idea of giving it a greater political profile .
It is true , and we have noted this , that the use of inland waterways varies a lot throughout Europe , from 0.1 % , in countries like the United Kingdom , Italy , and even a little less in my country , to 40 % in the Netherlands , which has a greater number of these waterways .
Unfortunately , in some cases canals and rivers have been abandoned .
Admirable attempts at recovery are being made , however .
In my country , due to its mountainous nature , canals and rivers are used more for carrying irrigation and drinking water than for transport , but we nevertheless are aware of and support the initiatives relating to the navigable stretch of the Guadalquivir from Seville to the sea , which is also hoping to be included in the trans-European network .
Furthermore , I am also delighted by the current efforts of my city , Zaragoza , which will host Expo 2008 and which , within that context , wishes - and this has been proposed within the context of the objective of promoting water and sustainable development - to restore the navigability of the River Ebro .
We are therefore pleased to be able to include ourselves in this European project .
We are talking about sustainable development when we refer to inland waterways ' potential to help reduce the impact of CO2 emissions by up to 75 % compared to roads and also - and this is why it is so important - to promote this inland waterways network at European level and to support new formulae so that this sector can be more competitive and efficient .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool has done an excellent job as rapporteur , and we are eagerly awaiting the Commission 's coming proposals to enhance the economic and competitive impact of this new sector .
We particularly support the strengthening of infrastructures . That is to say , for thousands of kilometres of inland waterways and hundreds of inland ports , with lock infrastructures , etc . , which have already been named , to finally become a connection network that strengthens regional and territorial cohesion .
To this end , some of the amendments that we presented in committee and which have been included propose greater inclusion of this sector in the trans-European network programmes .
We have also proposed supporting river information services , which we believe will very much increase the efficiency and safety of the sector .
Furthermore , we believe that it is an excellent idea to obtain greater economic support for the sector 's potential for container traffic , although there are still great deficiencies here .
In the report on logistics , which I hope to be able to present to this House , I will clearly also include Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's proposals on improving logistical aspects and innovation and technological progress for reducing operational costs .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the Commissioner has emphasised - and I am obliged to him for doing so - 6 % of all goods and persons transported are carried on waterways , and so an ambitious programme is required if these unused capacities are to be put to work and the existing infrastructure improved .
It has to be said that the greatest deficiency in this area is the lack of intermodal nodes ; if transport links - including these means of transport - are to be developed , the first thing to be done is to establish ports and terminals .
In other transport sectors , innovation has made great strides ; here , though , it is limping along behind .
There is still a lot of lost ground to be made up where fuels and materials are concerned , and this programme should provide an opportunity for that to be done , but we must also - as my colleague has already mentioned - give very serious attention to the environment , and I attach particular importance to this .
I would also ask you to support an amendment that we have tabled , which has to do with the transport of hazardous goods on waterways , which must be subject to regulations every bit as stringent as those applicable to road and rail , for an accident with hazardous goods on a waterway can do enormous and irreparable damage .
Another issue is the threat of flagging-out - the re-registration of vessels under flags of convenience - which poses a risk to social standards , among other things , and that is a danger we absolutely must take into account from the very outset .
I want to thank the rapporteur for her superb report and the shadow rapporteurs for their good cooperation .
Thank you all very much , and I hope that it will , tomorrow , be adopted as it now stands .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , for years , old canals were neglected or closed , inland waterway transport appeared to be a thing of the past and there was a massive growth in the transport of goods by road .
Nowadays , everyone across the party-political boundaries welcomes the fact that the water-borne transport of goods is coming back into fashion .
This consensus conceals different opinions , as was evident in this House during the debate in February 2003 on the subject of the White Paper on transport 2010 .
To my group , as to some others , water-borne transport is an alternative to ever more and widening motorways .
It is a way of being economical with space and the environment .
This is in contrast to another view , which wants more of everything , including , therefore , even more motorways .
By creating overcapacity , entrepreneurs are given more freedom to make fresh choices within this overcapacity to decide which mode of transport is most advantageous to them at that particular moment in time .
An example of overcapacity is the expensive Betuwe line that has been built as a TEN project for transport of freight by rail in the Netherlands alongside the rivers Waal and Lek , that are perfectly navigable , at the lower reaches of the Rhine .
More pressing projects than these projects that are probably underutilised include the widening of the narrow canals that connect Northern France with Belgium and the Netherlands , or returning the ever dwindling transport across the Danube between Hungary and the Black Sea ever since the bombardments of 1999 back to its original level .
My group is opposed to overcapacity . Even in the case of waterways , this is at the expense of space , nature and the environment .
The adjustment of rivers impacts on flood plains , biodiversity , the supply of drinking water and flooding surrounding low lands .
In addition , water-borne transport is not a panacea that magics away all the risks of polluting and harmful substances .
Their transport entails risks not only for the rivers themselves , but also for the residential areas and areas of outstanding beauty that are located downstream .
We need more than just cleaner engines and sulphur-free fuel .
Together with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we would propose infrastructural levies in order to promote fair competition between different modes of transport , a better environmental impact assessment of European development plans , a tightening of legislation for the transport of dangerous substances and preventing inland waterway ships from being put under flags of convenience , because this adversely affects social , security and environmental standards .
Only when our water-borne transport meets quality requirements of this kind , is its growth a step in the right direction .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her extremely comprehensive report and thank her for the good cooperation .
Like the other speakers , I should like to express wholehearted support for the NAIADES Programme .
Inland waterway transport can , provided it is correctly backed by flanking policy , substantially contribute towards solving the problem of transport .
I am pleased that this message is also being sent to the national , regional and local governments .
Both old and new Member States are urged , in their economic and planning policy , to give due consideration to the scope that inland waterways offer in order to meet the transport needs of enterprises , not only for bulkier , but also for slimmer , flows of goods .
In addition , the recommendation for active improvements in the fleet 's environmental performance also receives my unqualified support .
As in road transport , incentive schemes for the introduction of the reduction of emission and energy-saving measures in inland waterway transport also help make the fleet more environmentally-friendly .
Finally , I hope that the Member States will approach this Action Programme with the same positive attitude and commitment as the Members of this House have done in the recent weeks .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to draw particular attention to the title of Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report .
It is a report on the promotion of inland waterway transport .
Inland waterway transport most certainly needs aid .
This might not be the case in the Netherlands , where the report 's author hails from , but it is certainly true of many other European Union countries , including Poland , my home country .
The Oder Programme was adopted a few years ago in Poland , and was initially called the Oder 2006 Programme , but was later extended to last until 2015 .
However , all these schemes amount to empty words , because nothing is actually being done .
The virtue of the report we are currently debating is that it sets out to deal with European inland waterways as an autonomous field , and here I emphasise the word ' autonomous ' which means not treating inland waterways as a complement to road and rail transport , as an unimportant addition to them .
Instead , inland waterways are perceived as an independent , autonomous whole .
This is very significant , because the forthcoming accession of Bulgaria and Romania will provide a unique opportunity to create a European network of inland waterways .
I would like to tell the House about one of my dreams .
It is a dream I think many members of my committee share , and it involves a journey along the old and new inland waterways in Europe .
It may be an old-fashioned journey , but it is a very beautiful one .
In order to be able to undertake it , however , further significant investment is needed .
I think it is worthwhile recalling a couple of significant ideas that have formed part of the aspirations of far-sighted politicians over the centuries .
One of these is the plan for a canal between the Oder and the Danube , which would create a link between two important bodies of water .
I urge the European Commission not to end the studies , but to continue working on a European network of inland waterways .
Studies in this field should be continued , and I wish the venture every success .

( DE ) Mr President , as is well known , Austria is a land of mountains , but it is also - and Austria 's national day being tomorrow , perhaps I might be permitted this allusion - described in its own national anthem as a land on a river , the river in question being the Danube .
This makes inland waterways an important subject for us Austrians , as we are connected by water to the West , to the Rhine-Main-Meuse system that is to be found there , but also , and above all , to the south and east .
We in Austria know how important it is - not only for our own country , but also for Europe as a whole - to have a better , by which I mean above all better-functioning system of waterways .
Although reference has been made to the environment and technological dimensions , and to much else besides , we also know that it is above all for the sake of the new and future Member States of the EU that alternatives to roads are needed , for without them , we really are going to end up as roadkill , and what better alternative could there be than a well-developed and therefore well-used infrastructure in Corridor 7 of the Trans-European Network ?
I am glad that the Commission is willing to attach greater importance to this mode of transport , and I can do no other than agree with much of what Vice-President Barrot has said today .
While , though , we do need plans and programmes to be set out , they also need to be implemented , and as soon as possible .
I hope that the contributions made at the Vienna conference on inland waterways staged by the Austrian Presidency of the Council were useful in terms of our subject overall and will therefore be relevant to our future opportunities .
I particularly want to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Wortmann-Kool for the very good work she has done on this document and for her good cooperation , and , in particular , for her willingness to be talked into contending not only for the priorities of ' old Europe ' but also for the openings and opportunities afforded by the new .
Let me repeat what I said earlier : now is the time for us to make use of these opportunities !
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the neglect of internal waterways in the EU has been going on for many years to a positively criminal degree .
NAIADES is a means whereby we want to change that .
We want internal waterways to make headway in terms of job creation , on the markets , in terms of infrastructure and the fleet as a whole .
These depend , above all else , on the reliability of internal waterways and on the availability of multi-functional inland ports , not least with regard to multimodal transport links , and I would , in this regard , like to do as Commissioner Barrot has already done and highlight the importance of RIS as an important contribution to the use of inland waterways , and would argue that its potential ought to be used to the full by its being incorporated into the TEN programme .

Back to NAIADES , though .
The report on the subject highlights the need for tighter emission limit values to be laid down across the Community , particularly by promoting the use of low-sulphur fuels .
So far , so good , but I see it as counterproductive if more stringent emission limit values were to oblige the internal waterways sector , most of the operators in which are , of course , small and medium-sized enterprises , to pay out a great deal of money that they cannot afford for refits , and so we have to work towards incentives , provided not only by the Commission but also by the Member States , for a more rapid introduction of environmentally-friendly engines on ships .
It strikes me as important that the planned European Waterway Transport Innovation Fund be established subject to conditions agreed on with the inland waterways businesses themselves , and that the Fund should be able to help with the funding of communications offices .
Further to the Commission 's initiative for the production of information source on financial issues , in the shape , for example , of a funding handbook , what is also needed is a European development plan containing an up-to-date inventory and more detailed information on European waterways , which must draw on existing expert studies and reports , as well as on the experiences gained by the coordinators .
It would , after all , be wrong to keep on reinventing the wheel , and , since , additional bureaucracy is undesirable in the implementation of the action plans , we have to take particular care that it is avoided .
I will conclude by thanking our rapporteur , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , for her dedication and for her cooperation , which really has been good and constructive .
Mr President , I should like to begin by echoing what was said in this excellent debate and by thanking all of the speakers .
Inland navigation is not , as you said , an added extra .
It is a genuine option , and we need modes of transport other than roads in today 's Europe .
I am therefore fully determined , just as determined as your rapporteur and yourselves .
Nevertheless , you are right : we cannot just make declarations ; we need to act .
I am therefore going to provide you with a few answers .
Let us begin by focusing on the innovation fund : the Commission services , together with representatives of the profession and the Member States , are currently looking into the possibility of creating a fund for innovation in the field of inland waterway transport .
This fund would be an important instrument for implementing the NAIADES programme .
We are examining different options , such as how this fund can be sustained by the inland navigation sector , the Union and the Member States .
The Commission will draft a report on the state of play and on the results of the assessments in 2007 .
You did in fact place great emphasis on this innovation fund , Mrs Wortmann-Kool .
On the issue of pollution from ships , it is true , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , that we must think about reducing the level of sulphur in the fuel used for inland navigation purposes , but we must not go too far .
The idea is to bring this level of sulphur down to the level of the diesel fuel used in road transport .
This reduction in the sulphur level is key to reducing air pollution .
We are carrying out a review of the directives on air pollution with the aim of substantially reducing this sulphur level .
However , I have taken full note of what you said about the investments required to that end .
Mrs Lichtenberger , you asked me about the monitoring of dangerous transport .
On this point , I should like to make it clear to you that a proposal is currently the subject of an interservice consultation and is due to be adopted before the end of the year .
As a general rule , the improvement of infrastructure , Mr Meijer , will be accompanied by impact studies , in order to reduce as far as possible any harmful effects of infrastructure works .
Generally speaking , I would say to all of the speakers that infrastructure obviously requires investment .
This investment is the responsibility of the Member States .
Nevertheless , it is true - and I am addressing you , in particular , Mrs Ayala - that we have proposed in the financial regulation to prioritise inland waterway transport by providing for a 30 % cap .
May I call for Parliament 's help , Mr President , in adopting this financial regulation ?
I am well aware that there is some reluctance on the part of the Member States , but I am sure that Parliament will give priority to the inland waterways .
There are undoubtedly other solutions to propose , but my aim with these few answers was to tell you that my intention was obviously to act .
As you pointed out , we , in Europe , have several magnificent waterways , such as the Danube , and I have taken note of your comments about the need to involve all those who live along the Danube .
I must say that we are aware , Mr Rack , of the importance of these waterways and of the major role that they can play in the future .
That , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is what I wanted to say to you , in the hope that we can carry out this crucial work together and accord Europe 's waterways the full importance they deserve .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Public-private partnerships ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Weiler , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on public-private partnerships and Community law on public procurement and concessions .




rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my gratitude to the representatives of the other groups - Mrs Cederschiöld , Mr Lambsdorff , Mrs Rühle - and also to the representatives of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who had a hand in the production of this report , for we were able to exchange views in a constructive and fair way , and managed , in any case , to achieve agreement on over 140 amendments in committee , so that there remain only 23 to be considered today or tomorrow , although it has to be said that compromises had to be reached in respect of them too .
We have tried to strike a balance between two powerful opposing parties - the business associations and the local government associations - which put forward their no doubt legitimate interests in a forceful manner .
What I have to say at the beginning of my speech I wish to address to them .
What I want to say to the businessmen is that , despite all that we have heard , I want to make it clear that we in this House take it as self-evident that local authorities should engage in economic activity , and , indeed , that returning certain activities to them is reasonable and legitimate .
What I would like to say to the local authorities is that invitations to tender , whether at the national or European level , do not absolutely have to be arbitrary , but offer the transparency that is needed to benefit the public and prevent corruption .
I get the impression from the debate that their respective associations did not always see it that way .
I have attempted , by means of my report , to strike a balance that would secure more guaranteed competition for the private sector and would give the public sector , in the shape of the local authorities , more scope for inter-municipal cooperation .
Tomorrow , then , we will be deciding where this House stands as regards future mandates for action by the Commission , which - or so my group believes - should , wherever possible , be in the form of legislation .
What this is about is the legal and political aspects of the way in which our municipalities organise services of general public interest .
That they do , of course , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , which we here in this House also take very seriously ; after all , many Members of this House have strong links with local authorities , having been active in municipal politics before they came here .
We are also , though , asked how we , as the convinced Europeans that we are , would shape the internal market , and there is a plethora of rulings from the European Court of Justice and from other courts at the national level .
Complaints and Commission proceedings make municipalities and investors nervous about making investments at home and initiating projects , and so it is necessary for the European Union to take action .
What , for example , is the substance of European procurement law ?
What clarifications or additions need to be made to the institutionalised PPPs and in-house transactions ?
We see ourselves as having the vitally important function of considering how to proceed .
My group takes the view that legislation is needed , that it is not enough for the Commission , attempting as it does so to bypass this House , to act by handing down interpretive communications or other instruments of that kind .
I therefore once more appeal today to the Members of this House , when they vote by roll-call tomorrow , to cast a vote for this House 's right to govern its own affairs .
We want neither a great laborious enterprise , nor an opening-up of the last procurement directive , which was not transposed in all the Member States - it was not , for example , in Germany - but what we want to see is clarifications and additions , and they must not be made without reference to Parliament .
I will be quite frank in saying that we have no solution to the problem of inter-communal cooperation , which was - as you will see from the amendments - the most controversial area .
The line we take is that it cannot , as a general rule , be excluded from the scope of procurement law , but nor should it be subject to general tender .
What that means is that we need an intelligent solution to this bone of contention , for intercommunal cooperation makes sense for the communities from which we come , and will certainly be useful to them in the future .
That this House is supportive of this instrument is shown not least by our willingness to use money from the Structural Funds for it ; I am sure that it is not common knowledge just how much effort we have put into getting that .
Given our sympathy for European local authorities and the expertise of my fellow-Members on the Committees for the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I am convinced that we will end up with a law that everyone can support and accept , and one that will be proof against rulings from the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , Mrs Weiler , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , public-private partnerships ( PPPs ) have been put in place in several areas of the public sector and these partnerships are gradually developing within the European Union .
At a time when public budgets are limited , there can be no doubt as to their importance for the European economy .
This is particularly true in the area of infrastructure , and especially in that of transport infrastructure , with which I am very familiar .
In order to guarantee that these partnerships are totally effective and that public money is spent better , it is important to choose private partners on the basis of fair competition .
Thus , the choice of private partner must be the result of a competitive and non-discriminatory procedure and must enable the partners to get all of the added value out of such a partnership in the long term .
However , many interested parties believe that the regulatory framework that governs which private partners are selected to create these partnerships at Community level is incomplete or unclear .
Mrs Weiler 's report presents a balanced assessment of the main challenges that we must take up .
You have provided some good answers to the problems presented , Mrs Weiler , and I should like to thank you for your work as rapporteur .
Allow me to mention what are , in our opinion , two crucial aspects , which I should like to cover before tomorrow 's vote .
I shall begin by talking about concessions and then about mixed public-private companies , which are referred to as ' institutionalised PPPs ' .
Firstly , concessions : a concession gives a company the right to use facilities that have been built or services that have been provided in return for building infrastructure or providing a service .
The construction and maintenance of roads and airports and waste management are two such examples .
In November 2005 - a year ago - the Commission outlined in its communication the reasons why it thinks it useful to legislate on concessions , particularly on service concessions .
The aim of this initiative is to guarantee equal treatment and legal certainty in relation to the granting of service concessions - as is the case for public contracts - while making a clear distinction between public contracts and concessions .
In this regard , I am sure that Parliament will confirm the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
It remains very clear , however , that the choice of the legislative path should not deprive the public authorities of the room for manoeuvre that they need in order to choose the best private partner and , if necessary , to adjust the concession over time , in line with the objectives targeted by the partnership for the long-term future of the PPP .
Having said that , a step by step approach is called for .
To begin with , the Commission will look more closely at the costs and benefits of a binding initiative on the granting of concessions and will examine other measures that will enable us to deal with the problems at stake .
On the basis of the results of this impact study , the Commission will then - most probably next year - decide whether the cost-benefit ratio warrants such a legislative initiative .
If it does , then we will prepare a legislative proposal .
That is what I wanted to say about concessions .
We now come to mixed capital companies , namely institutionalised PPPs .
Public bodies are increasingly choosing private partners for public service companies set up in conjunction with the public sector .
This is what we call institutionalised public-private partnerships .
This type of partnership raises some specific questions : should the Community non-discrimination principles be applied to the choice of private partner , as the service provider 's fellow shareholder , to the choice of service provider , or indeed to both these levels ?
This question has given rise to some lively debates in Parliament .
The main issue is actually whether we should create a new set of rules or whether we should simply make the existing legislation clearer so that we can deal with the problems that arise .
The Commission has expressed a preference : for the time being , it does not want to draft new legislation on the matter , and this is for two reasons .
Firstly , in most of the Member States , the creation of public-private entities for the purposes of providing services of general economic interest is an altogether new and very innovative opportunity .
Non-binding clarifications in this area would enable us to provide the necessary guidelines , without stifling innovation .
Secondly , in 2004 , after several years of intense debates , Parliament , the 15 Member States at that time and the Commission reached a compromise and adopted the current directives on public contracts .
Many Member States only implemented these directives this year , and some are working towards implementing them .
In order to legislate on mixed public-private partnerships , we need to review the 2004 compromise , renegotiate a new text with 27 - and no longer 15 - Member States and , in the event that a new compromise is reached , once again force the Member States to amend their national laws and their practices in relation to public contracts , even though the current rules are not yet well established .
That is why we think that it is better , at this stage , to choose a non-legislative path , just as most of the interested parties are requesting .
That is the point that I wanted to make on behalf of my colleague , Mr McCreevy , but you would be right in thinking that the Commissioner for Transport is also very much affected by these provisions .
I am now going to listen carefully to the various speeches made by the MEPs .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , much as I would like one quarter of the Commissioner 's speaking time to explain the position of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the unfortunate fact is that I am not going to get it , but I am very grateful for the clear explanations that have been given today , particularly to the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , who has done something that is not customary in this House by accepting essential points from the proposal of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in the course of the enhanced cooperation procedure .
We all agree on the line we take , although we do have our differences about such things as paragraph 5 , which Mrs Weiler has reinserted by way of Amendment 20 .
In the event of a legislative declaration , we will handle it by way of the codecision procedure , as provided for by Article 251 .
This was a typical case for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , in which we found the exact wording only after a vote during which we had sought out a compromise .
We should do things the other way round , and then there will be no differences after the vote either .
In accordance with the position that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has adopted , I would opt for Mrs Weiler 's Amendment 21 , and my personal view is that we should incorporate this amendment , which envisages the possibility of these criteria being incorporated into Community law , and is therefore preferable to Amendment 20 .

I believe that we would be doing the right thing by sticking to our line according to which there would be no new areas excluded from the tendering procedure , with the alternative route of supra-regional communal undertakings being cut off , and no extension being permitted to in-house businesses .
We would , however , like the Commission to clarify the issues thrown up by the ruling in the case of the City of Halle , among other rulings from the ECJ .
What we want , then , Commissioner , is not only a proposal for concessions , but also clarification of the outstanding legal issues relating to institutionalised public-private partnerships .
You , Commissioner , have told us where you stand .
That was clear - laudably so by the standards of a Commission that has again and again avoided taking a decision in recent years - and so we will find an agreed solution that will enable us to move on .
As I finish , I would like once more to thank Mrs Weiler for having done everything she could to achieve an across-the-board position , one that will enable us not only to withstand the rulings of the ECJ , but also to stand firm in the vigorous debates with the associations representing various interests .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the majority of the experiences of public-private partnerships in Europe concerns the construction and management of infrastructure and transport and logistics services .
In addition , public-private partnerships are perhaps the only way that private investment can be involved in creating this infrastructure .
For this reason I would like to raise just two points .
Firstly , as stated in the report , we need a legislative initiative on concessions , including concessions for construction and management .
There is a real need for legal certainty and for defining relations between public concessionary authorities and private concessionaires .
On the one hand , private concessionaires need to have the guarantee that contracts will be respected for as long as they are in force , and , on the other hand , the concessionary authorities must be able to rely on having fixed- or limited-term contracts , which can then be adapted to production conditions over time and put to the test of competition .
These are the two pivotal points on which I hope that the proposed legislation in question will be based .
Secondly , there is a need to encourage new forms of innovative financial engineering , such as the guarantee funds already provided for by the regulation on the funding of trans-European transport networks , so that they can be used as leverage and ensure that many more public-private partnerships also prove to be efficient and effective funding instruments for infrastructure which we all need and with which I am sure you are very familiar , Commissioner .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are always complaining about the Member States ' refusal to countenance even the slightest increase in their contribution to the Community 's budget , and we are always saying that there is not enough money available to even out the regional differences in development and that Europe is developing too slowly .
We ought , therefore , to support the use of private money and know-how to promote development , instead of creating obstacles and difficulties .
The European Union should give absolute priority to the widespread dissemination of good practice in the area of public-private partnerships .
That is the bare minimum .
At the very least , the Union should invest in an Internet site , in the 20 official Community languages , which would be accessible to the general public .
Such a site would contain a description of the PPP system and its effects .
It would also provide examples of model PPP projects , enabling every municipality in Europe to have easy access to accounts of successful experiences .
This would allow municipalities to learn from the past and to make use of that knowledge as they plan their own way forward .
I call on the European Commission to request such publicly accessible information from the European Investment Bank .
The EIB is currently preparing a purely internal , intergovernmental information system on PPPs that would not be accessible to the public in the Member States .
This is unacceptable .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are concerned here with a response to the Commission Green Paper on public-private partnerships , designed to investigate points that remain unclear , especially in what is known as the in-house area .
We are , however , all agreed that , as the Commissioner so wisely said , there is no need to tear up existing legislation on public procurement .
Public-private cooperation must favour competition and , above all , contribute to new thinking and increased efficiency within the public sector .
The Commission must now solve the problem - that being the aim - without legislating more than is necessary .
We do not , however , have closed minds on this point and , just as Mr Langen said , we thus support Amendment 21 by Mrs Weiler .
We have made a request for legislation on concessions , and the Commission has responded positively and quickly to this .
We are agreed about respecting the threshold values and about the need for normal legal principles to apply beneath those values where public procurement is not a requirement .
We do not wish to reduce the scope for public procurement . Moreover , we unambiguously call on the Commission to propose solutions to the problems that exist in Germany , France and other countries when it comes to cooperation between local authorities , but not to forget less wealthy local authorities that wish to cooperate in sparsely populated areas in Member States such as Finland and Sweden .
If the Commission were not to carry out this task , it could no doubt expect heavy pressure to be placed on it by Parliament .
I am convinced that the Commission will do an excellent job of fulfilling this task , and we wish to give it time to consider our views on the Green Paper and to come up with proposals .
All the parties concerned should be involved in the continued process .
The committee can certainly be of help in increasing the level of knowledge in this difficult area .
Paragraphs 45 to 47 already guarantee more legal certainty and show that local authorities can cooperate .
In the future , we shall also have a clearer and more detailed view of how things are to work .
In conclusion , I wish sincerely to say a big thank you to Mrs Weiler for the splendid work she has done , as well as to the great many other people who have been involved .
Thank you very much .
We are obtaining a more competitive Europe with greater legal certainty .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , allow me first of all to thank all of my fellow Members , and in particular Mrs Weiler and Mr Langen , with whom we have done an outstanding piece of work .
Let us hope that the text will be adopted tomorrow .
It is quite simply a question of protecting the exercise of subsidiarity for PPPs , instruments that are very familiar to our local authorities , and have been for a great many years .
I welcome the fact that the Commission plans to legislate on concessions , which have been mixed up for too long with public contracts .
However , I shall state in this Chamber that I believe that legislation is also required for institutional public-private partnerships .
It is wrong to say that these are recent entities : semi-public companies have been around since 1955 in France and the Stadtwerke have been around for a very long time in Germany .
The fact is that subjecting them to two forms of competition today means putting an end to them .
What private partner would agree to work with a local authority that makes it compete twice over ?
Furthermore , I would draw the Commissioner 's attention to the risk run by inter-communal structures , which are in danger of being mixed up with private structures even though they are an entirely public means of organisation for local authorities that aspire to be large enough to be able to fulfil increasingly demanding obligations and public-service missions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , public procurement is of crucial importance in terms of budget and competition policy - on that we all agree .
Competitive tendering is a fit and proper way of determining the most economic way of providing public services , and , over and above that , mandatory Europe-wide tendering does something essential in terms of opening up the internal market to competition .
As rapporteur , Mrs Weiler has done a fine job of steering us , together , through the public procurement dossier - which is a difficult one - in an exemplary way .
It is thanks to her that we in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection have already managed to come up with plenty of workable compromises , so it is only right that we should take this opportunity to express our gratitude and particular appreciation to her , and both I and the other Members involved are certainly willing to do that .
I have advised my group to hold fast to what has emerged from this vote , and wish only to say something about the few contentious points .
In so doing , let me start with institutionalised public / private partnerships , which are a relatively recent phenomenon , the development of which should not be unduly restricted by legal regulation , and it became clear from the public consultation that people do not want it to be .
I therefore recommend that we go no further than an interpretative communication and guidelines that are comprehensible not only by lawyers but also by those who take decisions at the municipal level , which will not only afford greater flexibility than does legislation , but also - and above all - hold out the prospect of a rapid resolution to the legal uncertainties that are very definitely still there .
This is where the Commission needs to act as promptly as possible .

Moving on to inter-municipal cooperation , the second contentious point , I believe it to be self-evident that the municipalities should not in any way be hampered in their management of their own affairs , but equally self-evident , too , that this cannot mean that public / private partnerships should be generally exempted from the obligation to put work out to tender .
Although public authorities are not obliged to hand over to third parties the performance of functions for which a market exists , should they decide to entrust third parties with the performance of a service , they must be bound by a public tendering process , as is indeed clear from Article 295 of the European Communities Treaty , which requires neutrality in the application of internal market rules to public and private undertakings .
That , by the same token , makes cooperation between municipalities possible in principle , albeit subject to the restrictions that are so well stated in what is now paragraph 45 of the Weiler report , namely when cooperation between municipalities is for the purpose of administrative restructuring or where real in-house monitoring is provided for .
Perhaps I might be permitted to add something as I close , namely that people in Europe have had very varying experiences of public / private partnerships , and so I am certainly very glad to see that a start is to be made on an exchange of good practice , which will bring in its train more good examples of working PPPs .
I might also add that I believe we should be conducting this debate in Brussels rather than in Strasbourg .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I , too , wish to thank the rapporteur for her efforts , even though our group is rather less than satisfied with the final result that emerged from the committee , as a result of which I would like , this evening , to appeal to you all to rethink your position , even if only in part .
It is intercommunal cooperation , in the shape of intercommunal undertakings , that we see as the most important point , and I would like once more to make it clear - not least in response to those who have already spoken - that they have nothing whatever to do with the devolution of functions to third parties , but have to do rather with the municipalities deciding to perform services for the community .
It is lack of funds in public coffers and an ageing and numerically declining population - particularly in rural boroughs - not to mention greater critical awareness of the issues and the costs involved on the part of the public , that makes this form of cooperation the best for many local authorities in Europe , and often the only way available to them of modernising the services they provide .
So it is , then , that administrative services , water supply and drainage , playschools , schools and many cultural amenities are operated jointly , sometimes , indeed , across borders , examples of which can be found in the pre-school projects run together by French and German communities .
Europe should not be putting this sort of thing at risk , but rather enhancing it , so let me therefore commend to the House 's support our Amendment 45 , which is a compromise put together by Members from various groups , and which I hope will gain majority support tomorrow .
My second point has to do with concessions .
I dare say that I am more sceptical about public-private partnerships than are most of you , but I do , all the same , think it wrong to send out the message that public-private partnerships are being promoted and then demand that concessions be put out to tender in the same way as contracts , the performance of which was , of course , the basic rationale for the PPPs being set up in the first place .
I do not believe it is merely fortuitous that Parliament and the Council did not explicitly include concessions for services in the directive on the award of contracts , and I hope we will come to agree that what we do not want here is a requirement that they be put out to tender in the same way as contracts .
Services concessions are something different and need to be regulated in a different way .
As for ' in-house ' , what the European legislator really should have done about this was to clarify the conditions .
I do not regard a figure of 100 % as sustainable .
What is needed , I think , is threshold values , and high ones at that , which must then actually be complied with .
It is , though , the legislators that should define them and not the ECJ .
( SK ) Even though there is no uniform definition of public-private partnership ( PPP ) that would apply throughout the Community , a large number of projects have been successfully implemented in the European Union 's freight and passenger railway transport sectors , as well as in the area of public health and education .
These successful projects provide sufficient justification for Parliament to take up the topic as well , and I welcome the Commission 's communication on PPPs , which includes specific proposals drawn up on the basis of public consultation .
At the same time I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , on her well balanced report highlighting the need for legal certainty in this area .
Under PPP arrangements , private enterprises transfer their know-how to the public sector .
In my amendments , which have been incorporated into the report , I have therefore emphasised the need for establishing transparent mechanisms for private investors .
Investors should be given guarantees that their legal and financial interests will be safeguarded for the life of a contract and also that the terms and conditions of public tenders will remain unchanged during their period of applicability .
Due to lack of experience , the new Member States in particular are apprehensive of using PPPs .
Information gathered from the implementation of successful projects will help them to avoid repeating errors and procedures that have in practice ended in failure .
I am convinced that PPP projects will be able to attract the desired capital only if the interested parties within EU Member States are well informed and conform to the quality regulations and transparent rules of the Community .
These regulations and rules will help them build up infrastructure , the development of which has lagged behind due to underfunding .
This form of cooperation may also prove instrumental in helping bridge regional disparities and ensuring the sustainable development of Europe 's poorer regions .
( DE ) Mr President , I regard institutionalised public / private partnerships as a very important tool .
The legal uncertainty resulting from the ruling of the European Court of Justice on the case of the city of Halle shows just how necessary it is that legislators should do something about them , and it is surely not acceptable that the Commission should act without reference to anyone else in giving guidance as to the manner in which this problem should be addressed .
On the contrary , it is for the co-legislators , namely the European Parliament , the Council , and the Commission together , to reach a joint decision as to how we in Europe are to deal with these issues .
The second point I would like to address briefly is inter-municipal cooperation , and this is where I have to disagree with Mr Lambsdorff , for it has been going on for a very long time ; there is a very long tradition of it , not least in the Federal Republic of Germany , and it is something we should maintain .
Cross-border inter-municipal cooperation is at present a delicate shoot , and one that we must not destroy by declaring that these things should be left to the free market .
If they are , we can pack it all in on the spot , for we will have no further need of municipalities , and that is surely not the sort of Europe that we want to see .


( NL ) Mr President , I was particularly involved in this report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , where Mr Langen was rapporteur , and I would congratulate both rapporteurs on the final result , although it is true that a certain amount is left to be desired .
There is , as I see it , a clear correlation with the discussion we had about the services of general economic interest , on which we took a decision in the previous plenary part-session .
In both cases , it was about the way in which decentralised authorities , service providers and citizens can be given more legal certainty , which can sometimes create conflict between the internal market rules , on the one hand , and the general interest which authorities need to serve on behalf of their citizens , on the other .
It is often the case that the Court of Justice has to be called upon or that the Commission gives interpretations of its own .
The important message in both those files has been that we , via the codecision procedure , really want to take political decisions in this area , and that it is also important that we ask the Commission , and really insist on this , to present legislative initiatives on which we can decide in codecision with this House and with the Member States and their parliaments .
That is the principal message I should once again like to take to the Commission in connection with this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject of public-private partnerships has for some time been part of the new boundaries of welfare state systems within the European Union .
Its significance should be seen from a new perspective , through the interconnections with all the initiatives on which our services rely .
The common objective , which has been reaffirmed many times , including today , is to create a complete and clear legal framework within which local public authorities can make their own choices , aware of opportunities and constraints , principles to be respected and possible areas of freedom and innovation .
In the text on which we are voting , overlapping is apparent with the current regulations in the field of contracts , concessions and joint enterprises , and with the European Court of Justice guidelines .
However , the added value lies in the cross-cutting focus on the various ways in which alliances between the public and private sectors are built in the extremely sensitive field of services involving citizenship rights .
Two firm principles are needed .
Cut-backs on spending cannot come before or relax the requirements of service quality and safeguards for the rights of service providers .
The search for efficiency and innovation must be tied to guarantees of accessibility , transparency and non-discrimination .
This year has seen many initiatives in the field of services .
The hope is that , working on elements of various scales , we will be able to build a coherent scheme .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Weiler 's report provides the clarity and transparency that we needed in relation to public-private partnerships , and thus allows us to change the wayward paths taken by the European courts and to improve the legal clarification for all of the actors concerned .
Concessions are all too often mixed up with public contracts : the latter concern the purchase of goods consumed by local authorities , while concessions offer public authorities the opportunity to delegate the completion of part of their tasks to a third party .
Therefore , we should have a law on these concessions and not a mere interpretative communication .
The same is true of institutionalised PPPs .
Their creation is currently being threatened by the rigours of case-law , which tends towards having two calls for competition when allocating work , something that is likely to seal the fate of semi-public companies .
I am therefore grateful to our rapporteur for having requested a legislative initiative on this subject .
Finally , in the Commission versus Spain judgment , the inter-communal structure has become a private partner for the Court of Justice .
Authorities should therefore make inter-communal structures to which they delegate the provision of services compete with each other .
Mrs Weiler is re-establishing the law and offering us the best parliamentary contribution on this subject , and for that I thank her .
Mr President , I should like once again to thank Mrs Weiler , as well as the draftsmen of the opinion of various committees : Mr Langen , Mr Costa and Mrs Staniszewska .


I am going to try to respond to some of the questions asked , without claiming to respond to them all .
I shall first respond to Mrs Cederschiöld , to Mr Lambsdorff and to Mrs Rühle .
When a local authority grants certain services to another public body in return for payment , these are in principle services that have been the subject of a public contract .
The public body benefiting from the contract is competing with private companies and possibly with other public bodies offering the same service .
A general exclusion of all forms of public-public cooperation from the scope of the Community rules on public contracts and of the rules on concessions would therefore be unacceptable .
The Court of Justice case-law is very clear in this regard .
Conversely , not all forms of public-public cooperation are covered by Community law .
The Commission recognises that clarification is required in order to determine the extent to which Community law applies to the delegation of tasks to public bodies and which forms of cooperation remain outside the scope of the provisions on the internal market .
We are working closely with all the parties concerned in order to provide this clarification .
Next , I shall respond to Mrs Rühle and to Mrs Gebhardt on the issue of public-private partnerships and on the ' in-house ' concept . The ' in-house ' concept excludes the application of the rules governing public contracts when a public body grants a contract or a concession to a third party over which it exercises some control .
The Court has outlined the circumstances in which this derogation may be applied .
You will understand that the Commission wants this exception to the rules on granting contracts to continue being monitored .
In particular , it seems extremely doubtful that a public contract or a concession would be granted in a discriminatory way to a company that represents certain private interests , while other private companies concerned are pushed aside .
That is why we think it necessary at this stage to keep to the current definition of the conditions for application of the ' in-house ' system : where authorities exercise the same control over the service provider as they do over their own services , and where service providers carry out the bulk of their activities with the authority concerned .
For these reasons and also so as not to have to start from scratch with the new public contract rules , which are scarcely at the transposition stage in the Member States , we think it appropriate to legislate on mixed public-private companies and on the ' in-house ' concept .
An interpretative communication is the most suitable means of explaining the way in which the rules regulating public contracts apply to the selection of private partners for these partnerships .
In response to Mr Savary , who raised the question about the two calls for competition , I would say that we are aware of this problem and , as you pointed out , I referred to this in my speech .
I should like to make myself very clear : we do not require two calls for competition simply because we believe that that is unnecessary .
We explained this in the 2004 Green Paper on PPPs and we plan to clarify our position in the texts that we are due to present in 2007 .
Mr President , I am well aware that I have not responded to all of the questions asked , but I should like now to conclude .
On the subject of concessions and of a possible legislative initiative , it is important not to rush things .
To begin with , the Commission must look more closely at the costs and benefits of a binding initiative on the granting of concessions , and at other measures suitable for dealing with the problems at stake .
On the basis of the results of this impact study , the Commission will then - most probably next year - decide whether the cost-benefit ratio warrants such a legislative initiative and will , if necessary , prepare a legislative proposal .
Furthermore , the message from all those who work in the area of PPP start-ups is clear : they are calling for practical guidelines on the way in which to apply the rules on public contracts to the creation of these partnerships .
The Commission intends to provide these guidelines in non-legislative form for the reasons that I indicated in my introduction .
There can be no doubt as to the importance of PPPs for the European economy .
I hope that Parliament 's report will help clarify the Community rules on public contracts and concessions so as to offer partners transparent and fair conditions of competition .
It has become quite clear to us , in this debate , that Parliament 's emphasis was on legal certainty , but you , for your part , will have also understood the Commission 's preoccupation , in an area as vital as this for European investment , with retaining some room for manoeuvre , such as to enable it , while guaranteeing legal certainty , to invest more money where it is really needed .
Moreover , several of you rightly stressed that these are absolutely vital tools .
Mr President , those are the answers that I wanted to give , and I thank Parliament once again for the quality of this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Posting of workers ( debate )
The next item is the report by Elisabeth Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the application of Directive 96 / 71 / EC on the posting of workers .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Services Directive is one of the most important directives in terms of the freedom to provide services , making possible , on the one hand , fair competition among service-providing enterprises right across Europe , while also , on the other , containing unambiguous rules for the protection of the posted workers , and also setting down minimum standards applicable to all , while nevertheless providing sufficient flexibility to enable these standards to be enforced by the various national systems .

At its heart is the principle of the same minimum wage or the same minimum conditions for the same work in the same place , which enables it to establish fair competition conditions for businesses on the ground .
If , though , the Posting of Workers Directive is to be successfully transposed , it demands committed effort by all - on every side and at every level .
I would like , at this juncture , to thank those Members who worked with me on this report for their dedication , and , above all , for their inexhaustible patience with the negotiating process , as well as the staff of the committee 's secretariat , in the Tabling Office , of the groups and Members ' private offices , for their dedication and the innumerable extra hours they were required to work .
This report is a joint effort .
It enjoys support right across the groups , and the reason why that is so is that all concerned have met others halfway and arrived at compromises for the sake of the matter in hand .
It is out of its commitment to the Posting of Workers Directive that this House repudiates the Commission 's attempts at guidelines limiting the Member States ' opportunities to exercise control , for the Member States have the particular function of ensuring , by means of their control measures , that the minimum working conditions for the posted workers are actually complied with , and they must be able to continue to do so in future , and without exceptions being made .

Our criticisms of the guidelines will come as no surprise to the Commission , for it is using them for no other purpose than to reintroduce through the back door the substance of Articles 24 and 25 of its original draft of the services directive , which this House had , by a large majority , deleted , and to that deletion the Council consented , for neither employers ' nor employees ' associations , neither governments nor members of parliament , want the freedom to provide services at the price of workers ' fundamental rights .
The reverse is true : there is a broad alliance of people who are convinced that this European Union of ours can succeed in combining the two , and that doing so will bring into being what we call the social Europe .
Our expectation of the Commission is that it should take seriously February 's unambiguous vote on this report as a guide to how it should proceed .
That also means that we expect it to take into account this House 's views when evaluating the questionnaires that it sent yesterday to the Member States .
It is unacceptable that the Commission should make demands of the Member States with the ultimate object of jeopardising compliance with minimum labour standards .
I might also add that the ECJ has made it clear that requirements needed in order to secure minimum labour conditions do not run counter to the freedom to provide services , and that , precisely , is what is made clear in this report .
So it is , for example , that it has been demonstrated in practice that , contrary to the Commission 's interpretation , wages documents can also be needed in addition to certificates of time worked in order to secure workers ' right to their minimum wage , and the consequence of that is that , in future , legal counsel will be indispensable as parties in the wages negotiations described in Article 3 ( 8 ) of the Posting of Workers Directive , or as representatives to make such negotiations possible by being available for the effective delivery of official documents .
If the directive is to be implemented , then action will need to be taken to clarify matters in advance and to provide information on compliance with minimum employment standards .
It is with that in mind that I hope that the commitment of so many to this report will pay off and that the Commission will now , without any reservations , allow ' the same pay for the same work in the same place ' to be established securely throughout the European Union .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of the Posted Workers Directive is to reconcile the right of firms to provide cross-border services with the rights of workers who are on temporary postings .
The objective is to ensure that basic freedom of movement is upheld for both workers and services , and that the social legislation aimed at protecting employees is complied with .
Ten years on from the adoption of this directive difficulties remain in applying it .
First and foremost , workers and employees are insufficiently informed about their rights and obligations .
A further problem is the lack of administrative cooperation between countries of origin and host countries , which in turn could be viewed as something of a lack of mutual trust .
Lastly , the inspection measures imposed by some Member States have led to fears of protectionism .
The authorities in the host countries have been granted some right of inspection , although this too has its limits .
These inspections must be carried out appropriately , without discrimination , and without obstructing the freedom to provide services within the framework of the internal market .
In clarifying this point , the Commission deemed it appropriate to adopt the main principles on 4 April .
National bodies must provide posted workers and service providers with effective ways of obtaining information on the work conditions applying in the host country .
They must also work together in a fair way .
In this regard , the Commission feels it must remind the Member States of their obligations , and calls on them to implement more effective resources .
I am aware that the debate in Parliament on the posting of workers has been a complex one , and that a wide range of opinions has been expressed .
This demonstrates the difficulty of striking a balance between safeguarding the protection of workers on the one hand and the freedom to provide services on the other .
I am pleased that in the report on which Parliament has voted , I found many points of convergence with the position expressed by the Commission in its 4 April communication .
There are a number of points , however , to which I should like to pay special attention and on which a clear position should be adopted .
I cannot agree with the view that the Commission will try to include deleted Articles 24 and 25 of the original services directive by means of its communication .
That is not the case here .
In its communication , the Commission interprets the law in question , but does not introduce new laws , because communications from the Commission cannot do such a thing , not even formally , as this is a matter of legislative process .
This assertion does not correspond to the reality of the Commission 's interpretation .
I wish to stress again that in its communication the Commission is not establishing a new law on which to base these articles , but is interpreting current law , which includes significant rulings of the Court in Luxembourg .
The rulings of the court referred to in the Commission communication prohibit the national bodies from requiring that service providers posted in other Member States have an office or a representative in their country .
According to case law , a Member State that is hosting foreign service providers may , in order to comply with the principle of solidarity , stipulate that there must be documentation available at the workplace relating directly to the work concerned , and especially work reports or documents relating to health , safety and work protection in the workplace .
In its interpretation , the Commission in no way restricts the Member States ' capacity to carry out effective inspections , and none of the aforementioned articles have that intention .
It is my view that the Commission tried very hard in its interpretation to find and understand the true substance and spirit of individual court rulings .
The Commission attaches great importance to the proper implementation of the directive and has broadened its scope beyond this implementation .
It has already started work on a report assessing the situation a year after publishing its guidelines .
To this end the Commission has sent a questionnaire out to the national bodies and the social partners .
It has also created a website dealing with legal and practical issues relating to the posting of workers , on which it recently created a forum where every European citizen can offer suggestions and comments .
Moreover , under the aegis of the Commission , a group of national experts has developed principles of best practice , establishing a number of rules in the area of administrative cooperation and a single form enabling us to simplify the exchange of information between contact points .
The Commission takes account , of course , of all of Parliament 's opinions and the report before us is an important document for the Commission .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Schroedter for her report .
I am sorry to have to say , however , that unfortunately the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs did not take account of what I believe were the main findings which were voted through in my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
In addition to this , in Group B , we had no opportunity to exchange information on important issues or to discuss them .
In her report , the rapporteur included many worrying and often contradictory elements .
Today , I shall focus on the most significant problems .
They are not new problems , and had already been widely discussed during work on the Services Directive .
Regrettably , it was decided that the solutions to these problems would not be contained in the Directive , only in the Commission 's Guidance on the Posting of Workers .
I believe these guidelines are useful , because they deal with the problems thousands of entrepreneurs encounter daily as they post their workers .
One of these problems is the requirement imposed by the host country to set up legal representation , instead of simply posting a worker who could act as the employer 's representative .
This requirement has far-reaching implications , because setting up legal representation falls under the principle of freedom to establish an enterprise , and not that of freedom to provide services .
In addition , it represents a considerable financial outlay for employers .
The fact that the host country requires the provision of various quantities of documents is also a problem .
In practice , entrepreneurs complain that the host country 's authorities abuse this requirement , insisting on documents that are not relevant to the work undertaken .
The requirement pertaining to the supply of information declarations on the posting of workers represents yet another problem .
Some countries insist on receiving this information many months before the start of the posting period , and it is often the case that these declarations are treated as authorisations .
Such practices are very burdensome for the service providers .
The final important issue I should like to draw attention to , and which is often highlighted by entrepreneurs , is the very strict control of Polish enterprises ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , allow me first of all to thank Mrs Schroedter for the extensive and excellent work she has done in drafting this report , and especially for her efforts to secure the broadest possible consensus on a text that is important for a variety of reasons .
She has also pointed out the useful work done by a large majority of Members of this Parliament during the debate and the vote on the Draft Services Directive .
It was useful because , in voting in favour of crucial amendments guaranteeing absolute respect for the competences and subjects covered by the Posted Workers Directive , Parliament safeguarded the vital role that this directive must play at a time when we , in the Union of 25 , are witnessing and are going to witness a large increase in the provision of services , as well as a rise in worker mobility .
The text also safeguarded - and I believe that this was the unanimous opinion of the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - our powers over the subjects that are rightfully ours .
A directive that has been understood properly , applied properly and that has properly controlled effects should ensure that the right balance is struck between fair competition and guaranteed respect for workers ' rights .
The ground rules must be strict and fair regarding this issue .
They must also guarantee transparency and security for workers , in terms of both service provision and freedom of movement .
For a directive to be understood properly there needs to be a major effort in terms of providing explanations and information and of simplifying administrative matters .
A directive that has been applied properly must clearly ensure that the right to free movement and the principles of equal treatment are respected and must pursue objectives relating to the harmonisation of working conditions and of social systems .
A directive with properly controlled effects is a major tool in the fight against the anti-European feelings that may be stirred up by the presence in the population of workers who are treated as mere commodities moved about at will and exploited under the most abject conditions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank our rapporteur for all the work she has done and for her willingness to listen .
I can tell you at this stage that my group considers this to be a balanced report .
Commissioner , with this report , my group would , above all , like to encourage you to take action to get the Posting of Workers Directive complied with on the ground .
We do not ask you to review the directive , because the legislation itself is fairly sound , but we all know that in practice , employees who temporarily work in other countries are often brutally exploited , and we think that this exploitation should stop .
That is why the different Member States ' inspectorates should collaborate more .
We would , accordingly , ask the Commission to form them into a well-organised network .
The passing on of information about rights and duties to employees and to companies , Commissioner , should also improve , and our group is delighted with your pledge to develop a well-documented website , launch uniform forms and exchange good working practices .
I should also like to raise the subject of the guidelines that the Commission has launched in response to this House successfully preventing the Services Directive from eroding the Posting of Workers Directive .
I should like to urge the Commissioner not to create any confusion between , on the one hand , attempts to simplify administration , which receives our wholehearted support , and , on the other hand , question demands that are necessary for monitoring and control ; that is why we maintain , Commissioner , that Member States must retain the right to demand that representatives be appointed by the firms in question , but also to place demands in connection with documents and registration systems .
We must join forces in order to call a halt to bureaucracy and exploitation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) A spirit of protectionism and economic nationalism is becoming entrenched in certain countries of the Community .
This hinders international trade and the free movement of capital and labour .
Protectionists have a negative attitude not only towards competition from Asia but also towards any source of foreign competition .
This is a short-sighted attitude .
We all know that competition is an engine of economic progress , whereas exclusion leads to economic and social decline .
Putting artificial bureaucratic obstacles in the way of implementation and application of the Posting of Workers Directive is one of the manifestations of protectionism .
This situation harms not only our own interests , but also those of the entire Community and infringes its citizens ' fundamental rights ; first and foremost , the freedom to provide services and freedom of establishment .
These rights are embodied in the EC Treaty and in the Posting of Workers Directive , but are being ignored by the Member States .
Such behaviour undermines our Community .
I will be voting for the elimination of bureaucratic obstacles so that national borders do not hinder business development in the Community and people are free to choose where they wish to work .
They must also be sure of not being exploited or discriminated against when working abroad .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) It is well known that many workers from EU Member States , such as Portugal , continue to suffer discrimination when they go to work in other countries that are also EU Member States , but where people earn higher salaries .
According to the directive on the posting of workers , the host country is solely responsible for ensuring the protection and the rights of posted workers .
To this end , the country concerned is required to adopt measures to prevent minimum standards from being circumvented .
This gives rise to genuine discrimination affecting all workers , both the posted workers and those from the host country .
Reality has shown us that this directive is ignored on many sides , despite countless complaints , either by Parliament , or in reports of specific cases , such as we have issued on a number of occasions .
There are still examples of non-compliance that need to be resolved , and we accordingly do not accept the Commission 's proposal to restrict in certain important areas the minimum requirements imposed by the Member States on businesses , which followed on from the proposed directive on the creation of an internal market for services .
Consequently , whilst we support the report , we must express our disappointment at the pressure exerted , and the proposals put forward , by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , following their attempts to block clarification of important aspects of the implementation of the directive .
They tabled various amendments , for example , aimed at removing points in the report before us , with the attempts at removing Amendment 13 and parts of Amendments 26 and 29 from the report being of particular concern .
As far as we are concerned , we want the rapporteur 's work to stand and would urge the Chamber to adopt a number of other proposals aimed at enforcing the directive .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , when the feeble compromise on the Services Directive was reached , it was obvious that it had been achieved at the expense of the new Member States of the European Union , whose main competitive advantage on the Union market is precisely in the services sector .
This compromise sounded the death-knell for all hope of equal opportunities on the common market as outlined in the initial draft of the Directive .
The European Commission 's Guidance on the Posting of Workers was one element of the deal that might have inspired some hope in the new countries .
In presenting today 's report to us , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is aiming to completely do away with even that small and non-binding opportunity .
With this report , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is aiming to preserve the complete status quo concerning the services market , even though protectionism and plain chauvinism are rampant throughout that market .
According to the European Trade Union Confederation , for example , the benefit of this chauvinism , is that it is worker-related and has been established under the aegis of the unions .
Personally , I doubt it has anything at all to do with the genuine good of working people .
Essentially , strict administrative and social requirements only serve to deprive people of jobs .
That was what happened in the Vaxholm case and also in the case of the Polish company Zojax .
Both companies were forced to withdraw from the implementation of projects , and this resulted in losses and redundancies .
Swedish trade unionists were very complacent , however , because those made redundant were foreign workers , namely Latvians and Poles .
I would remind Swedish trade unionists , and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , that the said foreigners are citizens and companies entitled to their full rights , who had been promised equal rights within the common market when accession took place .
It is true that the requirements laid down in Article 3 of the Directive are minimal , but does the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs not feel that it is high time to set upper limits for such requirements , both for cases of requirements based on law and for those based on collective agreements ?
Does the committee not feel that these requirements are usually mere smokescreens for plain and simple protectionism ?
The requirement to register , to set up legal representation in the host country and to make social documentation available in situ are all used by the authorities as a pretext for making things difficult .
They all serve one single purpose , namely to protect the national market against bricklayers , bakers , wood polishers , and many other kinds of workers who are now , quite rightly , feeling let down .
Their expectations concerning equal rights within the Union 's market are being shattered by harsh reality .
Adopting the report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs as it stands will send out a clear signal to the Member States , namely that they take whatever action they like on the common services market .
It will also amount to going back on the delicate compromise reached on the Services Directive .
That is why I am appealing for support for the amendments tabled by a group of Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and from the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , because the report does not deserve our support without these amendments .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , when people work on short-term contracts in countries other than their own , there are obvious advantages for all sides .
So I am all in favour of posted workers - but not this way .
The report says in paragraph 19 that this will not be achieved by huge bureaucracy , but some 35 out of 49 paragraphs include references to laws , rules , infringement procedures , ECJ cases , enforcement by penalties .
If this proposal is anything to go by , I am not surprised that the Enterprise Commissioner is behind schedule in his drive to simplify EU laws !
For yet again we have a proposal carrying a raft of rules and regulations , backed up with so many references to penalties and infringement procedures that the rapporteur must be at her wits ' end trying to make a proposal which is easy to operate , fair to all , but effective .
When this was debated a while ago in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , Members were horrified to hear cases of blatant exploitation of posted workers .
This must be stopped , but what were the Member States doing ?
What were the trade unions doing ?
After all , it is highly likely that local workers were also being abused .
Were posted workers employed because local workers refused to accept the conditions on offer ?
The key lies in recital L on page 5 of the report , which talks about preventing the circumvention of national standards .
Since national standards are emphasised this way , why do we need an EU directive at all ?
Why is it not left to Member States , if it is their rules that control the situation ?
An EU directive will be a burden on all sides and produce delays , when all we want is people in work .
After all , this is not a new situation .
Posted workers did not come about because of the EU .
They existed before there was an EU .
My own brother , English like myself , was an engineering draughtsman .
He became self-employed , took up a contract with Volkswagen and worked in Germany for several years .
He had no problems at all , but that was before the UK joined the then EC .
So I repeat , we do not need this directive .
Member States are perfectly capable of managing their affairs within the existing regulations of the European Union - in short , subsidiarity .
Do you remember that ?
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank all those who contributed to this report .
The posting of workers is one of the important issues that the EU must resolve if it is to meet its target of completing the internal market with the free movement of persons and the freedom to provide services on a cross-border basis .
I feel honoured to take the floor in front of hundreds of my fellow MEPs at this significant time .
The Commission communication is aimed at liberalising the provision of services and the posting of workers , and removing the unnecessary restrictions and protectionism prevalent in some Member States .
Mrs Schroedter 's report , however , takes the opposite approach .
The rapporteur places undue emphasis on protecting workers and in turn establishes protectionist measures that work against the freedom to post workers .
The current practice places workers from the new Member States at a distinct disadvantage .
Businesses from the old Member States are permitted to provide services anywhere in the EU market , as well as in their country of origin .
Businesses from the new Member States , on the other hand , are not allowed such access or are subject to time restrictions and a series of administrative barriers and protectionist measures that in reality prevent their posted workers from being competitive and from providing services freely on the market under the same conditions as workers from the host country .
In this Chamber we still hear fears expressed about the Polish plumber and all he symbolises .
Mrs Schroedter 's report rides roughshod over the fundamental values on which the EU was founded , and in no way leads to the achievement of our shared aim , which is to complete the single internal market .
I should therefore like to call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to vote against this report .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her very constructive work .
As many others have said , this is an important directive not only for freedom of movement but also for the protection of workers .
There are quite a number of deficiencies - we know this from the surveys - when it comes to information , cooperation between Member States and the ability to carry out checks .
Allow me to state that we are in favour not of protectionism but of open borders .
We are in favour of competition on equal terms between companies , but we are also in favour of the equal treatment of workers .
That is what we are concerned with here - equal treatment .
Some of the Members who referred to the Vaxholm case have left now .
That precise case was about the need for Latvian workers not to be treated worse than Swedish workers .
They were to enjoy precisely the same treatment - not worse , but precisely the same , treatment .
One issue on which there has been disagreement between ourselves and the Commission is that of the importance of having a representative .
You propose that it would be enough to have a link with someone in the other country with whom to negotiate .
That would be incredibly bureaucratic and enormously difficult .
A representative must be able to act as a channel of communication in those countries that take care of the negotiations , so it would be necessary to have someone with a negotiating mandate .
He or she would also have to be able to communicate with , for example , authorities responsible for occupational health and safety .
Anything else would be quite impossible .
There is no case law that contradicts what I am saying .
The Arblade case was about something else .
It was about documents that had to be kept for five years under Belgian law and is therefore irrelevant to what the Commission is saying .
I nonetheless hope that we shall get this Posting of Workers Directive operating successfully in society . In that case , it will , however , have to include the parts to which I have referred .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report .
Because of time constraints , I shall concentrate on the Irish experience only , but it is certainly relevant to this debate .
The Commissioner stated that Ireland has not adopted specific transposition measures and was not conforming to the criteria established by the case law of the Court of Justice .
So , apart from all the other difficulties highlighted by the rapporteur - and I do not have time to list them - it seems that we in Ireland do not have the legal certainty to comprehensively enforce this directive .
Recent events in Ireland have shown how much we need full implementation of this directive : with GAMA , a Turkish construction company , ripping off some of its foreign workers ; the Irish ferry scandal , where existing workers were simply replaced by mainly foreign workers on half the wages and with inferior working conditions - I might add that this is one of the reasons I support a directive on ferries ; and today in Ireland the mushroom industry admitting that some of its members are paying half the minimum wage to their foreign workers .
My final point is that it is not just posted workers who suffer : it is all workers , including Irish workers , who will pay a price down the line , as minimum wages will be undercut and suspicion and distrust will replace solidarity between workers .
The Commissioner said earlier that it is difficult to protect workers while ensuring free movement of services ; but , regardless of how difficult it is , we must do so .
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , will begin by expressing my appreciation for the work the rapporteur has done .
The Posting of Workers Directive was a cause of constant controversy in the past , and has remained one to this day .
The country from which I come was not the only one to be unwilling to extend the directive 's scope to cover the economy as a whole , and , in Germany , it still applies only in the building industry and to occupations associated with it .
I would like to steer the debate on this report towards three aspects of it . One is the emphasis that the rapporteur puts on the need for the social partners to be strengthened if the standards laid down in wage agreements are not to be undermined .
That should not , however , be taken to mean that these agreements , reached between the Member States and the two sides of industry , actually do guarantee living wages .
There needs to be examination of the degree to which minimum standards actually do meet the need for ' decent work ' in the individual Member States .

Mrs Schroedter , with some justification , also points out that it is difficult to distinguish between the employed and the self-employed , but , necessary though it is to define them and clarify the status of those who are termed the ' putative self-employed ' , we should not forget that we are talking here about the people who are most on the margins and earn less than anyone else , that they must be accorded a status that secures them rights , including the right to a fair and living wage .
The use of the relevant directives to enforce the freedom to provide services is always justified by reference to - among others - the argument that , at the end of the day , there has to be something in it for the consumer .

At first sight , the Posting of Workers Directive would appear to have little to do with the protection of consumers , but I am sure that just how much the two are connected will become clear when we gain a sense of perspective , for the consumer 's interest is no longer only in the quality of the goods themselves , and that is why , today , consumers are protected against imported goods produced using child labour .
The exchange of goods and services is meant to have a social dimension to it , and those who participate in it must be entitled to minimum standards that guarantee them a living , appropriate working conditions and the protection of their livelihood .

( DE ) Mr President , in February , this House , together with the Council and the Commission , arrived at a compromise on the Services Directive , Articles 24 and 25 of which were thereby deleted on the grounds that they provided for only superficial scrutiny of the delegating firms and their workers .
We were thereby able to ensure the more effective combating not only of illicit labour but also of wage dumping .
Over the past few months , the Commission has sustained losses , and now it is trying to use the Posting of Workers Directive as a back door through which to resubmit the rejected positions , in certain cases - by way of guidelines on which we are allowed to do no more than state an opinion - going beyond what the ECJ has stipulated , and it is doing so by means of guidelines on which we can do no more than give an opinion .
That is deceitful and amounts to robbing the people 's representatives of their powers .
Guidelines will no doubt be drawn on by the ECJ when arriving at judgments , and they will thereby be made binding in law .
The German Federal Government , our political parties , social partners , employers ' and workers ' associations , will not tolerate the planned restrictions on our posting of workers legislation , and other European countries have similar misgivings .
In Poland , for example , there are hardly any Poles to be found on building sites , but instead loads of manpower from non-EU states .
Necessary though it is that mobility within the European internal market should be permitted , it is above all necessary that justice and fairness should prevail , and that is what effective controls make possible .
Every host country must be entitled to demand documents and check employment conditions - such things as income , working time , rest periods , safety and health protection .
Those who claim that fewer forms and documents are needed , and that bureaucracy is to be avoided , do not in fact want there to be any controls and are making illegality possible ; it must also be possible to serve notices on those who have broken the law , and so the posting enterprises must be represented by persons who are fully authorised under the law of the host country .
I welcome Mrs Schroedter 's report ; she has included my proposed amendments in compromises .
On one point , though , I do not agree with her , and that is with regard to the definition of ' workers ' which is adapted in such a way that the economically dependent self-employed are categorised as fictitiously self-employed .
I hope this position will gain majority support tomorrow .
( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I have discussed this dossier with Mrs Handzlik in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - she , unfortunately , is no longer taking an active part in the debate .
What I should like to underline is that we very much considered the problems mentioned by her and by many group colleagues which the new Member States are facing and that we obviously recognise that unnecessary bureaucratic barriers to the free movement of services and the free movement of employees should be removed .
I also have sufficient experience , however , of what is happening within the labour market legally , illegally or partly-legally to know that people are indeed exploited and that it is the scope for posting workers across the border that is used to circumvent the rules .


That is why I should like to spell out once again that we must not throw out the baby with the bathwater , but that we must strike a good balance instead ; I should once again like to impress on Mr Clark , who is apparently oblivious to how these rules work , that there is such a thing as the principle of subsidiarity , that it is the rules of the working country that apply in labour law , that Member States have complete autonomy in this and that this Posting of Workers Directive is only intended as an exception to this rule in order to cover the situations where employees are posted across the border and are allowed to work under their own conditions temporarily , provided there are a number of minimum protective provisions in place .
It is precisely because of the control procedures in this respect , and because they are so complex , that rules are needed in order to create scope for monitoring , better scope for labour inspectorates to collaborate , which means that this balance is needed .
Also in the framework of the Services Directive , I should like to underline once again that there is no hierarchy of rules for this labour legislation , that Member States are autonomous in this respect and that this is not overruled by the rules for the free movement of services .
( PL ) Mr President , the possibility of posting workers is intrinsically linked to the fundamental freedoms of the European Union .
The most important of these are the free movement of people , services and capital .
The Posting of Workers Directive is therefore a logical consequence of the functioning of the European Union 's internal market .
There is no doubt that the state of the Union 's economy is measured in terms of the state of its enterprises , particularly its small and medium-sized enterprises .
The 1996 Directive was mainly intended for SMEs , and aimed to simplify the principles allowing them to compete and carry out their economic activity outside their country of origin .
Internal competition is essential if the Union is to cope successfully with competition at global level , where it faces competition from the economies of the United States , China and Japan .
I would like to thank Mrs Schroedter for venturing to tackle an issue of such importance for the future of Europe .
I have studied her report carefully .
Unfortunately , I am bound to say that I fear the document is not quite in line with my vision of freedom to provide services on the internal market , which is so dear to my heart .
Having read Mrs Schroedter 's draft report , I have come to suspect that its de facto aim is to make it difficult for companies to post workers in order to undertake a specific task and , accordingly , it sets out to sanction the protectionist practices Member State governments put in place to protect themselves from the effects of competition .
I should like to state clearly that I am referring to the positive effects of competition .
At the same time , I support the efforts by the European Commission , and the Commissioner 's own personal efforts , aimed at ensuring better implementation of the Directive in practice .
I hope that there is no reason to change it , or replace it with a new legal act .
I trust Commissioner Špidla is of the same opinion .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Schroedter for a very good report .
We need an effective directive to protect workers posted temporarily to an EU state .
This is essential to prevent a race to the bottom .
However , we have a directive that is full of legal black holes and is not applied at all in some states .
Despite the best efforts of Commissioner Špidla , I do not believe that guidelines will solve these failings .
Many of our states are resisting the necessary legislative changes .
The consequences are scandals of the kind already mentioned , such as the Irish ferries debacle .
While ships ' crews are excluded from the posting of workers directive , the Irish Government also resists the implementation of a ferries directive , which would protect those workers .
We urgently need a legal framework to effectively prevent a race to the bottom , unfair competition and , indeed , the ugly emergence of xenophobia .
We need clarity and certainty on definitions of workers and an end to false self-employment .
We need the right to apply clearly established higher minimum standards , sufficient inspectors to ensure compliance and enforceable penalties for failure to comply with EU legislation .
I believe , also , that we need protection for whistle-blowers , for those who reveal the abuses that take place under the existing regime .
I should like to remind those who would criticise the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and myself over this issue that I represent a state that opened its borders to all ten new Member States , fully and freely .
We have now been forced to close our borders to Bulgaria and Romania because of the abuse of migrant workers and the consequent effect upon Irish-based workers .
This is not an easy question to resolve and it is certainly not an attempt to create protectionism in the 15 ' old ' Member States .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the dynamic nature of the internal market has offered increased mobility for workers and has helped European businesses to develop their activities beyond national borders .
The ability of businesses to post some of their workers to other EU Member States for the purpose of temporary work has made a further contribution to this increased mobility .
The experience until now , however , has left much to be desired .
In the case of Portugal , the posting of workers has not gone well , especially in the building industry .
A number of cases have come to light of Portuguese workers being exploited in Spain , France , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands .
This has happened because there is a yawning chasm between the 1999 directive , which strikes a balance between the freedom to provide services and the guarantee of the labour rights of posted workers , and the implementation of that directive on the ground .
In addition to the fact that Member States have differed in their interpretations of the directive , there have also been differences in its practical implementation , and this has led to more barriers and more bureaucracy , and has slowed down the process .
It is abundantly clear that there is no monitoring of the implementation of this directive .
Subcontracting is a terrible example of situations that are very common but are not covered by the directive .
This has led to an unacceptable watering down of responsibilities , which always - I repeat , always - works to the detriment of the posted workers .
I support Mrs Schroedter 's report because I believe it is up to the host Member State , in close cooperation with the authorities of the country of origin , to ensure that the employment conditions laid down in the directive are rigorously complied with , for the purposes of increasing the effectiveness of monitoring and of combating illegal practices .
What is needed , therefore is greater transparency and more information on the rights and obligations to be complied with when businesses become involved in the posting of workers .
I also endorse Mrs Schroedter 's report because it has become necessary to adopt corrections in order to ensure that this directive is supported , monitored and carried out better and more systematically .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must acknowledge the fact that a European labour market does genuinely exist , especially in the field of services which , more than any other field , involves the posting of workers .
We are in favour of this , but not under just any circumstances and not at the risk of social dumping .
Human labour is not a commodity and cannot be subjected to the rules of free competition .
We voiced this concern during the debate on the ' Services ' Directive , and - as you pointed out - Parliament rejected Articles 24 and 25 of this directive , which deal precisely with the easing of the conditions on the posting of workers .
The fact is that it is unacceptable for the Commission to undermine this position and to ignore the criticisms voiced by Parliament .
The Directive on the posting of workers has been poorly applied in the Member States and is not meeting its objectives .
That may be the case , but should the legislation be relaxed as a consequence or , on the contrary , should more be done to encourage the Member States to apply it ?
I do not believe that the obligations for declarations and effective controls and the retention of documents lead to pointless red tape when what is at stake is the protection of the social rights of posted or local workers .
A lax attitude on the matter only benefits fraudsters .
Furthermore , enhanced restrictions and the very threat of financial penalties should act as a deterrent .
That is why I endorse this report and urgently call on the Commission and the Member States to overcome the difficulties in applying the directive , which we do not want to have amended at this stage .
( HU ) Several people have pointed out that the Posting of Workers Directive and the Services Directive are closely interconnected .
Therefore , I regret that we will not deal with both together in November , although that would have been logical and sensible .
As for our standpoint , there is an important philosophical difference between the approach expressed by socialist and Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance fellow Members .
We put the focus on strengthening and speeding up the economy , because without accelerating development we cannot create new jobs and we cannot secure long-term financing for the major social welfare systems or safeguard European social values .
It will be impossible to make progress towards trying to balance work and family life or towards improving the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Consequently , we will not have adequate resources to deal on a European level with the massive downsizing caused by company relocations .
The question , then , is whether we want to hamper or strengthen the performance of the economy .
In the course of the debate on the Posting of Workers Directive , it seemed to me that we want to hamper it , which is not a good sign for the future .
To mention only the most striking problem , the requirement concerning company representatives runs completely counter to the free provision of services .
In practice , this represents a serious competitive disadvantage .
It would require setting up a local framework , which is an expensive , pointless and impractical exercise .
This is why I would like to bring to your attention the fact that we consider Amendment 7 to be crucial .
Should it not be accepted , we will not support adoption of the directive .
Please , take that into consideration when voting .

( DE ) Mr President , I wish the Posting of Workers Directive were no longer needed , and I am sure that the Commissioner is thinking along similar lines .
Nor am I sure that this law actually can adequately protect workers from exploitation , but there is no other means available to us - or none that is adequate - to prevent problems on the European labour market .
What is clear is that the most important features of the Posting of Workers Directive function only to a limited extent - I am talking here not only about the imposition of administrative penalties across borders , but also about the cooperation between authorities .
Moreover , the failure to take account of bonuses as an often essential component of wages leads to more wage dumping .
No doubt the minimum requirement for the Posting of Workers Directive to function will be the availability of a person who can act as the representative of the delegating enterprise and ensure that the directive is applied .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I shall be very brief indeed , because it is already five past midnight and I feel we must adhere very strictly to regulations such as the working time directive , and others in force in the EU .
Very briefly , then .
One key question , raised twice in this debate , is that in its communication the Commission tried to reintroduce Articles 24 and 25 , which had been removed from the services directive .
I wish to point out that this is a mistaken view , because Articles 24 and 25 are based on the country of origin principle , which is the principle that the country of origin is responsible for inspections .
This is not in the communication because the communication is duly based on the current legal situation , according to which the responsibility for inspection lies with the countries to which workers are posted , that is to say , the countries hosting the workers .
I should also like to say that I have noticed in the debate that we agree on the idea that the directive is capable of working at any given time , but it is vital that we step up efforts to ensure its consistent application .
The main problem at present is that it is being applied inconsistently , especially in cross-border cooperation between individual Member States .
The Commission has taken steps in its communication to address this issue - and I feel that it is our duty to do this as thoroughly and as quickly as possible .
I do not wish to issue an opinion on individual cases that have been cited by way of criticism of the directive or the Commission , not because this is impossible but rather because I respect the working time of the interpreters .
I should like to make a final general remark .
In its communication , the Commission firstly interpreted the court ruling in Luxembourg , and it did so correctly .
Then on the basis of its obligations as Guardian of the Treaties it formulated a position on a series of issues .
Thirdly it proposed , and continues to propose , steps that must be taken to improve the implementation of this directive .
I should now like to make one last remark .
It is a basic principle of due process under the rule of law that any law - in this case the directive - can be used only for the purpose for which it was drawn up .
The purpose of this directive is to protect posted workers , not to restrict the freedom to provide services .
Consequently , in terms of this general structure and from the standpoint of proportionality , the communication does not restrict the Member States ' ability to carry out their own inspections ; nor does it restrict their ability to perform their duties .
The fundamental rule of proportionality naturally applies , whereby the obligations laid down must be appropriate to the objective , and cases must be dealt with on a case-by-case basis , as in fact the communication indicates .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you for the attention given to this issue by Parliament .
I am convinced that this is one of the most important directives concerning the EU labour market .
It is our duty to interpret it correctly and accurately and to put it into practice as quickly and effectively as possible .
I should like to thank Mrs Schroedter for her report , because it undoubtedly marks a step forward in the process I mentioned earlier , namely the full implementation of the directive in such a way that it can meet its objective .
Honourable Members , thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
Tonight we are debating the report on the application of a directive relating to posting of workers , as we are aware the posting of workers directive refers firstly to the guarantee of the free movement of persons and services , secondly , that posted employees enjoy terms and conditions related to minimum rates of pay , working conditions , health and safety of the host Member states .
The main problem of the directive is its enforcement .
One of the main obstacles is the need to adjust the definition of ' employees ' so that a clear distinction is made with the status of ' self employed persons ' for the purpose of national employment law .
Another difficulty is that this directive has not been transposed by all the Member States , nor is it enforced in practice in a number of Member States .
Also it is apparent that such workers do not even know their rights and therefore the aim of the directive is not being achieved .
I have come across numerous Maltese who were working in other Member States and who have no idea of their rights under this directive .
So as to make the directive meaningful , we must not be ambiguous .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
European Central Bank Annual Report ( 2005 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Berès on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the 2005 Annual Report of the European Bank .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , ladies and gentlemen , the annual report of the European Central Bank always offers an opportunity for the European Parliament to review monetary policy and to supplement the work carried out by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs through the monetary dialogue conducted four times a year with the President of the European Central Bank .
You will all remember that last year we rejected the report , as it did not correspond to the guidelines advocated by this Parliament .
The year 2005 was an unusual year , in which the Central Bank initiated a movement raising interest rates five times , the first of which was on 1 December .
These successive rises took place in an unusual economic context , determined by both the rise in oil prices and a disadvantageous exchange rate for euro zone exports , and in the context of an upturn in economic growth considered by more acute observers as fragile .
In these circumstances , this report specifically invites the Central Bank to analyse carefully the conditions in which it conducts its monetary policy .
I am pleased that this report also emphasises that euro-dollar parity is important to growth in the European Union and that it draws from this a number of conclusions , which have been drafted in a spirit of compromise , bearing in mind the need for each monetary authority to exercise in full its responsibilities in terms of exchange rates .
I hope that this compromise will still be present at the time of the vote .
I should like to express my regret , nonetheless , that it was not possible in this report to include both the subject of household debt and the improvement needed in the coordination of economic policies .
Allow me , Mr President , to mention a number of points on which I believe this report provides original and valuable insights .
Consider , for example , the invitation made to the Central Bank to examine closely the use of EUR 500 notes and the possibility of freezing the issue of these notes .
Let us come now to the key issue for this Parliament , namely the conditions in which democratic control is exercised and the way in which the Central Bank operates as an institution .
From this point of view , we wanted to make our contribution , before the next renewal of a member of the Executive Board , to the necessary debate that must take place among the institutions in order that the members of the Executive Board may represent the interests of the euro zone in the best way possible .
We believe that , to this end , the best approach would be to apply to the ECB the arrangement seen on the executive boards of all other central banks , namely a variety of backgrounds and a balance of portfolios .
We are in agreement within this Parliament on requesting that the balance between nations should not be enshrined as an eternal status quo , and we believe , moreover , that a variety of backgrounds should enable the contributions and plurality within the Executive Board to be enhanced .
I also hope that this Parliament will advocate that the Council , when giving its opinion on approving a nomination to the Board , should exercise its decision-making power in full by making its choice on the basis of a number of different candidates .
I am familiar with the argument used frequently by yourself , Mr President of the European Central Bank , and also used by Jean-Claude Trichet from time to time : having several candidates would damage the careers of those not accepted for the position .
Allow me to say that , as observers of international nomination procedures , our assessment is entirely different .
At international level , the only post that is filled without competition or without a variety of candidates - and I come from a party that , as you know , is currently experiencing this process and all its virtues - is the Presidency of the World Bank .
This process does not apply in the case of the International Monetary Fund , the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development or the World Trade Organisation .
That is why we believe that , from this point of view , the euro zone as an integrated area should allow a number of different candidates .
Obviously , we also request that the European Parliament should finally be given the power to approve the appointment of the members of the Executive Board , which , in my opinion , would only strengthen the Board 's authority and legitimacy and ability to embody a strong voice for the euro zone , on the international stage also .
This is the primary objective of this Parliament , namely that , on the international stage , the Central Bank , alongside the Council and the Eurogroup , should be the key legitimate spokesman that we need for Europe 's voice to carry loud and clear on such important subjects as you have wanted to raise , Mr President , and on which this Parliament would like to make a contribution .
I am of course thinking of the question of the alternative funds , on which , I hope , the compromise drawn up by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will be supported by all the groups at the time of the vote .
European Central Bank .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour and a great pleasure to speak to you today .
I am here to present to the European Parliament the 2005 annual report of the European Central Bank .
However , as you know , relations between Parliament and the European Central Bank go beyond the specific obligations imposed by the Treaty .
In fact , as Mrs Berès has just said , we have over the years established a very close dialogue , which , I should like to emphasise , has been enhanced once again this year .
Honourable Members , it is therefore the third time that I have spoken before you this month .
Furthermore , my colleagues on the board of the ECB have been in close contact with the European Parliament regarding various issues such as reform of the International Monetary Fund , payment systems and clearing and settlement systems .
For our part , we attach great importance to the contacts on these issues .
( DE ) I would like to start by giving you a brief overview of the economic and monetary policy developments of 2005 and by outlining the European Central Bank 's monetary policy measures .
I would then like to make some comments with regard to points and proposals that you have raised in your draft resolution on the ECB 's annual report for 2005 .
Mr President , Let me first of all welcome the assessment of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee as regards the ECB 's monetary policy in 2005 and beyond .
As recognised in the draft report , the ECB 's monetary policy - which is designed to fulfil our primary objective of maintaining price stability - has continued to be successful in anchoring inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability , despite a number of challenges mentioned by Mrs Berès , relating in particular to the continued strong surge in oil prices until the most recent period .
As already emphasised on several occasions , such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area , fully in line with Article 105 of the EC Treaty .
In this respect , let me emphasise that the ECB 's open and transparent communication is a key element in guiding market expectations .
In particular , my introductory statement at the press conference after the first Governing Council meeting each month provides a clear view , on the part of the Governing Council , on the current monetary policy stance in real time .
Hence , we make the outcome of our deliberations public .
As such , the introductory statement is comparable with what other central banks call ' summary minutes ' .
In 2005 , the ECB 's monetary policy operated in an environment of increasingly improving economic conditions .
While real GDP growth remained moderate in the first half of the year , in an environment of heightened uncertainties surrounding domestic demand , the pace of economic activity gradually strengthened during the second half of the year , from around 1.2 % year-on-year on average in the first half of 2005 to around 1.7 % year-on-year on average in the second half .
Overall , real GDP in the euro area grew by 1.4 % .
As regards price developments , annual HICP inflation averaged 2.2 % in 2005 , compared to 2.1 % in each of the two preceding years .
While annual HICP inflation eased to 2.0 % in the first half of 2005 , mainly reflecting base effects , HICP inflation rates accelerated to levels significantly above 2 % in the second half , reaching a peak of 2.6 % in September , mainly on the back of substantial increases in energy prices .
Thus , reviewing the ECB 's monetary policy decisions in 2005 and early 2006 , it is useful to split this period into two parts .
In the first half of 2005 , against the background of subdued inflation developments and with inflation expectations for the euro area solidly anchored at levels in line with price stability , the Governing Council concluded that it remained appropriate to keep interest rates at their historically low levels .
At the same time , the Governing Council was constantly alert with regard to the materialisation of upside risks to price stability , as signalled by both the ECB 's economic and monetary analyses .
In the second half of 2005 and early 2006 , the likelihood that average annual HICP inflation could remain above 2 % over the medium term increased and a spill-over to inflation expectations had to be avoided .
This scenario of elevated inflation rates remained subject to previously identified upside risks , notably further increases in oil prices and indirect taxes and , more particularly , potential second-round effects in wage and price-setting .
It was also confirmed by the monetary analysis , given strong monetary growth , robust credit expansion and ample liquidity .
As a consequence , by the end of 2005 , the regular cross-checking of the ECB 's economic and monetary analyses indicated that an adjustment of the very accommodative stance of the ECB 's monetary policy was clearly warranted in order to contain upside risks to price stability and preserve the firm anchoring of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area .
The Governing Council of the ECB therefore decided in December to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points , after two and a half years of maintaining these rates at historically low levels .
Since then the Governing Council has continued to withdraw monetary accommodation , thereby establishing the minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem at 3.25 % by now .
Turning to recent developments , all the main indicators of economic activity in the euro area that have become available in the course of 2006 confirm the Governing Council 's assessment that economic growth has gained momentum and , in addition , become more broadly-based and sustained , mainly supported by domestic demand .
With regard to consumer prices , annual HICP inflation rates , notwithstanding their decline in most recent months , will remain elevated , at levels above 2 % on average in 2006 .
As regards 2007 , inflation risks remain on the upside .
These risks include , in particular , a stronger than expected rise in wages on the back of improving labour markets and a stronger than expected pass-through of past oil price rises .
The assessment of upside risks prevailing is confirmed when cross-checked with the monetary analysis , given the ongoing dynamism of monetary and credit growth , ample liquidity and , from a medium-term perspective , a persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion .
This has been noted in the Commission report .
Monetary developments therefore require enhanced monitoring , in particular against the background of improved economic conditions and strong property market developments in many parts of the euro area .
As I said publicly on behalf of the Governing Council after our last decision , if our assumptions and baseline scenario are confirmed , further withdrawal of monetary accommodation will remain warranted .
The Governing Council will therefore continue to monitor all developments very closely , so as to ensure price stability over the medium to longer term .
As regards fiscal policy , budgetary developments in 2005 and 2006 and plans for 2007 point to further , albeit slow , improvements in budget balances .
However , this should not give rise to complacency .
It remains of the essence that budgetary consolidation is strengthened in the current upswing and that pro-cyclical policies are avoided , which would boost the confidence of both the markets and the public .
As regards structural reforms , I welcome the view of the European Parliament that comprehensive structural reforms are needed to raise the potential growth rate of the euro area and underpin the momentum of the ongoing economic recovery .
In this respect , the reform measures initiated in the context of the renewed Lisbon Strategy were a welcome additional step in the right direction .
The successful implementation of national reforms aimed at removing rigidities and inefficiencies in euro area countries would improve the smooth functioning of EMU and facilitate the conduct of the ECB 's single monetary policy .
In your motion for a resolution you raise a large number of issues of relevance to the ECB and I would like to assure you that we will consider them with great care .
I should like to share our assessment on two issues straight away , in view of their topical nature and the exchanges of views I and my fellow members of the Executive Board had with you on those points .
In the motion for a resolution , the ECB is called upon to carry out further analysis in the area of hedge funds - a point you have underlined .
Amid the increasing attention being paid to the activities of hedge funds , I think that it would be unfair not to mention their role as regards enhancing market liquidity , providing significant diversification opportunities for investors and fostering financial innovation .
That being said , it is clear that there are potential risks for financial stability from their very rapidly growing presence in the financial system and it has yet to be tested whether they would amplify market volatility or pose greater counterparty risks in a less benign financial market environment .
Against that background , the ECB will definitely follow up on your request for further analysis .
It is possible that we will conclude that there is a real case for enhancing the current framework , which relies essentially on the vigilance of the financial institutions that are themselves under supervision as regards their counterparty risks on the hedge funds .
But I also note that any such enhancement should be agreed upon at the level of the international community and , in particular , on the basis of an appropriate transatlantic discussion .
As regards payment and settlement issues , let me first thank the European Parliament for the support expressed for the implementation by November 2007 of the TARGET2 system .
Being an integrated large-value payment system , TARGET2 will provide for efficiency gains and improved liquidity management by banks .
In this regard , I should like to refer to the increased pressure also to have an integrated platform for the settlement of securities transactions in euro .
The Eurosystem is therefore currently examining , in coordination with the European Commission and in close cooperation with the market , the feasibility of setting up a Eurosystem infrastructure for the provision of securities settlement services in central bank money .
A decision on whether to offer such a service , referred to as ' TARGET2-Securities ' , is expected early in 2007 .
In the field of retail payments , we strongly support the efforts to establish a Single Euro Payment Area - SEPA .
We welcome the European Commission 's initiative for a directive on payment services and I warmly welcome the European Parliament 's contribution to a swift adoption of this directive to assist the banking industry in its implementation of SEPA payment instruments as from 1 January 2008 .
I thank you very much for your attention . I am now available to answer your questions .
( Applause )
Mr President , allow me to begin by saying that - as can be seen from the report - we generally endorse what the European Central Bank has done over the past year .
It is particularly important that the independence of the ECB has been , and remains , secure .
It has proven to be the case that the Bank 's moderate interest rates policy has contributed to the invigoration of the economy , even though that same policy has very often been criticised in recent years .
That being the case , we believe that it would be absolutely right to raise the current level of interest rates , which is very low in historical terms , a little , if the situation so requires it , in order to control inflationary trends .
We also welcome the ECB 's comments with regard to the necessary structural reforms in the Member States that it is constantly calling for .
It is quite right to do this , as inflation would hit those on middle and lower incomes particularly hard .
Higher inflation would make these people poorer . We are opposed to that .
We also welcome the clear statement by the President of the ECB in relation to the development of European stock exchanges .
It is imperative that we ensure that European stock exchanges are consolidated within Europe and are not simply taken over from abroad - from the US , for example .
That is the only way that we can prevent the US Securities and Exchange Commission regulations and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act being implemented in Europe via the back door .
We have sound and transparent market regulations in Europe that are suited to our European situation , and they should not be undermined .
As regards the report , we have resolutely advocated that the ECB does not become politicised .
We , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , are thus very clear in our rejection of the publication of ECB voting results .
Doing so would lead to politicisation , because voting results would then be discussed .
We are also opposed to a publicly debated nomination process , as qualified candidates would be discussed to death .
We thus do not feel that we can support these two elements , as they would mean politicisation of the ECB .
We would , on the other hand , like to point out that , if the ECB becomes a market operator in the areas of settlement and the clearing of payments and instalments within the framework of TARGET 2 , it must also subject itself to appropriate corporate governance .
Corporate governance of this nature still has to be developed .
The independence of the ECB will then be ensured and that will result in a stable economic policy that will call for structural reforms in Europe .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I shall refrain from dwelling , on behalf of my group , on the first part of Mr Trichet 's account or on what Mr Lauk stated a moment ago .
Suffice for me to say that I welcome such a political dialogue - as Mr Lauk 's viewpoint is also a political viewpoint obviously - with you on a regular basis .
We have ourselves conducted such a dialogue only recently , and I think we should persevere with it .
The report that is now before us reflects , in my view , just how mature this dialogue has become , touching , as it does , upon very serious subjects , including the link between monetary policy and macro-economic policy , which is of huge importance to our group .
Allow me to single out two or three items which have been subject of discussion .
First of all , I am delighted with what Mr Trichet had to say about hedge funds , his commitment to better analysis of them and to the adoption of a much more serious stance with respect to them .
Whilst we stated this in very specific terms a few weeks ago during the dialogue , he was a little more hesitant back then .
I am therefore pleased that this has now been spelled out much more clearly - I have referred to this in a different connection as the black hole of the financial markets - because that black hole is widening all the time and must be plugged very deliberately by monitoring financial markets , not least with stability in mind .
The second point is the appointment of the members of the ECB 's Executive Board .
In the spring , we debated this very subject further to Mr Stark 's appointment .
We then said quite clearly , because we did not have anything against Mr Stark himself , who was well-qualified , but wanted to talk about the procedure , that we would not dwell on the appointment procedure and would come back to it in this report , which is what we are doing now .
I regret that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats refuses to help improve - by making it more fully-developed - this appointment procedure , and also the role we in this House can play in this .
I am pleased , though , that at least the Liberals and other groups are prepared to lend their support .
I hope that we can make the necessary progress in time for the next appointment , which , as it happens , will not be until 2009 / 2010 .
This is very important , because it should not be the case that large countries have a qualified seat and that it is , in this case , only in the Federal Chancellery in Berlin that it is decided who is a good candidate .
Finally , I should like to turn to the subject of Target II .
We have clearly decided not to speak out on this , or on the code of conduct that is being prepared by the Commission for that matter , but to closely monitor your next move instead .
What we would say at this stage is that if , and only if , the ECB and the euro system are to have an active decision-making role in this , this should involve sound monitoring and democratic decision-making ; that much we agree on .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , this report does , in any event - and indeed , as has already been indicated - represent an opportunity to take another good look at not only the ECB 's annual report but also at where we as Parliament stand in the debate on monetary policy .
I have to say that this time round , as indeed in recent years , my group has taken a traditional line .
First of all , our viewpoint on monetary policy is clear .
The ECB 's independence may not be affected , there should be no political pressure and we must prevent monetary policy in the euro zone from being politicised .
We believe that there is a need for confidence in the European Central Bank to be restored .
In September 2005 , when the rate of inflation rose by 2.6 % , the European Central Bank responded well by increasing the historically very low interest rate .
Price stability is the ECB 's Number One priority and that is how it should stay , as described in the Treaty .
Having said this , we also take the view , and will do in future , that more transparency is possible .
This is , in fact , what Mr Huhne said as long as six years ago , when he produced a report on this .
I also value the ECB 's efforts on this score , and the President 's being present in this plenary is a very different matter - although the same people are involved - from his visits to us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ; this is also very much appreciated ; and I also think that this has not been done before .

Despite this , much of the ECB 's decision-making is done in what appears to us to be dark backrooms .
It is , of course , not the case that we want the whole of the European Parliament and the BBC to attend the meetings of the ECB 's Executive Board , but we would like to know the arguments in favour or against any decisions taken and whether these were taken unanimously or not , so that the market can gain a better insight into monetary policy .
Finally , we would ask that the procedure for appointing members of the ECB 's Executive Board be reviewed .
We think the current de facto division of ECB seats according to the size of Member States should be abandoned .
This should not involve a major public debate , but choosing from various candidates really strikes us as being a better system .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since we are discussing the European Central Bank 's report , allow me to address these few words to its president .
Mr Trichet , you really are the reviver of a very poor system for all the peoples of Europe .
As such , you have probably been - inadvertently , otherwise it would have been common knowledge - the best campaigner for the ' no ' vote of the French and Dutch people on the European Constitutional Treaty , and we thank you for it .
The principles on which the European Central Bank is founded are already in themselves an obstacle to growth in the euro zone , but when there is growth , in spite of your actions , it creates few or no jobs and only benefits the richest in society .
The European Central Bank claims to have stopped inflation .
In reality , the working and middle classes have seen their purchasing power plummet , while the rich have never been so rich .
You champion the worst kind of capitalism , that of shareholders and the pauperisation of the middle and working classes .
Day after day , your inertia faced with the weak dollar policy pursued by the United States destroys thousands of qualified industrial jobs creating added value in the euro zone .
You represent the bank of discontent and mass unemployment .
For all these reasons , we must break with a European Central Bank controlled by the financial markets and with no link to the will of the peoples of the Union .
We urgently need a new treaty entrusting the European Central Bank with responsibilities in the field of employment , training and research , all under the strict control of our Parliament and the national parliaments .
This new treaty must , imperatively , replace the financial stability pact with a social progress pact for employment and growth , reviving public spending throughout the Union on health , training , education , social housing , culture , transport and infrastructure .
Through these decisions we will be able to restore the confidence of the European people .
If this were not the case , the gap would continue to widen between our institutions and the various peoples .
The differences in wealth between the peoples of the Union and between citizens of a single country would continue to increase . This would therefore encourage the rise of extremism and anti-European nationalism .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , here we are again telling the European Central Bank how to do its job !
Not only is this against the spirit of the Treaty , which states that the ECB is independent , it is also largely a waste of time , because , as always , the ECB will listen politely but , quite rightly , take little notice .
Indeed , the ECB has enough trouble of its own , without listening to this Parliament , in finding an interest rate that suits 12 different economies , soon to be more .
The one-size-fits-all problem does not go away .
At the moment , the larger euro zone economies are enjoying slightly higher growth but , as Mr Trichet accepts , this is fragile .
When it falters , his problem of choosing the right interest rate will become more critical .
Effectively , the ECB will be forced into a choice between inflation in Germany or recession in southern Europe , with all the dire implications for government debts that this will entail .
I wonder what advice this Parliament will be giving then .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , in this Chamber yesterday we were debating breast cancer , and no one appeared worried about the fight against inflation .
That is to say that in situations of life and death our priorities change : we discover what is truly important .
However , is the fight against inflation really the most important thing in economic life ?
Beginning our resolution with a reference to the Father-like status of the independence of the Central Bank , followed by the Son-like status of price stability , in the hope that the Holy Spirit of prosperity will descend from the United States may be good for the independence of the Central Bank , but it is bad for the people .
Personally , Mr Trichet , I fully appreciate that you are bound by monetary aggregates one , two and three and by the need for fine-tuning and for steering interest rates .
Yet even in the country of Milton Friedman , Chile is left to practise a budgetary surplus of 1 % , while the United States itself takes a budgetary overdose .
I must therefore conclude by asking the real question : just because our German grandmother had inflationist diabetes in the 1920s , should that mean that , 80 years on , the whole of Europe should go on a sugar-free budgetary and monetary diet ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the European Central Bank , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats endorses the European Central Bank 's position on currency stability .
We should not succumb to the temptation to add to the ECB 's responsibilities areas in which the nation states refuse to act , in other words the areas of economic and social reforms .
The ECB cannot pay for such reforms alone , nor can it afford to .
In this case it is essential that the nation states finally fulfil their obligations .
We also support the independence of the European Central Bank , its political independence and the independence of its monetary policy , and all of this right from the selection procedure for its members .
I do not know what the results of today 's votes will be . I can only tell you that the European People 's Party supports the idea of non-politicisation , starting with the selection procedure , and believes that the form of transparency proposed is not helpful .
The European Central Bank has numerous other tools in its dialogue and does make use of them , just as other central banks around the world do .
There is broad support for this in this House .
On the subject of independence , I would like to add that we are fighting for the independence of monetary policy . I also hope , however , that the European Central Bank realises that it should not overplay the subject of independence .
We have had an on-going discussing with the European Central Bank for years now on the subject of ' clearing and settlement ' , in particular with Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , and I would just like to remind the House that the European Central Bank has begun a dialogue with the Committee of European Securities Regulators ( CESR ) on this subject and is now entering into a dialogue with those involved in the market .
I would like to state clearly that we are not opposed to dialogue .
Perhaps the route that the European Central Bank is proposing , and that it is taking , will be the right one in the end .
For us , this is not about a material assessment , but the route by which the European Central Bank becomes a part of the market cannot be chosen unsupervised and in a vacuum cut off from politics .
That is why we have been calling so urgently for this - and we hope that the vote today will proceed as we had all envisaged - we need governance , we need a regulatory framework for this area .
We cannot have a situation where Parliament and the Commission are deliberating about whether to create a directive , whether to produce with a suitable framework , and the European Central Bank then comes out and claims that none of that affects it and that it will take the route it thinks is right .
Do not overdo it here ; where monetary policy is concerned , we are on your side .
( FR ) Mr President , since its creation , the European Central Bank has fulfilled its primary mission , namely the fight against inflation .
Rates of inflation in the euro zone have thus remained below those in the United States and Great Britain .
The public is mistaken in believing that the euro has made prices soar .
Admittedly , there was an inflationist surge during the transition to the euro , mainly in the catering and retail sectors , where prices were rounded up a little too high .
That said , since this surge of initial excitement , underlying inflation has in general remained under control .
The price boom on the oil and gas markets represents an external shock over which the Union has very little control .
However , because the euro has risen against the dollar , which remains the currency in which raw materials are listed , the shock has been less severe for the euro zone than for the Americans .
The euro is in fact a shield that has protected the whole of Europe during events such as the war in Iraq , the war in Afghanistan or even 11 September 2001 .
Without the euro , many European currencies would have been under pressure and would have threatened the internal market with collapse .
As Mr Zapatero pointed out , Spain would never have been able to withdraw its troops from Iraq if its currency had been the peseta instead of the euro .
Although the euro has served Europe well , and although I congratulate the ECB on the work accomplished , I remain convinced that the ECB could do better .
President Trichet and his colleagues attach too much importance to the fight against inflation , while inflationist risks remain very limited .
On the other hand , the ECB refuses to lend its support to the Union 's general economic policies and justifies its position by arguing that the Constitutional Treaty stipulates that maintaining price stability represents the only possible support for Europe 's general economic policy .
The ECB is independent and will remain so , even without Mr Radwan 's support .
This is another reason to be open to dialogue .
Those who are independent , Mr President , can allow themselves to maintain a more active cooperation with the Eurogroup , for example with a view to achieving more sustained economic development for Europe .
Growth and stability are the two feet moving Europe forward .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Trichet and his colleagues for their solid cooperation thus far .
The ECB annual report is a very important document for this House .
It forms the basis of the debate on fundamental monetary policy issues .
Not for nothing has the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs taken personal responsibility as rapporteur for this issue .
There is , however , always controversy when we debate appointments to the ECB and the primary task of the Bank . We have just experienced this once again .
It is therefore no surprise that it was only through innumerable compromise proposals that it was possible to achieve something like a common view in the committee .
Personally speaking , I find it regrettable that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament abstained from the final vote in committee , despite all these compromises .
Their decision shows the difficulties the Socialist Group still has with a handful of points in the report .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supported the independence of the ECB without ifs and buts .
The primary function of the Bank is , and remains , to ensure the stability of the euro .
Thus far , it has performed this job admirably . We cannot go soft on independence or on price stability under any circumstances .
There must thus continue to be an absence of political pressure in future , and the members of the Executive Board must be chosen purely on the basis of their expertise and not according to nationality .
Mr President , yet again it is necessary to draw attention to the fact that the ECB continues to print large numbers of 500-euro notes , which are only useful to those who are hoarding ill-gotten gains or laundering money .
Indeed , the volume of printing has recently even gone up .
Yet the Sunday Times in London recently published an extensive article detailing much evidence about the use of these notes in Spain , Italy and Greece , directly for money-laundering purposes .
The only possible conclusion we can reach is that the ECB is actively involved in aiding and abetting money laundering .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express a favourable opinion of the activities of the European Central Bank in 2005 .
I would also like to categorically state that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament fully supports and respects the independence of the Central Bank .
We believe that this independence is a sine qua non for conducting an appropriate monetary policy within the economic and monetary union .
It also guarantees the value of our common currency .
I would now like to highlight three issues that have long been debated in this House .
Firstly , the relative importance of the two pillars of monetary policy adopted by the ECB remains unclear .
I refer here to monetary supply as opposed to other information on future inflation .
As a result , we do not know whether , or to what extent , developments in monetary supply constitute a decisive factor for the ECB when setting interest rates .
Laying down clear rules in this matter would improve the transparency and effectiveness of monetary policy .
Secondly , a clear interpretation of the ECB 's mandate , as laid down in Article 105 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , is urgently required .
In particular , the ECB needs to state how it intends to fulfil its Treaty obligations to support the European Union 's economic policy while simultaneously maintaining price stability , and what resources it intends to draw upon to do so .
I would point out that the Treaty draws a clear distinction between these two aims , and that they cannot therefore be deemed to be interchangeable .
If the ECB adopted a clear stance on this question , it would be possible to avoid misunderstandings as to whether or not the ECB is responsible for attaining aims other than price stability .
Thirdly , the ECB is mistaken in its interpretation of the inflation criterion applied in assessing how prepared new Member States are for entry into the euro zone .
The Treaty clearly states that the point of reference should be the average inflation rate of , and I quote : ' the three best performing Member States in terms of price stability ' .
The Treaty makes no mention of the lowest prices .
The ECB defined price stability as a rate of inflation under 2 % but close to 2 % .
However , when assessing the degree of preparedness of the candidate countries , the ECB applies another definition , namely the average of the three countries with the lowest inflation .
There cannot be two different definitions of the same Treaty provision , and I therefore call on the ECB to clarify the situation .
( ES ) Mr President , President Trichet , ladies and gentlemen , the presentation and debate in Parliament of the European Central Bank Annual Report 2005 is the annual account that makes the independence of the Central Bank compatible with its democratic control .
I would like to make three brief comments on the impact of the monetary policy , the need for financial integration and the future composition of the Management Board .
The objectives of the monetary policy are to control inflation and to contribute to economic objectives of a general nature .
At the end of 2005 , and following two and a half years without taking any action , the European Central Bank increased interest rates , inflation stood at 2 tenths above the 2 % , and there was a modest growth in the euro zone of 1.4 % .
Those are the macroeconomic data , but the results of the monetary policy require that a more precise approach be taken , which I believe requires , on the one hand , an examination of internal divergences , which are considerable in terms of inflation and growth , amongst the Member States of the euro zone .
This is important in order to ascertain the impact of the monetary policy , and , in particular , to ensure that there are no persistent imbalances .
Secondly , we also need to know how these monetary policy conditions translate to the market and , in particular , small and medium-sized businesses .
During 2005 , the European Central Bank published its first report on financial integration in the euro zone , and I congratulate it on that .
It makes a very significant contribution .
Accelerated globalisation is creating changes in financial products and markets that bring new challenges .
When the single currency was drawn up , the risks of the system could be dealt with by means of monetary policy instruments .
Now we need new initiatives .
This is why it is important to carry on making progress on the Economic and Monetary Union , in order to achieve new goals , but also in order to maintain the efficiency of the monetary policy in the face of new challenges .
Finally , on the composition of the Management Board , I am in favour of greater parliamentary control , in order to achieve more professionalism and competence , and also a gender perspective , Mr President .
The group photo of its governing body contains just one woman .
European Central Bank ( FR ) Mr President , might I perhaps say a word or two , since a number of issues have been broached ?
I should like first of all to thank the honourable Members .
I have indeed been very alert to the precise nature of the remarks , observations and recommendations made to us .
On the subject of independence , I should like to say , on behalf of all the members of the Executive Board and the Governing Council , how important it is to hear so very many MEPs state how crucial it is for the European Central Bank to be independent .
I must confess that we should certainly not have been able to give the European economy its particular monetary and financial environment without the credibility conferred on us by this principle of independence recognised by your Parliament , by the whole world and by all market participants , wherever in the world they might be .
The Bank 's independence is stated in the Treaty , it is a recognised fact and it is one of Europe 's basic assets .
I should like once again to thank all the MEPs who expressed themselves so clearly on this point .
Let me now deal with some of the other points raised , which are certainly important in the eyes of a number of Members of Parliament .
I have to say that the question of the appointment of the members of the Executive Board is one that should be addressed to the executive branches , particularly the Council , because they are responsible for such matters .
We are appointed according to the Treaty provisions and , as you know , not only does Parliament give its assessment of the quality of the various persons concerned , but so do we in the Governing Council .
I know that Parliament would like to have not only an advisory role but also responsibility for the decision itself .
I respect that sentiment .
I realise that the ECB has to let Parliament and the Council discuss the matter , provided full independence and absence of politicisation are totally assured , for , clearly , if the institution were to suffer from politicisation , it would not be able to deliver what it has to deliver , namely , price stability , something which also depends on it enjoying sound credibility , so that inflation expectations can be firmly anchored .
As regards the various remarks on the dialogue between Parliament and the ECB , in my opinion this dialogue has improved in terms of both frequency and interaction and I will take good note of all the remarks made here , including those concerning the governance of our possible Target2 Securities system .
On that issue , which is dear to your heart , Mr Radwan , and to that of other Members of Parliament , I would say that our aspiration - and it is really a work in progress - was to maximise the benefits of European integration following the successful introduction of the euro , since it is clear that the availability of a single settlement engine for securities denominated in euros would undoubtedly represent progress .
The second objective would be to maximise settlement efficiency and that would probably require cash and securities to be settled on the same IT platform , according to what is known technically as an ' integrated model ' .
The third issue , which is important from our own perspective , is how to maximise the Central Bank 's control over the bank accounts opened in our own book .
We take a very strong line on this , believing that solutions which avoid forcing central banks to outsource the management of their accounts would not be good ones .
These are the three main reasons why we are working on this matter , through a dialogue with the market , which is very important , and , of course , with Parliament .
A number of other points have been mentioned .
I will not return to the matter of hedge funds raised by Mrs van den Burg , in particular .
As to the question of whether or not we are sufficiently transparent and open as regards communication , I reiterate that we do not take decisions alone behind closed doors .
The Commissioner and the President of the Eurogroup , Jean-Claude Juncker , are invited to all meetings of the Governing Council .
They are also invited every fortnight to our discussions and deliberations , so that they can be as close as possible to the decisions taken .
I myself have the privilege of appearing before the Eurogroup every month .
So there are three opportunities each month to exchange views and gain as full as possible an understanding of how the decision-making process really works .
It seems to me that , from that standpoint , we have the most highly-organised system of contacts anywhere in the world .
It is not new ; it was the tradition of the Bundesbank , the Banque de France and a number of central banks .
Let us not underestimate its significance .
Some of the remarks made fail to take this into account .
As regards the transparency of our concept of monetary policy , we are in a position where we say that our primary goal is price stability , because that is what the Treaty stipulates .
We give an arithmetical definition of price stability as inflation rates of below and close to 2 % . Everyone is aware of this .
We have a two-pillar strategy that is very clear .
In that respect , we are much more transparent and precise .
We provide a greater yardstick with which to measure our performance than other sister central banks do .
I do not want to address myself to any of them in particular , but across the Atlantic there is a sister central bank which , for very good reasons of its own , has a different approach to the definition of price stability , with regard to the clarity of that goal .
From that standpoint we are very transparent .
The entire world knows that we are transparent and it is one of the reasons why inflation expectations are anchored in line with our definition of price stability , which is a fundamental result .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to reply briefly to a number of MEPs .
The fact that we are credible and that our predictions concerning inflation correspond to our definition of price stability offer the European economy a particularly favourable financial environment .
I would ask those Members who have criticised our monetary policy , accusing it of being too orthodox , simply to remember what the rates of interest for the medium- and long-term markets in their countries were before the introduction of the euro .
In reality , inflation predictions assumed a rate of inflation much higher than that which we ourselves are now able to guarantee to Europeans .
It should be noted that low inflation represents , above all , a crucial factor for the poorest sections of our societies , preserving as it does their purchasing power .
I noted , moreover , that many Members were asking us to remain very vigilant in this respect .
I am , therefore , deeply convinced that there exists a very simple relationship between our primary objective , as assigned by the Treaty , and Article 105 .
Meeting our primary objective is a necessary , but not sufficient , condition of our being able to move in the direction desired by everyone in this Chamber , that being , of course , the direction of growth and employment .
Price stability is a necessary condition for sustainable growth and for the creation of lasting employment .
If I have time I shall make two or three other remarks .
Regarding the 500-euro note , I do not agree at all with the remark that was made suggesting that we would actively assist money-laundering .
As you know , large denomination notes were a strong tradition in many of the countries forming part of the euro area and we decided not to change the various traditions drastically .
So the note is used in some countries , but not in others .
It remains an option and we decided not to eliminate that option for those countries and economies that were used to it .
I believe I have covered all the other questions that were raised .
However , Mr Whittaker mentioned the ' one-size-fits-all ' angle .
Europe is a vast continental economy and , from 1 January next year when Slovenia joins , the euro zone will have 315 million citizens .
This compares with 300 million in the United States and thus represents an economy of the same order of magnitude .
When you measure the dispersion , the standard deviation of growth and of inflation at the level of various states of various different sizes , you will see that it is roughly the same for both economies .
This is not widely known , but is worth pointing out , since it appears to be a characteristic of a vast continental economy .
This does not mean that we have to cater for persistent differences , and it is one of the things that we have discussed , particularly in the Eurogroup .
We need to reflect on this question , but again , it would probably be wrong to forget that an element of dispersion is always associated with the size of the economy concerned .
( FR ) Mr President , I think I have covered most of the questions put , but it goes without saying that I remain at Parliament 's disposal .
Thank you , Mr Trichet .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) Mrs Berès 's report on the Annual Report ( for 2005 ) of the European Central Bank is disappointing as it does not sufficiently underline the need for political reflection on the use of the euro to support growth and employment .
In an ever more complex world , characterised by an extremely violent economic and social war , not to have an extensive and high-quality political debate on this subject is , at present , an error but may , in future , prove to have been an act of negligence .
The European Central Bank and its President , Mr Trichet , must not lose sight of the fact that Article 105 of the Treaty establishing the European Community clearly indicates that , without prejudice to the objective of price stability , the European System of Central Banks shall support the EU 's economic policies .
At a time when increases in the prices of raw materials and of energy are giving rise to natural inflationary tensions in the world , we need to reflect on the impact of this situation on our internal market and our common currency , while seriously asking ourselves whether the time might not have come to develop the euro so that , as well as being a truly remarkable technical success , it is also a political currency .
Support for rural development by the EAFRD - Voluntary modulation of direct payments under the CAP ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) C6-0237 / 2006 ;
the report by Mr Goepel , on behalf of the Committee of Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down rules for voluntary modulation of direct payments provided for in Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers , and amending Regulation ( EC ) 1290 / 2005 C6-0235 / 2006 .


Mr President , according to the agenda , we were supposed to be able to have , and conclude , a debate about both Mr Mulder 's report and my own this morning , before having the opportunity to vote on them .
We now have exactly 18 minutes until voting time .
It is completely unfair to our farmers and agriculturalists to begin a debate of this nature and then perhaps conclude such an important subject as the 20 % voluntary modulation - in other words , a policy whereby one-fifth of the existing direct payments to farmers are to be transferred or reduced - with some form of contingency vote this afternoon .
I request that this debate be postponed until November .
( Applause )
Are you asking for the debate or the vote to be postponed ?
Mr President , when are we to have this debate ?
Surely not now , in the 15 minutes that remain ?
On behalf of my group and of my fellow MEPs , I would like to bring forward a motion for the postponement of the debate .
I do realise that under the rules of procedure such a motion must be brought forward at least 24 hours before the debate , but 24 hours before the debate I was unaware that Parliament would not be keeping to its agenda .
( Applause )

( EL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we absolutely support the proposal by the rapporteur , Mr Goepel , for the debate and vote to be postponed until plenary in November .
( DA ) Mr President , I am deputising today for Mr Mulder , who is unable to be with us for personal reasons , and I would very much like , on behalf of my group too , to support Mr Goepel 's proposal .
At the same time , I would like to direct some criticism at the Presidency .
It is absolutely outrageous that this extremely important issue - which we needed to be able to deal with this week , partly from the point of view of timing considerations - should now be mishandled in this way and dealt with like this .
I therefore support Mr Goepel 's proposal to postpone both the debate and the vote .
Mr President , I support Mrs Batzeli , Mr Goepel and Mr Busk .

This is a very important debate : it is about the whole future of the common agricultural policy .
It concerns all the countries in the European Union , but none more than the United Kingdom .
As we have to catch planes this afternoon , it is simply impossible to debate it now .
We really need to postpone the debate and the vote until November .
I hope you will accept that situation .
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of my group , too , I would like to support the rapporteur 's motion .
Looking at the report , even the uninitiated would be able to tell that what we are dealing with here is rather a formal matter .
Behind this facade , however , as Mr Parish has already pointed out , lies the fundamental consideration of the funding of agricultural policy in the coming years and the position of Parliament on this issue .
For this reason , we must debate this issue at a proper time when there is sufficient time available so to do .
We cannot dismember this issue in this way .
I therefore support this motion and ask that you agree to it and that you inform the Bureau of the significance of this dispute .
Perhaps the Bureau was not already aware of it .
( PT ) Mr President , I should just like to say that I agree with the proposal to postpone this debate and the vote until November , for the reasons mentioned , that is to say , because it is too important an issue to be dealt with in a hurry in 15 minutes or a little more .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly , I would ask that we simply vote on this motion so that you then also have the recommendation of this House .
Furthermore , we could vote solely about postponement .
The decision as to when this subject is put on the agenda again is of course a matter for the Conference of Presidents and ultimately for the entire House .
Personally speaking , however , I would be in favour of postponing both .
Perhaps we could vote , and then you would see the clear will of the House .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to endorse the rapporteur 's motion as well as what Mr Swoboda has said .
As rapporteur on financial planning , I would also point out that this ill-starred proposal is based on the conclusions of the European Council and that the Commission was obliged to come up with a proposal for this so-called voluntary modulation .
In the course of the financial planning negotiations we explicitly reserved our position for the legislative process . That is exactly what the rapporteur is now observing .
Given the significance of this matter , I find it reasonable to ask the Council to be represented at the next debate after any postponement and to confirm to us that this will be the case .
( PL ) On behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I simply wanted to say that I also fully endorse Mr Goepel 's suggestion .
These are important reports and they deserve to be debated in a serious setting , not under the present circumstances .
I fully support Mr Goepel .
I am convinced by the arguments .
I propose , as President of this sitting , that we change the agenda by withdrawing the joint debate on the reports by Mr Mulder and Mr Goepel .

( Parliament agreed to withdraw the two reports from that day 's agenda )
Mr President , I would like to offer my sincere thanks to all the political parties and groups .
( Applause and laughter )
We have reached a reasonable solution .
The debate will take place at a more convenient time , under more favourable conditions .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.40 a.m. )

Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , before proceeding to the vote on the budget , I would like to inform you that the President of the Chilean House of Deputies , Mr Antonio Leal Labrín , is here with us in the official gallery .
( Applause )
Mr Leal Labrín is accompanied by Chilean MPs Mr Gonzalo Duarte Leiva and Mr Germán Becker Alvear .
We welcome them and thank them for visiting us .
( FR ) Mr President , this is indeed a point of order and also a reminder of Rule 188 of the Rules of Procedure .
We have just learned , following the meeting of the Bureau , that the Israeli Government would like to exclude Mrs Le Pen from the political discussions of the Israeli delegation .
She is a member of that delegation in a spirit of debate , dialogue and openness .

I should like to express our thanks to Mr Brok for his perfectly correct attitude and to say very clearly that , when Mr Krivine was similarly excluded by a decision of the United States Government , we agreed entirely , whatever the difference of opinion between us , that it was not for the host government to determine how the European Parliament 's delegation should be composed .
I therefore dare to hope that , in your capacity as guarantor of the rights of all Members of the European Parliament , you will be anxious to make this point to the Israeli authorities .


( DE ) Mr President , you should give the floor to Mr Brok first , as he has something he wants to say on the subject ; I am quite happy to state my position afterwards , and so I ask to be given the floor after Mr Brok has spoken .

The Conference of Presidents has decided to postpone the visit of the ad hoc delegation to Lebanon , Israel and Palestine , and I hope that this is a satisfactory response to the concern expressed .
Thank you for drawing Parliament 's attention to this issue .

( ES ) Mr President , as you know , I try to be serious when I speak and , since the Rules of Procedure state that all documents handled officially in this House must be available in all of the official languages , I would draw your attention to the fact that I am going to vote for amendments that only appear in three : English , French and German ; these are three highly respectable languages , as are all the others .
Since this may create problems in the future , therefore , I would draw attention to the fact that this text is not available in all of the official languages ; it is not available in mine .
The Secretariat 's services inform me that they are sure that they appear in all languages , including yours and mine .
If I have understood correctly , you are not referring to the texts on which we are going to vote , but to the voting list .
This list is available in three languages , as usual , but the texts on which we are going to vote are in all languages . Our Rules of Procedure have not therefore been violated .
Nevertheless , we shall look into the issue for later plenary sittings .
( DE ) Mr President , since I wish to repudiate the utterances made by the group back there , perhaps I might be permitted to make a comment .
The rights of all Members of this House are being safeguarded , all in the same way .
If we are to undertake a journey to a region like this one , balance is essential , and every aspect of the trip must be organised professionally .
That it was not possible , on this occasion , to go at the time planned , was attributable to technical considerations .
We should , however , be making the journey at a later date .
We should not allow the Le Pen group to read something secret and mysterious into this that is not there , and I would like to repudiate what they say in the strongest possible terms .
The procedure has been as follows : the Conference of Presidents , having listened to you , has decided to postpone the visit of this ad hoc delegation .
That is the fundamental procedure we have followed ; anything else is a matter of opinion or interpretation and everyone is entitled to their own .
1 .
Draft general budget for the European Union - Financial year 2007 ( vote )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would point out that , according to the Treaties , in order to be approved , draft amendments relating to what we call non-obligatory spending must be voted for by a majority of the members of the European Parliament , that is to say , 367 votes .
In the case of proposed amendments relating to obligatory spending , a majority of the votes cast is sufficient .
Before the vote , Mr Elles wishes to propose certain technical amendments .
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is good to get the vote on the 2007 budget under way .
Before we start on the vote on Parliament 's first reading , I should like to announce that a small number of technical adjustments need to be made .
Rather than read out a very long list of numbers , the list of technical adjustments has been annexed to our voting lists .
Following the vote those adjustments will be made by the relevant departments and included in the Minutes of the sitting .
( Parliament accepted the technical amendments proposed by Mr Elles )
( Before the vote on Section I )
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to inform you that the resolution will be adapted according to the result of the vote on the budgetary amendments .
Therefore , any technical corrections needed will be made by the session services .
( Parliament agreed )
2 .
Draft general budget for 2007 ( Section III ) ( vote )
3 .
Draft general budget for 2007 ( sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII ) ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 31 :
( FR ) Mr President , because it has never been proved that , employee for employee and hour of work for hour of work , the Manpower solution to providing session auxiliaries was any cheaper , and because Parliament is constantly trying to make savings , we propose to help it by adding , at the end of paragraph 31 , the following sentence : ' reject as too expensive the solution of using a temping agency to replace session auxiliaries ' .
( Applause )
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to propose that the text of paragraph 58 of the report be replaced by the following text : ' Notes the improvement in monitoring of the implementation of the EU budget in its budgetary vote ; asks the relevant committees to examine the setting-up of a structure and a procedure to carry out the implementation assessment exercise for 2007 with the specialised committees ; in this way it will also help to prepare for the budget review in 2008-2009 ; asks the Secretary-General to facilitate the logistics to organise regular monitoring meetings according to the priorities that will be defined by the committees concerned ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
4 .
Fishing fleets registered in the outermost regions ( vote )
5 .
Commemoration of 1956 Hungarian Uprising ( vote )
- Before the vote on Recital J :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although this resolution makes a connection between the Hungarian revolution and the other efforts at resistance in Eastern Europe , it makes no reference to the uprising on 17 June 1953 in the GDR , when , in over seven hundred cities and municipalities , people went on strike and mounted demonstrations , events that were put down by Soviet tanks .
I would therefore like to insert the following in Recital J :
' recognising the historical and political link between the Hungarian Revolution in October 1956 and various other forms of resistance and resistance movements , such as the mass demonstrations in East Germany in June 1953 , the Poznań demonstrations in Poland in June 1956 , the Prague Spring of 1968 , the birth of the Solidarity Movement in Poland in 1980 and democracy movements in the former USSR , notably those of the Baltic peoples ; '
( Applause )
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
6 .
Moldova ( Transnistria ) ( vote )
7 .
Georgia ( South Ossetia ) ( vote )
8 .
Export of toxic waste to Africa ( vote )
9 .
Use of criminal law to protect the environment ( vote )
10 .
EC-Syria Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement ( vote )
11 .
Nairobi Conference on Climate Change ( vote )
12 .
Inland waterway transport ( vote )
13 .
Public-private partnerships ( vote )
- On paragraph 45 :
( FR ) Excuse me , but you have unfortunately forgotten the original wording of paragraph 45 .
Thank you very much for your constructive observation , but we have voted on the corresponding amendment , and we did not therefore have to vote on the text to which you refer .
14 .
Posting of workers ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
( NL ) Mr President , it has been agreed between the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs that the text should read as follows : ' considers that for ensuring ' , etcetera .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
15 .
European Central Bank Annual Report ( 2005 ) ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
( DE ) Mr President , may I make just a very brief interjection , since this report is not exactly an unimportant one , and ask just how legitimate a vote is when fewer than half the Members are present for it ?
I have no desire to waste the House 's time , since the previous President wasted quite enough of it already .
Yes , Mr Alvaro , I note your concern , but we have checked that there is a quorum in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and the votes are valid .
- Before the vote on Amendment 11 :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , with regard to Amendment 12 on the subject of the post market and tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , we wish to table an oral amendment .
I will say it in English .
Rather than ' its own settlement infrastructure ' , we should say , ' a settlement infrastructure ' .
( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
That concludes the vote .
Mr President , I should just like to thank you very much for the fast and efficient way in which you have organised business since you took the Chair .
Those are the kinds of speeches we like to hear when we are in the Chair !
( Laughter )
Mr President , this is just to say that I was mistaken on my last vote .
I thought we were voting on the amendment instead of the final vote on the Berès report .
I voted against when I should have voted in favour .
This is just for the record .
Thank you for your efficiency .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . UKIP voted for every reduction or cancellation of payments , especially the ones concerning subsidies and propaganda , on the principle that these funds should not have been used for these purposes .
Concerning Euronews , this is blatant propaganda and the media should stay independent .
in writing . Smoking kills half a million EU citizens every year .
Smoking is the biggest cause of preventable illness and disease across the EU .
It is disappointing that Amendments 376 , 489 and 529 were rejected ( 232 votes for , 333 votes against ) .
Subsidies for tobacco-growing in the EU need to end .
I abstained on Amendment 3 because I was not quite sure of the intent of the study that was proposed in paragraph 23 , but I fully support paragraph 23 itself .
in writing . ( SV ) We want the budget to contribute to sustainable social , economic and environmental development for the EU in accordance with the Lisbon Strategy .
We have therefore chosen to vote in favour of those amendments that give priority to research , development and education and training .
We do not , however , wish to support those amendments that give more money to direct agricultural aid and export subsidies for agricultural products , as such aid is already excessive and also results in inefficient agriculture that damages the environment and that , through the dumping of surpluses , helps increase the gap between rich and poor in the world .
Nor do we want to give money to subsidise tobacco cultivation , as this contributes directly to public health problems .
We believe that such aid should quickly be cut back on and completely abolished before long .
The money thereby saved could be used , for example , to fund measures designed to reduce the use of tobacco and dependency on it .
in writing . - ( FR ) On Thursday 26 October , the European Parliament adopted the first reading of the European Union 's budget for 2007 .
Amounting to EUR 120 billion , it reflects the first time that use has been made of the new financial perspective for 2007-2013 , which was adopted in May 2006 and which the French Socialists did not approve , believing that it did not make it possible to respond to the great challenges of the future .
In this context , the 2007 budget has turned out to be very modest , corresponding to 1.04 % of the European Union 's GNI .
The many constraints , both internal and international , on the European Union have led Parliament to single out priorities that should enable Europeans better to perceive the added value supplied by the EU .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has therefore decided to vote in favour of this 2007 budget , having received assurances concerning their priorities in relation to the Lisbon and Gothenburg strategies .
These priorities include , in particular , education , training , research and sustainable development .
The revival of the communication policy and the emergence of new pilot projects are also encouraging in terms of the future of the European Union .
I voted against Amendment 811 , which refers to the Committee on Budgets ' rural development programmes , and against Amendment 3 to paragraph 23 , because they restrict funding for rural development and block ' voluntary modulation ' under the terms in which it is proposed by the Commission .
in writing . This budget again fails to find the money to meet our commitments , particularly in relation to our emerging common foreign and security policy and our development policy .
The EU 's ability to play a global role is being hampered by ' bean-counters ' back in our national capital .
For this they bear a heavy responsibility .
On two details I will be voting against the amendment from our ultra-nationalistic and Catholic fundamentalists from Poland urging opposition to forced or ' coercive ' abortions .
Of course I am opposed to such an idea , but the EU is not supporting such a programme .
Rather it is an attempt to introduce US evangelical Christian bigotry into EU development policy and must be opposed for that very reason .
Second , I want proper control of spending and value for money .
Yet some pursue these demands as a way of tying Commission staff into overly-bureaucratic regulations that hamper and hinder work , rather than assist .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that the EU 's budget should be limited to 1 % of the Member States ' average GNI .
I have therefore chosen to vote against all the increases proposed by the European Parliament , at the same time as the June List has welcomed the few savings proposed in the form of amendments by either the Committee on Budgets or individual Members .
There are quite a few unfortunate budget headings , but the June List particularly regrets the large amount of aid for the EU 's agricultural policy , Cohesion Fund and fishing industry , as well as the budget headings under which various forms of information campaign are to be subsidised .
The June List also believes that something must be done about the European Parliament 's constant commuting between Strasbourg and Brussels and that the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions should be closed down .
This week ( beginning 23 October 2006 ) , the EU 's Court of Auditors observed for the thirteenth time in a row that it could not guarantee that more than a small part of the EU 's budget was being used correctly or for the purposes intended .
How can this madness continue whereby , year after year , financial resources are appropriated , only a small portion of which can be guaranteed to be used for the purposes for which they were intended ?
Whilst we wish to restate our opposition to key aspects of the negotiating strategy and of the priorities established by Parliament on the Community 's 2007 Budget , we also feel we must advocate the adoption of some of our proposals , which are aimed at :
increasing the appropriation earmarked for the European Social Fund convergence .
promoting cooperation and the establishment of associations between micro , small and medium-sized enterprises ;
protecting and preserving the forests , with measures and actions to monitor and prevent forest fires ;
promoting , preserving and protecting cultural heritage , such as the Cistercian Route and UNESCO world heritage sites .
promoting cooperation between farming organisations and other stakeholders in rural areas , with a view to revitalising those areas ; and promoting family , small-scale and medium-sized farming , and farming among young people .
carrying out studies or reports into child labour in the EU , relocations and employment , the single currency , the price of essential goods and bank charges and commissions , and the impact of new technologies on the work place and on work-related illnesses ;
providing information on , and clarification of , the rights of people employed in seasonal work outside their country of origin .
in writing . We are opposing a continued expansion of the EU-budget , which today is already too extensive with a large part of the funds going to the wrong ends .
Today there seem to be a reciprocal action between new objectives for the Union and demands on financing via EU .
These mean new demands on payments from the Member States , but also that new funds are being transferred to a system which is bureaucratic , inefficient and complex .
However , there are many desirable initiatives being financed via the budget , and we support reasonable changes of existing means .
But our opposition to a constantly increasing budget is firm , and therefore we have chosen to vote against the report in the final vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) This vote is in response to an unacceptable multiannual budgetary framework .
Detailed examination of the budget headings shows the blatant inadequacy of appropriations to many areas such as research , innovation , the big technological projects such as Galileo and the great trans-European networks .
This budget will not encourage the stimulation of growth in Europe .
European aid to the countries of the South , Africa and the Maghreb is light years away from a development policy such as needs to be implemented as a matter of urgency in order to tackle extreme poverty and unbalanced migration .
It is urgently necessary to devise a European tax guaranteeing a high level of own resources for a European budget that is finally a match for what is at stake .
in writing . Once again we are adopting a budget which does not meet the commitments entered into by the EU institutions .
This is particularly true in relation to foreign and security policy and development policy .
It is bound to increase the impression in the world that the EU is very poor when it comes to putting its money where its mouth is .
That said , I welcome the emphasis in this budget on proper control and getting value for money .
( FR ) Mr President , I regret that paragraphs 18 and 44 of the Grech report were not subject to a split vote , as I would have voted against them .
A number of members of the Commission on Budgets continually mount rearguard actions against the decisions of Heads of State or Government regarding our Parliament 's three places of work .
It is true that having three sites gives rise to costs .
To call such expenditure ' superfluous ' is , however , inappropriate , to say the least .
Decentralisation also has some very positive repercussions for MEPs and for Parliament .
Moreover , to bring into question the need for our officials to be present in Strasbourg during plenary part-sessions is a veritable affront to the administration which , I know , is very careful in choosing the officials it sends out .
I would also have voted against paragraph 44 , which takes a dim view of the ' Strasbourg experience ' .
I protest against the implications of this paragraph .
By purchasing the three buildings in Strasbourg that it did not own , Parliament has , indeed , obtained real bargains .
This is an extremely judicious piece of expenditure which , unlike expenditure on rent , will enable large public savings to be made .
I should have liked a number of members of the Committee on Budgets to have made a more objective judgment , especially since they are required to respect decisions concerning Parliament 's seat , whether they like them or not .

Mr Grech and Mr Elles , the rapporteurs , are right to opt in favour of increased efficiency when discussing the 2007 budget .
Setting priorities is also a necessary and sensible component in Mr Elles strategy .
This does not automatically mean , however , that more funds should be made available for priority budget lines .
Instead , non-priority budget lines should be given a more critical evaluation .
In the majority of the amendments , however , a decision has , unfortunately , been made to increase the budgeted means after all .
With regard to multilingualism , I welcome the fact that efforts are made to enhance efficiency in that area too .
Cost-reducing measures should not lead , though , to multilingualism being under threat .
All in all , it is positive that , following the Council 's position , there is now more attention for efficient and more economical budgeting .
It is for this reason that Mr Grech 's resolution receives my support .
in writing . ( SV ) We have today voted in favour of the reports on the EU 's budget for 2007 .
We welcome efforts to ensure that taxpayers obtain more value for money .
We also support the investments in research and development and the ambition to strengthen the EU as a global actor .
We reject , however , the proposals to increase the appropriations for agricultural aid and regional aid .
As always , we are sceptical about centrally devised campaigns and opinion-forming .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on appropriations to the European Parliament .
I regret , however , that paragraphs 18 and 44 were not subject to split votes , as I would have voted against them .
A number of members of the Committee on Budgets continually mount rearguard actions against the decisions of the Heads of State or Government regarding our Parliament 's three places of work , namely Strasbourg , Luxembourg and Brussels .
It is true that this arrangement gives rise to costs , but to call such expenditure superfluous is rash , to say the least .
For MEPs , as well as for Parliament , decentralisation - which a majority of the Committee on Budgets unfairly refers to as geographical dispersion - has some very positive repercussions .
To bring into question the need for our officials to be present in Strasbourg for the plenary part-sessions is a veritable affront to the Bureau and , especially , the administration which , I know , is very careful in choosing the officials it sends to Strasbourg .
I would also have voted against paragraph 44 which asks the administration , after what it pejoratively calls the ' Strasbourg experience ' , ' to apply more stringent , water-tight and transparent procedures when purchasing buildings ' ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
In view of the structural , economic and social situation in the fishing sector in the outermost regions , and the adoption of the new European Fisheries Fund , it is crucial to extend the derogations laid down in Regulation ( EC ) 639 / 2004 on the criteria and conditions governing structural actions relating to the preservation and sustainable use of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy .
The proposal for a Council regulation providing for an extension of these derogations for the outermost regions until 31 December 2006 and the practical implementation of measures adopted in the interim by 2008 , must of course be adopted at the earliest opportunity , so that it can actually have the desired effect on the ground .
Although I agree with the thrust of the proposal and the content of this document , I am very disappointed that the implementation plan for renewing and modernising the fleets in the outermost regions cannot be put in place until the period of the next financial perspective , rather than the timeframe established for 2008 .
In spite of this , and because this derogation represents positive discrimination in favour of the outermost regions , I shall be voting in favour of this proposed regulation .
The purpose of this proposal is to extend the derogations granted to fishing fleets in the outermost regions until 31 December 2006 , and subsequently until 31 December 2007 . These derogations relate to the entry / exit schemes of the fleet capacity and the provision of aid for the renewal and modernisation of the fleet .
It was a matter of great urgency that this proposal be adopted , in view of the specific structural , social and economic realities of the fishing industry in the outermost regions , for example the Azores and Madeira , coupled with the permanent difficulties and constraints faced by these regions , such as their limited markets and their remoteness .
The crux of the matter is that the existing economic activities - in this case fisheries - of many of these regions are of major socio-economic importance , for example in ensuring that people have fresh fish to eat .
Given the need for these derogations , and in view of the fact that the situation facing the fleets is down to structural rather than economic factors , as the Commission and the Council have acknowledged , the derogations should be made permanent and be included in the European Fisheries Fund for 2007-2013 .
in writing . - ( FR ) Today , the European Parliament is voting under urgent procedure on a Council Regulation on the management of fishing fleets registered in the outermost regions , which extends the regulation currently in force by one year .
The main derogations authorised relate to the addition of fishing vessels to the fleet , public aid for the renewal of vessels and aid for modernisation .
This regulation takes account of circumstances in the fishing sector in the outermost regions , where there are still abundant fishery resources and significant potential for development .
It would therefore be inconceivable and counter-productive to prevent the fishing fleets in these regions from benefiting from such facilities !
I hope that those involved in fishing in the outermost regions will be able to take advantage of this new extension to develop and modernise the fleet .
Nevertheless , I find it regrettable that the European Commission has still not put forward any longer-term guidelines .
I have already asked on numerous occasions for these derogations to be extended beyond 2006 .
It would have been more sensible to accept this proposal right from the start , instead of coming to Parliament each year asking for the derogations , which are absolutely vital for fisheries in our regions , to be extended for another year .
in writing . I will be supporting this resolution .
The tragedy of this failed revolution , brutally put down by Soviet imperial troops with the death of thousands , is that it closed down an evolutionary path out of Soviet oppression to engagement with the rest of the world , a slow but sure path to pluralism and democracy .
Instead , tens of thousands fled as refugees .
I remember as a six-year-old schoolchild being sent to collect a Hungarian refugee child who was to join my class at my school in Gloucestershire , on his first day .
Seeing the misery and distress of him and his family was probably my first experience of the consequences of oppression for the lives and future of ordinary people .
I have never forgotten it .
in writing . - ( EL ) We MEPs of the Greek Communist Party refused to take part in the vote on the 50th anniversary of the Hungarian uprising which developed into anti-communist hysteria .
The final resolution jointly signed and supported by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and by the neo-liberals and other groups with the exception of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left adopts the anti-communist memorandum taken from the Council of Europe and reintroduced into the European Parliament .
They are calling events supported and organised by imperialism to overturn socialist regimes popular uprisings and democratic movements .
They collectively consider everyone who furiously fought socialism to be resistance fighters and democrats .
It is now clear that the political forces that support the ΕU are the same forces that morally and politically advocate the revival of fascism in the Baltic and other states and are urging and leading the ban on communist action , as in the Czech Republic and other countries previously .
The call by the servants of capitalist barbarism in paragraph 3 of the resolution on the ' democratic community ' ' ... to unequivocally reject the repressive and undemocratic Communist ideology ... ' expresses their fear of it .
We want to remind all those dreaming of the ultimate prevalence of the barbaric , exploitative capitalist system that the communist ideology gave birth to the biggest social uprisings and will give birth to even bigger ones , precisely because it is fighting for a society free from the exploitation of man by man .
One of the most positive aspects of the recent EU enlargement is that it has also led to an enlargement of our memory .
For most of us , the 1956 Hungarian uprising is a distant memory in terms of time , geography and even in politics .
The accession of countries like Poland , the Baltic States , Slovenia and Hungary itself has brought with it another memory that we have incorporated , and this memory has been a full part of our consciousness for a year and a half .
This has led to a fresh geo-strategic perception of our place in the world , which we need to incorporate and to keep up to date , and has shed new light on the democratic struggles of the 20th century .
On the other hand , this moment should naturally serve to remind us that Communism was neither romantic nor utopian .
The history of Communism is one of repression , violence and inhumanity , and we should not forget this .
The European Parliament resolution on the situation in South Ossetia is an expression of the EU 's imperialist plans in the region .
We know that Georgia is already one step away from joining ΝΑΤΟ , while the imperialist lackey Saakashvili government has already agreed to the installation of American basis on its territory .
The EU 's ambitions to encircle and exert pressure on Russia , with one eye firmly on the Russian market , especially the energy market , within the framework of the vying and infighting between the imperialists are hiding behind self-righteous pronouncements about respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and condemnation of the independence movements in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
With the same ease with which the EU is allegedly defending the territorial integrity of Georgia today , it can undermine it tomorrow by supporting the secessionist movements which it condemns today , if the strategic interests of the monopolies in the area so require .
The peoples in the area have a great deal of experience of Community interventionist policy , with incitement and support for all manner of ' domestic uprisings ' and the ' carrot and stick ' policy .
That is why they need to draw their own conclusions and to stand up and resist and overturn the policy of the ΕU and the other imperialist forces and governments which serve it .
in writing . I welcome this vote on the export of toxic waste to Africa .
The recent incident involving a Dutch company dumping waste in the Ivory Coast demonstrates that many in Europe still see Africa as a dumping ground .
I hope the Dutch authorities leave no stone unturned in bringing those responsible to justice .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Hieronymi report stems from a worthy aim , namely that of supporting European audiovisual production against the crushing competition exerted by US productions , as well as others .
In order to reach that goal , it seeks to encourage coproduction , support coordinated marketing strategies and promote the distribution of the Union 's products on the internal and international market .
However , the budget allocation appears fairly limited .
Moreover , precisely because of the fact that resources are limited , it by no means seems a good idea to open the programme to participation by non-European countries as well .
I believe that public support for this sector , at both national and European level , should be directed towards audiovisual productions intended to inform and to instruct , to educate in the strictest sense , and towards projects making a real difference in breaking down the present situation in which Europe is made a cultural colony of the United States .
I do not feel that the report goes far enough in this respect .
in writing . I voted in favour of this report .
It is clear that many companies and individuals routinely abuse laws designed to protect the environment .
They often find it cheaper to pay fines than to comply with laws on dumping or transporting toxic waste .
If we want to protect the environment we must consider criminal as well as civil action against the abusers .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that the EU should not interfere in other countries ' internal affairs .
It is important for reasons of principle to pursue the policy we went to the polls on .
There is no doubt that Syria should improve its relations with Israel .
The June List is an uncompromising opponent of all totalitarian regimes , and we condemn all countries that choose to support terrorism in all its forms .
It is obvious that the EU 's foreign policy is governed by various special interests possessed by certain Member States in regions around the world .
I find this policy to be very disingenuous and destructive , and to be so in a way exemplified clearly by the current report .
The EU is trying to influence Syria 's relations with its neighbours , and that cannot be regarded as acceptable .
I am choosing to abstain in the vote for reasons of principle .
Naturally we have no quarrel with the conclusion of an association agreement with Syria , which , as we know , is the only country in the region with which the EC does not have an association agreement .
We are vehemently opposed , however , to some of the key points in the report .
The report is marked by an approach based on interventionism and meddling on a broad range of issues over which sovereignty should rest with the Syrian people .
What is more , Parliament holds Syria responsible for the situation in the Middle East and makes accusations against the country , something it has failed to do in relation to Israel and the USA , which are primarily responsible for the dangerous , tragic situation in the region .
Among other points , the report 's objectives include the transition of the political system in Syria and the creation of ' an open and market-based economy ' .
It seeks to force Syria to comply with UN Security Council resolutions on Lebanon , yet fails to mention the fact that Israel continues to occupy part of Syrian territory , attacks Lebanon and continues to pursue its policy of State terrorism against Palestine .
It criticises Syrian politics and calls on the country to review ' its current foreign policy and regional alignment ' .
We find this unacceptable .
in writing . I welcome this Agreement .
Syria has much to do in terms of improving human rights , its relationship with its neighbours and its treatment of its minorities .
However , I believe constructive agreement is the way forward .
Europe must keep Syria at arm 's length , not because that country forms part of the axis of evil , as America 's President Bush claims it does , but because it oppresses its own people and represents an unnecessary burden on others .
Syria has , for many years , been a dictatorship that was run by the El-Assads , both father and son .
Many Syrian residents were forced to flee abroad , because they otherwise faced being locked up or disappearing utterly , and no organised opposition is permitted .
Not only political opponents , but also Kurds and Christians feel themselves under threat .
In neighbouring Lebanon , Syria was responsible for years of military occupation , for political assassinations and for arming Hezbollah .
In another of its neighbours , Israel , it is considered to be a most unreasonable neighbour , one that never wants peace or reconciliation , and Syria 's actions can be used as one of the arguments not to actively broker a peace agreement with a Palestinian neighbour .
Syria has recently secretly extradited a Dutchman of Iranian descent to Iran .
The EU 's position on Syria is still too much focused on good relations with the Mediterranean Sea countries and too little on democracy and human rights .
The statements by the Council and the Commission and the European Parliament resolution are a blatant and unprovoked attack on Syria , from which they want a statement of apology for its policy and its subjugation to imperialism .
Taking advantage of the debate on a Euro-Mediterranean association agreement , threats are being launched about its stand against the war in Iraq , solidarity with the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and refusal to bow down to imperialist plans .
The escalating aggressive policy of the EU reveals the nature of UN Resolution 1701 by announcing in advance the role which the military occupying forces of the Member States of the European Union will play in the area .
The report constitutes the European version of the American propaganda which is targeting Syria and calling it an axis of evil country .
We voted against the report in an expression of solidarity with the peoples of Syria and the Middle East which the American and European imperialists have in their sights .
The EU , USA and ΝΑΤΟ are jointly promoting the application of the NATO ' Middle East ' plan in a bid to subjugate countries and peoples .
We consider it politically unacceptable for this specific report to be passed by political forces which call themselves leftist , because they are joining sides with the imperialist policy of the ΕU and the USA , thereby providing an alibi for unleashing new wars .
Although this is , broadly speaking , a balanced report in the version negotiated by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I still have one or two reservations about its adoption .
As a result of both its status and logistical difficulties , the EU has neither the power nor the ability to act as a world power .
It also has neither the military nor the financial resources to do so , and most importantly , it does not have such a mandate .
This does not mean , however , that the EU should be a passive member of the international community .
The dimensions of Europe as a market , as a provider of financial aid , as a place of refuge for immigrants , and as a neighbour make , or ought to make , the EU a partner in external policy .
I am not talking about the traditional reference to the virtues of soft power or the debate on the need for alternative axes .
What I am referring to is the ability that the EU should have , on account of these dimensions , to influence and change policy in the Mediterranean , one of the most important regions in the world .
In the medium term , the EU should be capable of having the same effect on its neighbours as it has had on the countries that have joined it in successive rounds of enlargement .
What we should be doing is reproducing in our Mediterranean neighbours the effects of pre-accession expectations .
Unfortunately , this agreement does not convey that ambition .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Conference of the Parties in Montreal last year concluded with the minimal decision to continue discussions on the Kyoto Protocol and its objectives after 2012 .
On the eve of the next annual conference , the situation is still just as uncertain , and it therefore presents a serious threat to the future of the Kyoto Protocol , particularly in the wake of the statements by the new Canadian Government .
This situation is incomprehensible and unacceptable given that the warning signs are continuing to multiply and that forecasts are certain of a 50 % increase in CO2 emissions by 2030 , which runs counter to the objectives in this matter , to which our institution refers on a regular basis .
There is a very broad consensus within the European Union , as the European Trade Union Confederation ( ETUC ) has lent its support to some very ambitious objectives to combat climate change .
We must act as a matter of urgency , and take decisions and measures that match the challenges facing Europe and the whole world .
Our response to those challenges represents a powerful driving force for research and technological innovation , and for the modernisation of our production facilities .
in writing . One of the most important issues facing the world today is the issue of climate change and how to tackle it .
This is no longer an issue for tomorrow , but now .
The time for action is upon us .
All the evidence from the world 's scientists tells us exactly that , even if the Bush Administration is lying to gag its own experts ' contributions to the debate .
It is the American Administration that is the problem .
Everyone is horrified by the consequences of the second Gulf War for the ordinary people of Iraq , with the recent estimate that there have been more than 650,000 deaths amongst the civilian population .
Yet the failure to sign the Kyoto Agreement threatens billions around the world , and the very existence of nations like Bangladesh and the Maldives .
This will be the legacy of this United States Administration unless they are prepared to look again .
But I am afraid there are none so blind as those that cannot see !
( FR ) Mr President , the Naiades programme for the development of inland waterways and Mrs Wortmann-Kool 's report contain some excellent things .
I would like to take this opportunity to emphasise the need to complete the Rhine-Rhone link .
This link is an extremely important route that will enable us to connect the South of France and the Western Mediterranean with the Rhine-Main-Danube basin , and hence with the new and emerging markets in Central and Eastern Europe all the way to the Black Sea .
In my opinion , this programme is a top priority , and I hope that it is to the completion of this link - the technical and environmental difficulties of which I am well aware of but do not consider to be insurmountable - that the resources mobilised under this programme will be allocated as the first priority .
The Wortmann-Kool report calls for the active promotion of inland waterway transport , which is currently underdeveloped .
This safe , environmentally-friendly mode of transport with a lot of free capacity on its infrastructure , can contribute to modal shift and ease the congestion problems affecting other transport modes .
It also strikes me that the increase in trade since the enlargement will help develop new markets , such as this form of transport .
The adoption of measures aimed at redressing the balance between different forms of transport is hugely important for the future of a sustainable transport policy . As such , I am strongly in favour of developing the inland waterways transport network , which , from the developmental stage , can encompass all of the strategic areas that are important in optimising the development of this market .
Consequently , and bearing in mind the diverse characteristics of European territory , it is vital to establish an appropriate legal framework that will allow for the development of markets , which may , in turn , help move traffic over to alternative forms of transport .
As a Portuguese MEP , I therefore support this programme , which does not foster national self-interest , and which I believe will have a positive impact on the transport market in Portugal .
Public-private partnerships are very popular in EU Member States , and , somewhat inevitably , the United Kingdom is the European champion .
Unfortunately , though , they are a euphemism for the privatisation , or preparation for the privatisation , of public assets and services , which will be put up for sale , over the longer term , for private investors to make profit from them .
This , say the proponents , will lead to better risk management .
What they overlook , however , is that private firms keep the profits and the State always ends up carrying the can when the partnership turns sour or fails to deliver the profits that the private businesses were looking for .
This applies right across the board , in areas as diverse as the outsourcing of motorways , the management of hospitals and schools , and the incorporation of investment projects within the scope of the Structural Funds .
They are a means of outsourcing the State 's responsibilities , and this is something we find unacceptable .
What is more , this initiative is seeking Community-level legal arrangements .
We therefore have no choice but to vote against the report .
The Weiler report that is being put to the vote today includes a number of positive points on the future of public-private partnerships , particularly as regards the Green Paper and Commission communication .
In this regard , I am delighted at the clear distinction made between public procurement and concessions , and at the call for a legislative initiative on the latter .
Although I bitterly regret the fact that the European Parliament chose not to extend this approach with regard to institutional public-private partnerships , the amendments adopted in plenary represent an acknowledged step forward towards a future definition for ' in house ' services , in other words towards a more secure situation for European local authorities .
Although this interim text is not perfect , in my view it presents a set of advances that explain why I finally voted in favour , advances which the Commission now has responsibility for integrating fully into its future proposals on the subject .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Community legal framework for public-private partnerships ( PPPs ) does indeed need to be clarified .
However , this clarification needs to comply with a number of principles : in particular , it must indeed relate only to partnerships between the public and private sectors ; it must be based on a distinction between partnerships / contracts on the one hand and partnerships / concessions on the other , respecting the characteristic features of each and therefore avoiding new specific regulations for PPPs ; it must not call into question the rules of the negotiated procedure applicable to concessions ; it must give the national public authorities the freedom to choose the structure ( creation of mixed economy companies or other legal forms , a public structure taking control of a private business , outsourcing , etc . ) ; and , finally , it must ensure that any Community initiative is consistent with the needs of the public services and national choices in that regard .
None of this is likely to require the adoption of new binding legal documents , but , since it seems inevitable that the European Union will intervene in such matters , let us at least ensure that it does not lead to the creation of one of the bureaucratic machines for which the Europe of Brussels seems to have the secret recipe .
Public private partnerships are the back door by which the public service sector can penetrate and be handed over to private capital .
They are the basic route by which European capital can appropriate public infrastructures and services and circumvent the obstacles and problems which it encounters .
They are also the mechanism for buying off consciences , disorientating the grassroots movement and limiting support for the public sector , by gradually privatising and commercialising services of general interest , especially at local government level .
The objective is to increase the profits of big business and intensify exploitation .
Any efforts made in the report for conditional use of PPPs and democratic control of them are simply an alibi and wish list which ultimately facilitate the general and exponential transfer of services to the control of private capital , with damaging consequences for the workers , consequences that appear to be concealed in the report itself .
The basic point is not how public procurement rules will apply and how franchise contracts will be configured .
What is important is that the management and transfer of public wealth are accompanied by an attack on workers ' rights in order to profit capital .
We voted against the report and call on the peoples to fight against the full frontal attack by capital and the policy of the ΕU .
Mr President , I should like to give my explanation of vote on paragraph 4 of the Schroedter report on the posting of workers .
I support the proposal for a directive on the conditions required for the cruiser vessels providing regular passenger and freight ferry services between Member States .
I was particularly pleased to see Parliament do so too .
I do so because of our experience in Ireland with what has happened to the ferry workers and the workers - most of them foreign - who replaced them at Irish Ferries .
We had a documented situation - and this is quite recent , Mr President - where one particular worker was paid approximately EUR 1 an hour .
It is worth noting that the Irish minimum wage is in excess of EUR 8 per hour .
Redundancies were forced , not voluntary , because the redundancy offer on the table involved substantial wage cuts and significant disimprovement in working conditions .
The vacancies arising from forced redundancies were mostly filled by foreign workers , many of them earning half the minimum wage in Ireland .
That situation simply exploits all workers , offers no protection , promotes xenophobia and certainly fits the description of the ' race to the bottom ' .
( SK ) The basic EU principles on the free movement of persons and services within the European Union forbid any discrimination on grounds of nationality against workers from other Member States in matters of employment , remuneration or any other work-related matters .
What is the reality of the situation , however ?
Some Member States are still clinging to the transition periods that apply to the creation of labour markets .
The Posted Workers Directive is closely related to the Services Directive and , despite an intense and justifiable struggle by MEPs from the new Member States , the European Parliament in the first reading omitted Articles 24 and 25 from the draft Directive on services in the internal market .
We consider these articles to be crucial , as the basic ideas of the Posted Workers Directive are interpreted differently in different Member States , and workers are generally unaware of their rights as guaranteed by the Directive .
Regrettably , I have to note that a Commission Guideline cannot remove obstacles to the free movement of labour and services and therefore cannot solve the problems that enterprises and workers in the Member States are experiencing as a result of the inadequate implementation of the Posted Workers Directive .
I have voted against the Schroedter report because it did not include key amendments aimed at ensuring greater mobility within the EU labour market .
I am concerned that the position taken by the rapporteur would place unnecessary obstacles in the way of job creation and lead to the failure of our bid to make the internal market in services fully functional .

Mr President , I thought you might like to know that I voted in favour of the resolution that we adopted on the basis of the Schroedter report from the Employment Committee , because I think its general thrust , which is that we need better application of the existing legislation , rather than new legislation , is the right one at this time .
However , I think that in due course , once we have evaluated whether we have managed to get this legislation better applied in the near future , we shall need to return to the question of whether the original directive needs amending , updating or improving in other ways .
in writing . Where companies in one country wish legally to post workers to work in another EU country , such a procedure should be made straightforward rather than burdened by yet more bureaucracy .
Parliament should not give its approval to practices deemed illegal by the European Court of Justice and disporportionate by the Commission . The Schroedter report on the posting of workers calls for extra bureaucracy such as prior declarations from companies intending to post workers and the requirement to keep detailed time sheet records , etc .
Such practices are disproportionate , promote protectionism and undermine the services directive .
Sending out this message undermines the EU commitment to the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
The Commission text is sensible and practical .
This socialist report attempts to move the text in the wrong direction .
In this context UK Conservatives have been unable to support this report .
in writing . ( SV ) The report points out that the Posting of Workers Directive is not being applied in full by all the Member States .
It is thus necessary to adopt a number of measures to enable the Member States genuinely to guarantee minimum standards of protection and conditions of employment for workers temporarily employed in another EU country .
The June List is in favour of the host country 's legislation applying to employees working in other Member States .
That is one of the things that we have stated clearly in the debates on the Services Directive .
On the basis of the aforesaid reasoning , I have chosen to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
in writing . I wish to give a brief explanation on paragraph 4 in the original text of the Schroedter report on the application of directive 96 / 71 on the posting of workers .
I support the proposal for a directive on the conditions required for the crews of vessels providing regular passenger and freight ferry services between Member States .
I do so because of our experience in Ireland and what happened to Irish workers and the mostly foreign workers who replaced them in Irish ferries .
We had a documented situation where one particular worker was paid approximately 1 euro per hour as a hairdresser , and it is worth noting that the Irish minimum wage is in excess of 8 euro per hour .
After the redundancies - and these were forced , not voluntary , because the redundancy offer on the table involved substantial wage cuts and significant disimprovement of workers ' conditions - the vacancies arising from the forced redundancies were filled by mostly foreign workers , many on half the minimum wage for Ireland .
This situation simply exploits workers , offers no protection , promotes xenophobia , and certainly fits the description of the ' race to the bottom ' .
The rapporteur quite legitimately wants to counteract the European Commission 's unfortunately chronic liberal excesses .
It is unacceptable that the Commission has tried , in its communication , to reintroduce the country of origin principle even though it was rejected by Parliament during the vote on the Services Directive .
I would join with the rapporteur in calling for this directive to be implemented and enforced strictly as soon as possible , and for fines to be introduced .
The Commission must accept Court of Justice case-law , which establishes that there is a difference between self-employed workers and posted workers , and provides more favourable social standards for the latter .
Everything that was excluded from the first resolution on the Bolkestein directive is being restored with the European Commission guidelines on the application of Directive 96 / 71 on the posting of workers , in order to complete the crime against the working class .
Using the case law of the Court , the Commission is proceeding to overturn even these defective and limited rules of protection acquired by the workers and to abolish all controls on posted workers by the host state , thereby undermining the Collective Work Agreements and the social rights of workers in general .
The political mouthpieces of European capital ( the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and social democrats and liberals ) who voted for the Bolkestein directive in the European Parliament in February 2006 , with a new unacceptable compromise in the report on the Commission communication , are stuttering out lukewarm recommendations , thereby facilitating the EU 's attempts to direct the workers ' movement .
They are yet again serving the ambitions of monopoly groups to increase their profits by overexploiting the working class .
The escalation of the fight by the working class and of workers in general against the entire anti-grassroots policy of the ΕU is an urgent necessity and the only way to satisfy the contemporary needs of the working-class , grassroots family .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party ( EPLP ) voted to support the Schroedter report on the Posted Workers Directive as there is a need to improve the implementation of this important legislation to aid the free movement of workers .
However , the EPLP recognises that Member States have different enforcement mechanisms and there may be differences in , for example , information requirements between Member States .
Any requirements must be proportionate and justified .
It is important that this legislation does not add unnecessary burdens to business and interfere with the right of foreign services providers to post workers .
The Posting of Workers Directive 96 / 71 / EC is an important milestone in European labour legislation .
The Schroedter report highlights problems with the directive 's application , thus responding to a Commission communication - promised back in 2004 but not appearing until April 2006 - in which the Commission has tried , by referring to Court of Justice rulings , to restrict the control measures available to the Member States .
The Schroedter report redraws the balance between economic liberalisation and social protection .
Accordingly , certain administrative measures ( for example , social inspection of bogus self-employment , collective labour agreements ) can no longer be seen as restricting the free movement of employees within the EU 's labour markets , an opinion also shared by the Court of Justice .
The conditions for minimum pay , working conditions and health and safety at work , as well as the principle of the receiving country , are important instruments in preventing social dumping and unfair competition .
At the same time , they ensure that employees and service providers are treated fairly .
Thanks to this report , the neo-liberal course which Europe has been steering for years is given a more social dimension .
The European Parliament must bear its responsibility with regard to the social protection of workers , and that is why I support the Schroedter report .
in writing . ( PL ) The Schroedter report on the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive undermines all the valuable provisions enshrined in the European Commission 's Guidance on the Posting of Workers , following the compromise reached on the Services Directive .
From a political point of view , this amounts to backtracking from that hard won compromise .
The European Commission set out to indicate ( in a non-binding document ) that there are upper limits to social protection and administrative regulation of the market , and that these cannot be exceeded in the Member States in order to avoid impinging on the principle of freedom to provide services ( until the entry into force of the Services Directive , the Posting of Workers Directive remains the main legal basis for the market in services ) .
The report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs undermines all the key provisions of the aforementioned Guidance on the Posting of Workers .
It defends the outrageous status quo on the services market , where companies from the new Member States are systematically harassed by the administration in order to restrict competition .
This is a clear and simple case of protectionism , except that it is being implemented in the name of the workers and social protection .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is a fact : the directive on the posting of workers has not been properly implemented in some Member States and is not fulfilling its objectives .
This is due to variations in the interpretation of certain key concepts ( worker , minimum wage and subcontracting ) , the difficulty of monitoring compliance with the directive , and the difficulty of obtaining information , both for workers and for SMEs .
If we are to have an effective system of cooperation between the Member States , we need to increase the participation of the social partners , provide posted workers with more information on their rights , and provide businesses , particularly SMEs and craft enterprises , with contact partners .
Finally , it is now vital for the European Commission to look into constructive solutions to prevent and eliminate unfair competition , as illustrated by ' PO box companies ' or double posting from one country to another , and the social dumping resulting from the improper posting of workers , in particular by means of ' sham self-employment ' .
This is not about changing the acquis of the directive , but about improving it .
That is why I voted in favour of Mrs Schroedter 's own-initiative report .
Parliament has observed its annual ritual of ratifying the European Central Bank 's ( ECB ) monetary policy .
Although the report calls for prudence with regard to raising interest rates and for investment , its key priorities are price stability and budgetary consolidation , which will undermine economic growth , employment and people 's buying power on what they earn .
When what is needed , in contrast with the ECB 's fundamental objective , are economic and social concerns , the recipe is more of the same , that is to say , structural reforms in the labour market and in social security , and this comes as no surprise .
By saying that the system of appointments to the Executive Board worked well and that its members should not be chosen on the basis of nationality , the report overlooks the fact that this system always operates on the basis of rotation between the nationalities of the major EU powers .
The net effect of which , in a rotating system on the Board of Governors adopted in 2003 , is to exclude the small countries from the vote on monetary decisions .
Parliament has said it is opposed to such a situation , on the grounds of complexity and unfairness , instead proposing a Board of Governors comprising just nine members .
No prizes for guessing who will be in and who will be out .
For all these reasons , we are compelled to vote against .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I see it , Mrs Bérès ' report is a demonstration that the monetary policy pursued by the ECB is a failure .
To be honest , the only truly positive points it contains are the profit earned by the Bank and the fact that it has at least succeeded in creating jobs within its own four walls , because its workforce ( though God only knows what they do ) has increased by 86 % in seven years .
We have now reached the point when , in order to make the euro more popular with the people of Europe , the rapporteur is calling for the banknotes to be changed to replace these images of non-existent bridges with real living beings , landscapes or monuments rooted in the culture of our continent .
I and my colleagues in the Front National have taken many , many opportunities here to say exactly what we think of this policy , of its disastrous effect on employment and the purchasing power of the European people , of its focus on financial rather than economic objectives , of the harmful absence of an exchange policy , and now of the policy of increasing interest rates , which will further hinder growth .
Our opinion has not changed .
in writing . ( SV ) In a referendum , the Swedish people rejected the introduction of the euro by a broad majority .
I support that position wholeheartedly .
The report is redolent of propaganda , to which I cannot give my backing , in favour of the euro .
Paragraph 26 proposes measures that should be taken to ensure that Europeans do not distance themselves from the euro .
Paragraph 27 contains propaganda in favour of the Constitution .
I am opposed to wordings of this type and have voted against the report as a whole .
in writing . The policy of the Conservative Party in relation to the euro is clear : we are firmly committed to keeping the pound .
Nevertheless , as the European Union in general and the euro zone in particular are our largest trading partners , we are ever vigilant of the need for the euro 's stability , since this directly affects Britain 's prosperity .
We therefore reserve the right to make ourselves heard when we believe that unwarranted political pressure is being directed against the independence of the European Central Bank .
In the last year , as interest rates have been raised from their historic low , the ECB has been under political attack , and an attempt was made to use this report to interfere in its management .
Fortunately , the report in its final form respected the ECB 's independence , and we have therefore taken the exceptional step of endorsing it to make known our commitment to a sound monetary policy .
in writing . - ( FR ) Since the euro was introduced seven years ago , the purchasing power of the people of Europe has fallen considerably .
In the ' Euro zone ' , we have seen a real increase in prices for household goods and leisure , and an even clearer trend in housing due to a lack of monitoring of speculative funds .
It is therefore the working and middle classes who are hardest hit , even without adding excess debt to the mix .
Economic growth in the ' Euro zone ' has even fallen : the GDP volume has gone from an increase of 1.8 % in 2004 to an increase of 1.4 % in 2005 .
The prospects for 2007-2013 are even more worrying , because the Euro will present a greater risk to European growth once the exchange rate with the dollar becomes too favourable .
Not only does this bank , with its ultra-European foundations and philosophy , demonstrate a democratic deficit and a certain lack of transparency , but it will not even achieve any of the European Union 's economic and social objectives .
These indicators should make it clear that we should get out of the Euro zone and that the individual nations should regain their competence for economic , social and monetary decision-making in a free Europe where protection and national and Community preference take first place .
in writing . Although I could agree with the broad thrust of this report , particularly in the area of transparency and scrutiny , there is one issue I believe needs a sensitive touch - hedge funds .
It is appropriate for all central monetary authorities to maintain a vigilant approach to hedge funds .
However , the call for research to promote regulation is premature .
The need to regulate could be disproportionate to any potential threat such funds are perceived to have .
Time and time again , the ECB argues that price stability is its contribution to job creation and growth .
In the euro zone , price stability is a reality ; in quite a few sectors , indeed , aggregate rates of price increase below two per cent are opening the door to deflation , but as soon as there is the slightest indication of economic recovery in the euro zone , the only way the ECB , with its blind fixation on price stability , knows how to respond is by raising interest rates .
It does that despite the absence of even the least sign of inflationary tendencies , even though there is no change in the prevalent mass unemployment and wages are rising more slowly than productivity , which , in the long term , cannot do other than lead to serious imbalances in the national economies .
It does it even though even the capital markets , with their extremely low long-term interest rates , are indicating that they expect the future to bring neither a substantial increase in prices , nor sustainable economic recovery , and a look across the Atlantic reveals that they have little reason to do so .
As originally drafted , this report was courageous enough to take critical lines . Lamentably , though , little remains of them following the vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , although words of criticism would seem necessary to say the least .
What we really need in Europe is a different monetary policy , one that is guided , not by monetarist dogma , but by social responsibility ; one that represents the interests of the vast majority of Europeans rather than only those of the financial sharks and of the European financial elite .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Tibet
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Tibet .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , Tibet has been under Chinese occupation for over 50 years .
The Chinese authorities have been pursuing a policy of discrimination and persecution , aimed at marginalising Tibetans in their own homeland .
The Chinese army has recently carried out yet another barbaric killing .
On this occasion a defenceless Tibetan nun was murdered crossing the border into Nepal .
China denies that shots were fired at Tibetan refugees attempting to enter Nepal , but the entire incident was caught on film .
The House cannot remain silent and indifferent to these latest events .
The policy of force and repression imposed on the people of Tibet by the Chinese authorities can no longer be tolerated .
I hereby call on the Government of the People 's Republic of China to stop violating the human rights of the Tibetan nation and of other minorities .
I also appeal to the Chinese Government to guarantee that it will respect international law , international human rights standards and freedom of religion .
Tibet must be granted genuine autonomy and the Tibetan people must be allowed freedom of religion and education .
I also call on the Government of the People 's Republic of China to accelerate the dialogue begun with representatives of the Dalai Lama , and to seek to arrive , without further delay , at a solution to the issue of Tibet that is acceptable to both parties .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , China 's representatives described the events of 30 September on that country 's border in terms suggesting that they had been attacked by a band of Tibetans and had had - and with difficulty - to defend themselves .
On this occasion - unlike in many other instances - a video is in existence to clearly demonstrate that the opposite is the case .
This video shows that the Tibetan refugees did not attack ; that , on the contrary , the group of people trying to cross the border was composed of young people , children , nuns and monks .
The European Union must firmly repudiate the Chinese account of what happened , and demand clarification of the matter .
It must also demand clarification as to what has become of the children that the Chinese troops took into custody , the present whereabouts and state of these children and refugees and the manner in which such situations on the border are , as a rule , handled .
We in the European Union must make it abundantly plain that Tibet must be accorded autonomy within China 's borders , but real autonomy nonetheless , in line with the ' Middle Way ' proposed by the Dalai Lama .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , there has been another incident with fatal consequences at the border between China and Nepal .
When , on 30 September , a group of Tibetans - all of them unarmed civilians - attempted to flee over the Nangpa Pass to Nepal , Chinese border guards opened fire on them .
Kelsang Namtso , a seventeen-year-old nun , was killed ; many people were wounded , and thirty arrested , among them women and nine children .
I wish to echo what was said by the previous speakers .
This tragedy would never have come to light had it not been for a Romanian camera crew that was on the scene by chance and filmed what happened .
The pictures they took appeared on Dutch television at peak viewing time .
Despite this documentation , Peking maintains that there were injuries but no deaths and that , moreover , it had been the Tibetans who had opened fire and the Chinese had been obliged to defend themselves .
We condemn this brutal action on the part of the Chinese security forces and call on the authorities to treat their captives in a humane manner and in compliance with international agreements , for China is a signatory to the UN Charter on the Rights of the Child , which protects minors from arrest and from arbitrary treatment on the part of the state .
What happened at the Nangpa Pass must be investigated with the minimum possible delay , and those responsible must be called to account for their actions .
These attacks on defenceless civilians must be put on the agenda for the next EU / China dialogue on human rights .
I urge those representing the Commission to get an idea for themselves of what is going on , to go to the Tibetan Welfare Centre in Katmandu , as our ad hoc delegation from this House did in July when we went to Nepal , to ask the refugees arriving there about the things they have had to endure , and to do something about it !
( Applause )
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , this Parliament is right in once more expressing its indignation , and the unfortunate fact is that I expect it will have to do so many times more .
The situation in Tibet is getting worse rather than better , and we may actually be to blame for this .
Even before 1951 , the European countries accepted that Tibet should be part of China , even though it was not described as such on maps .
That is how it stayed when in the 50s , the People 's Republic of China actually brought this inhospitable region under its control with military means , and the Dalai Lama fled to India .
Tibet has now become more easily accessible from China via the world 's highest railway line .
Foreign mountaineers witnessed recently how inhabitants who tried to flee the country were simply gunned down .
The government , and probably the majority of public opinion in China , consider Tibet , above all , as a region that is still virtually empty and that needs to be colonised by Chinese people from the most densely populated areas .
Since the Chinese economy is more than ever intertwined with the European economy , Europe has a powerful lever .
The question is whether we are prepared to use this lever .
Oppression will persist if we do not bring any pressure to bear .
author . - Mr President , China 's Communist occupation of Tibet is a long-standing scourge on democracy and an open wound on the principles of justice and freedom .
Time and again , we have strongly condemned the thoroughly indefensible and brutal way the Chinese regime has been treating a small peace-loving nation , isolated at the roof of the world .
In the latest incident , China 's occupation forces opened fire on a group of unarmed , defenceless civilians who were attempting in desperation to flee their country through the glacial pass at Nangpa , situated at a height of almost 19 000 feet .
The group included many women and children .
A 17-year old nun was killed ; a 20-year old was seriously injured ; some individuals are missing and 29 people , including 14 children , were arrested .
Some succeeded in escaping to neighbouring Nepal .
Luckily and thankfully , the incident was witnessed by a number of foreign mountaineers , whose independent and trustworthy accounts , including a video , utterly contradicted the ridiculous lies about what happened put forward in an official statement by the Chinese authorities .
We in Europe have a lot to say when it comes to condemning actions of totalitarian and oppressive regimes , but in practice the severity of our words is not matched by our deeds .
Apart from being regrettable , this is also highly hypocritical , in my view .
The colonial-style occupation of Tibet by China , as , indeed , any colonial occupation of one country by another , has to end forthwith .
To demonstrate that we mean what we say , we must take tangible measures against China .
Yes , we have an arms embargo against that country , but it has little effect .
What would really be effective is if we had a trade import ban on China ; that would really cause headaches to the Communist leaders in Beijing and would lead to some sensible responses to our demands for freedom for Tibet .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it is clear that bold action is needed to improve the human rights situation in China .
This recent incident gives us a clear reason why that should be a priority for the European Union .
I find it absolutely appalling that the Chinese state media Xinhua reported the shooting as self-defence , while video footage clearly shows the Tibetan refugees were shot from a distance and in the back .
No force , threat or resistance was offered to the Chinese border guards .
None of the refugees had a weapon of any kind , not even a knife .
I would like to thank the Finnish Presidency and draw attention to its work in the human rights dialogue .
Last week , on 20 October , the Finnish Presidency issued an official statement condemning the incident .
I would like to thank the Presidency for that .
Finally , as indicated in the joint resolution on Tibet , we must continue to encourage high-level talks between the Dalai Lama and the Government of China .
I would like to reiterate that this is the only way to find a peaceful and sustainable solution for real autonomy for the Tibetan nation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , despite the fact that official relations between the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama were restored in 2002 , human rights continue to be infringed in Tibet on a regular basis .
It is estimated that every year 2 500 people decide to escape from repression and undertake the dangerous journey to Nepal , lasting several days .
The acts of violence perpetrated against unarmed civilians have given rise to particular concern .
These acts include the shots fired at refugees by Chinese border guards in the Nangpa La pass in September of this year .
The group of fugitives concerned was attempting to cross the Tibetan border and included women , children and monks .
To date , the Chinese authorities have not accepted responsibility for this incident , in which one person was killed .
The fate of several children detained by the military is still unknown .
It is incumbent upon international institutions to take decisive and effective action to compel the Government of the People 's Republic of China to put an end to its repression of the people of Tibet , its inhumane treatment of prisoners , its use of torture and its extra-judicial executions .
We appeal once again , from the floor of this House , for fundamental human rights to be respected in Tibet .
These rights include freedom of expression and association .
We also call for a genuine dialogue between both parties , aimed at achieving understanding and respect for the religious , political and cultural rights of the Tibetan people .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , in the two and a half years that I have been an MEP , this must the third time , or perhaps there have been more , that we have had to discuss human rights violations in Tibet , and I fear that it will not be the last .
The difference this time compared to previous occasions , however , is that we have filmed evidence demonstrating that the Chinese authorities ' attempts to deny these events are deceitful and that , at the same time , the Xinhua news agency 's attempts to show that this action was in self-defence is entirely without foundation .
We are therefore dealing with an event that clearly requires investigation , as other speakers have said .
I agree with that and I support it , but , furthermore , it also deserves to be treated as a fundamental issue within the framework of European Union-China dialogue .
I would insist that this is not the first time , but it is really becoming rather sad that , since we have the opportunity to hold this dialogue with China , and on the eve of the 2008 Olympic Games , we do not stress over and over again that the Tibet situation could be resolved if there were truly a little political will on the part of the Chinese authorities . So far we have not seen any such will .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating human rights in China .
We are doing so in the wake of a tragic and terrifying border incident .
On this occasion , people throughout the world were able to see for themselves how China deals with defenceless individuals who do not present any kind of threat to the Communist authorities .
These poor people are simply shot at without compunction .
The incident we are currently debating , and which has rightly triggered discussion of this subject in the European Parliament , reminds us of a bitter truth .
Human rights are being systematically violated in China in almost every aspect of life .
The human , economic and religious rights of the citizens of the People 's Republic of China are being infringed .
Unfortunately , we have to admit the sad and unpalatable truth that , all too often , the governments of individual European Union Member States remain hypocritically silent about what is happening in China .
The same applies to the European Union institutions .
If the common values that unite us in this House and across Europe really are common , it is incumbent on us to call , loudly and clearly , for human rights to be respected in the People 's Republic of China .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I am very glad that Parliament is showing such concern for the people of Tibet .
I do not question the genuineness of it , but I do question the genuineness of the way in which this Parliament acts on such concerns .
Today in the budget vote we rejected three amendments that would have removed EU development funding from government and organisational programmes that included coercive abortion , involuntary sterilisation and infanticide .
Why do Tibetans try to escape from China ?
It is because of these very barbaric practices , in addition to religious persecution and political persecution .
This is what blights the life of all minorities and conquered peoples within the territory that China now claims to rule .
I ask you , Commissioner - and I would like an answer - what part does our development aid play in this kind of suffering ?
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying to Mrs Sinnott that it is clouding the issue to raise points like that , which are entirely separate from what we are discussing here today .
Approximately 2500 Tibetans - possibly more - annually flee across the border from the Himalayas into exile .
They are certainly escaping from the brutality of China 's occupation , but it is not necessarily as Mrs Sinnott suggests .
It is difficult to know how many are caught or shot by the Chinese border authorities , because the allegations have generally remained uninvestigated .
This particularly horrendous shooting incident on 30 September is in violation of the basic UN principles on the use of force and firearms by law-enforcement officials .
It is interesting that there are guidelines as to when law-enforcement officials can shoot , but these require that they should not use firearms against persons except in self-defence or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or serious injury .
Those of us who have seen the video clips of this incident know that the situation was not one involving grave threats to life .
It appeared to be an unprovoked attack .
That is why the motion for a resolution before us is very important , in particular paragraph 8 , which urges the Council and the Commission to reiterate their position regarding dialogue between the appropriate authorities .
That is a position we must echo this afternoon : dialogue to resolve this situation .
( PL ) Mr President , the resolution we are to vote on today concerns the events of 30 September , when Chinese policemen shot at a group of Tibetan refugees seeking freedom beyond the People 's Republic of China .
It was certainly not the first incident of its kind .
It was unusual , however , in that this barbaric behaviour was caught on film .
Television and the Internet enabled us all , along with millions of others around the world , to see for ourselves what the Chinese policy on Tibet actually amounts to .
The fate of the Tibetan people is particularly unfortunate because they are one of the most peace-loving nations in the world .
The Dalai Lama is not demanding independence for Tibet .
The Tibetans are prepared to exist within the framework laid down in the Chinese constitution .
How can it be possible to shoot at such people ?
How can they be persecuted and killed , simply because of their desire for a small measure of freedom and for the protection of their cultural heritage ?
Can this tragic course of events be halted ?
It can be , if orders are issued to ban the shooting of people fleeing from a country they do not wish to live in .
This happened in the past , rather closer to home , on the border between East and West Germany .
Great nations cannot and must not base their authority on the massacre of defenceless refugees .
( PL ) Mr President , much has been said in the House today about the situation in Tibet .
The Chinese authorities claim to respect Tibet 's autonomy , but their actions tell quite a different story .
I would like to take this opportunity to draw Parliament 's attention to the report by Human Rights Watch published on 9 October 2006 .
This report mentions how an Internet blog created by Woeser , a leading Tibetan intellectual , was shut down .
The blog was one of the most interesting political and cultural developments in contemporary China .
It told the truth about the situation in Tibet , describing the damage to the environment and to Tibetan culture .
Woeser is one of the most distinguished female intellectuals in contemporary China , and her blog gave a true account of current events in Tibet .
We simply cannot tolerate a situation in which the Chinese authorities claim to have granted autonomy to a particular province , whereas in practice they are closing down leading intellectual online blogs .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission fully shares the concerns expressed by the honourable Members of Parliament regarding the recent shooting by China 's People 's Liberation Army of Tibetan refugees at the border between the People 's Republic of China and Nepal , the subsequent death of one of them and the imprisonment of some of those refugees .
The matter has been formally taken up by the European Union in the framework of the last session of the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue , held in Beijing on 19 October , as rightly mentioned by the honourable Member from Finland .
On that occasion , the European Union refuted the claim by China that the shooting had been in self-defence , urged the Chinese Government to undertake a thorough investigation of the incident and insisted that the imprisoned refugees be treated in compliance with international humanitarian standards .
More generally , the Commission is very concerned about the human rights situation in Tibet , and in particular the preservation of the cultural , religious and linguistic identity of the Tibetan people .
This issue has been regularly addressed during the bilateral dialogue on human rights as well as at the highest level , during bilateral summits .
The European Union is particularly concerned about the number of Tibetans from religious backgrounds who are in prison for political reasons , and has repeatedly asked for their immediate release .
Several of these people are on the list of individual cases regularly submitted to the Chinese authorities on the margins of these dialogues .
The Commission believes that China 's policy in Tibet is not consistent with the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
The early ratification by China of this covenant ranks among the top priorities of the European Union in the field of human rights and we have left China in no doubt as to the need to fully respect the spirit of that covenant , once it has been signed and even before it is ratified .
As part of its overall policy vis-à-vis Tibet , the European Union has consistently taken the view that establishing a direct dialogue between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities is the only realistic way to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the question of Tibet .
We have therefore welcomed and closely monitored the five rounds of talks so far held between the special envoys of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government .
The Commission urges both sides to continue this dialogue and use these talks to try to make substantive progress .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at the end of the debates .
2 .
Case against Rios Montt
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on the case against Rios Montt .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , unlike Tibet , we have not often talked about Guatemala in this House , at least since I have been here .
Nevertheless , it is a small Central America country that has suffered very harsh repression for many years , a brutal dictatorship , and the people responsible for it have so far escaped any form of punishment .
The Spanish High Court has issued an international arrest warrant and what we are doing here is supporting the extradition of General Ríos Montt , the person bearing the greatest responsibility , and of five other generals , some of whom were de facto Presidents , that is , dictators , during that thirty-year period in which 200 000 people were murdered , 45 000 disappeared and a tenth of the population was displaced ; the enormous majority of the displaced population - 83 % - belonged to the Mayan community .
There have also been European victims , however , Belgian and Spanish , particularly priests .
I believe , Mr President , that just as we in this House supported the extradition of Pinochet and of Fujimori , it is right for us now to support the extradition of General Ríos Montt and his accomplices , and unanimously if possible .

author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I naturally agree with what my colleague , Mr Yáñez-Barnuevo , has just said , because ten years after the peace agreements in Guatemala were signed , a country that has aspirations to be a member of the Security Council and with which an association agreement is being negotiated , has yet to implement the global agreement on human rights .
That is truly worrying in a country which , as has been pointed out , has been the victim of dictatorships , genocides , crimes against humanity , and - most seriously - the people responsible for them are still lording it around the country and around the world unpunished .
We must therefore welcome , as we do in this Resolution , the fact that on 7 July the Spanish High Court issued this international arrest warrant .
This will to a certain extent make it possible to begin to put an end to this impunity and genuinely make the people responsible pay for what they did .
We should do more than that , however .
We must also call for effective cooperation from the Guatemalan authorities in this field .
We must naturally ask them , within this context of increasing cooperation , to be as cooperative as possible , so that , on the basis of this international ruling , they can contribute to the arrest , return and trial of these people .
We must also ask for the cooperation of the banking authorities , which have been holding the profits and wealth that those people have been enjoying , in order to ensure that the latter assume their civil and financial responsibilities .
I would like finally to say that it would be very useful for Europol and Interpol to be able to cooperate in this work as much as they can .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Guatemala has a long and bloody history of violence behind it , and one certainly must not be partial in one 's judgment when considering it , for , while there were terrible dictatorships and repressions , there was also an equally cruel and bloodthirsty revolutionary movement in the shape of the Tupamaros .
Over three decades have passed since the eyes of all Germany were fixed on this part of Central America , when the German ambassador Karl Graf Spreti - whose son is a member of my staff - was abducted and murdered .
Karl Graf Spreti was one of the great men who prepared the way for Europe ; he was also a member of the German Bundestag for my party , but it was as a diplomat and an innocent man that he was taken away and put to a cruel death in the primeval forest . Since then , the country has gone through a period of terrible crises .
It is for that reason that we must be very careful , but also very firm , in supporting the peace process there by unambiguously denouncing those who , while in positions of power , had recourse to violence , as well as those who misused the word ' freedom ' as a justification for doing the same thing .

Guatemala has also , repeatedly , been the scene of gruesome acts of genocide , and it is cause for gratitude that the resolution does not mince its words about the expulsion of some 10 % of the Maya , a people with an ancient culture , and the murder of tens of thousands of them .
We also need to seize this opportunity to tighten up our definition of genocide .
It is said repeatedly that the term ' genocide ' may be used only when a group is systematically exterminated .
That is not so : it is also genocide to deprive an ethnic grouping of its basis for existence by robbing it of its homeland by means of expulsion and murderous violence .
That has happened to many ethnic groups , not only to the Maya but also to smaller groupings in Guatemala .
There is no statute of limitations applicable to such crimes , and that is why we must leave no stone unturned in bringing those responsible for them to account rather than turning a blind eye and moving on to the next item on the agenda .
author . -
( The speaker spoke Irish )
During the 1980s and 1990s , Guatemala was constantly in the international news .
Three decades of conflict and a decade-long peace process ensured that people all over the world , including those here in the European Parliament , remained informed .
Colleagues have mentioned some of the stark figures from that period : 200 000 people killed , thousands more displaced , entire villages and communities destroyed forever .
The Government 's own investigation confirmed that 93 % of all killings were the responsibility of the Government 's own armed forces .
The military dictatorship of Rios Montt in the early 1980s was singled out as one of the conflict 's most brutal periods .
There was great optimism after the signing of the peace agreements but , ten years later , the reality has changed very little for people in that country , where 80 % of the population live in poverty .
Ten years on , not only have the perpetrators of the policy of genocide carried out in the 1980s not been prosecuted , they continue to play prominent roles in public life .
The victims and survivors of the conflict have received neither adequate financial support nor recognition of their suffering .
Indeed , the vast majority of the disappeared have not been found .
Many of those displaced have yet to be returned to their original homes .
I welcome the demand in the resolution , which seeks the support of the Government of Guatemala , the other Central American governments , the Spanish Government and the Government of the United States , for the European order of detention to be facilitated , with reference to the international order of detention , so that those mentioned in the warrant issued on 7 July 2005 - all of whom are charged with crimes of genocide , including Rios Montt - can be brought to justice .
I would also urge Members to be cognisant of the fact that very little has changed for people .
For the majority of Guatemalans , conditions today differ little from those of 1996 .
The peace dispensation promised a demilitarisation of society and much-needed land and tax reform , the aim of which was to build a more just and equal society .
Surely today we should remember that , even if Guatemala is not so often in the news , and we should continue to demand and press for an equal and just society .
I therefore welcome and stress the resolution 's commitment to the principle of universal justice and the protection of human rights .
Our experience in Ireland has taught us that peace can only be built on justice and respect for the rights of all .
I would explain to our friends in the visitors ' gallery , who may have been surprised for a short while at the lack of interpretation , that it was because Mrs de Brún was speaking in Irish , which is not yet an official working language of Parliament , but which will be as from 1 January .
author . - Mr President , Commissioner , it is very sad and shameful to contemplate the fact that , in the vast majority of cases , those who commit despicable and atrocious crimes against humanity , including genocide , remain unpunished .
In fact , most of these callous murderers of largely innocent , defenceless civilians never face justice .
It is even more shameful that in reality many such vicious sub-human criminals not only escape the arm of the law , but enjoy a high standard of living and important political status .
Numerous examples of this disgraceful state of affairs can be found all over the world , throughout history and across most political systems and ideologies , which only goes to prove that , in reality , true administration of justice is a summer night 's dream and a fallacy .
We all know it applies to our world , but most of us are too afraid to admit it publicly .
The situation in Guatemala 's recent history fully bears out what I have just said .
In the period from 1960 to 1996 , more than 200 000 people were murdered in state-sponsored violence orchestrated by a notorious army general turned dictator , Efraín Rios Montt , and assisted by a string of infamous top officials and high-ranking military officers .
None of these characters was ever punished .
Rios Montt remains in politics today as the leader of the Guatemalan Republican Front , one of the nation 's most powerful political parties .
He served as President of the National Congress as recently as two years ago .
We should of course note that Rios Montt was trained by the United States , and his rise to power was accomplished through CIA involvement and with the full political backing and financial assistance of successive US governments .
Honestly , how pathetic can US foreign policy be ?
Sometimes one wonders .
Has the US State Department not had any straight-thinking , sensible people with average IQ working in it over the last few decades ?
I urge you to support this resolution , which aims at supporting the present attempts by the Guatemalan authorities to bring to justice Rios Montt , as well as a number of other despicable criminals .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the armed conflict in Guatemala lasted for decades , and that period saw terrible crimes committed against humanity , with 200 000 people being murdered , 45 000 taken away from their homes , and some indigenous communities wiped out altogether .
The peace agreement will be ten years old in December this year .
The Global Agreement on Human Rights has still not yet been put into effect in Guatemala , and the victims of the genocide have received no compensation , whether material or symbolic .
The warrant issued by the Spanish Supreme Court in July 2006 for the arrest of Efrain Rios Montt is a sign of hope that the culprits will no longer be allowed to get away unpunished .
We call on the Guatemalan authorities to cooperate unconditionally ; they must do everything in their power to investigate crimes against humanity , and the country 's ex-dictator and the other seven accused must be arrested and handed over .
Mr President , as Guatemala is preparing to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the signature of the peace accords that put an end to 36 years of civil war , the Commission shares the opinion that everything possible should be done to bring justice to those having suffered human rights violations during the darkest hours of the conflict .
In that respect , the Commission takes note of the legal proceedings instituted against former military and political officials for their alleged role at that time .
The Commission once again calls upon all parties to wholeheartedly support the quest for truth and justice and to fight impunity where it prevails .
The Commission welcomes the willingness of the present government , albeit timid , to recognise the state 's responsibility for past violations of human rights and to secure compensation for victims .
It furthermore acknowledges the country 's commitment to consolidate the implementation of the peace accords , as confirmed by the Congress in August 2005 with a vote on a framework law establishing procedures and mechanisms to secure the effective attainment of the objectives set ten years ago .
Finally , the Commission praises the work of the Human Rights Ombudsman and welcomes the establishment in July 2005 of an Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights .
Sadly , however , the country continues to be marred by the impunity characterising not just past but also present crimes .
This affects all citizens , including human rights defenders who are notably involved in assisting civil war victims .
The government agrees that this situation is not acceptable , but still has to take decisive action to reinforce the rule of law .
A European programme is currently offering support to the judiciary , but more public funds and structural reforms will be required if lasting improvements are to be made .
The Commission is also eagerly awaiting the establishment of a ' Commission of Investigation into Armed Groups and Clandestine Security Apparatus ' .
We hope the Guatemalan Congress will provide the necessary support for this , as well as for the pending ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court .
The Commission believes the European Union should pursue dialogue with Guatemala on key issues relating to the implementation of the peace accords , particularly as the country gears up for the general elections scheduled for the end of 2007 .
The Constitutional Court has , by the way , recently declared General Rios Montt ineligible for those elections following the coup he led in 1982 .
The issue of impunity for past and present crimes should be central in this context .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at the end of the debates .
3 .
Uzbekistan
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Uzbekistan .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , much has been said in this House concerning the situation in Uzbekistan .
The situation is not improving at all .
In fact , we are witnessing increasing repression .
The latest Human Right Watch report , published on 3 October 2006 , describes the situation in detail .
Nobody has yet been called to account for the massacre in Andijan , criticism is still being silenced , and freedom of religion infringed .
There is still no cooperation with international institutions with respect to human rights and fundamental rights .
Two journalists , Djamshid Karimov and Ulugbek Khaidarov , disappeared in Uzbekistan in September .
Both men were well known for their independence and for their criticism of the regime .
Eventually , Mr Karimov was found in a psychiatric hospital , and Mr Khaidarov in a prison .
At the same time , the European Parliament 's strategy should be directed towards assisting Uzbekistan 's return to the community of democratic countries intent on reforming themselves .
We must not take any action that could interfere with that course of events .
author . - Mr President , unusually for us , sanctions are currently in place against Uzbekistan .
Sanctions should be used sparingly and only as a last resort , but we in this House should not be afraid to call for them and indeed to see them implemented , as they are the only real weapon for encouraging internal change within that country .
It is important for the EU to speak with one voice and this motion for a resolution seeks to do just that .
First , we need to agree on a reality check .
In recital C we note the fact that : ' the Government of Uzbekistan has not addressed the conditions the Council set out when sanctions were applied ' .
So any moves to lift the sanctions currently in place would be counter-intuitive and bizarre .
It would be a bizarre incentive or reward for , in effect , ignoring us .
And yet , as we say in recital B , the General Affairs and External Relations Council is expected to consider on 13 November whether it will extend the sanctions adopted last year .
We understand there are genuine moves afoot to lift the sanctions .
My group disagrees with that and we hope the House will follow us .
We believe that the sanctions should be extended and widened , particularly in the light of Uzbekistan 's continued refusal to allow an independent inquiry into the events in Andijan .
We would like to see provision in paragraph 2 for the sanctions to be extended , with a targeted visa ban on specific key individuals .
That will underline our growing frustration at the lack of progress without any detriment to the Uzbek people themselves .
It is important that we keep up the pressure .
We hope that the House will not lose its nerve .
While I have no doubt that the Commissioner shares our concerns , we hope that she will match our commitment .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is important that this House , rather than averting its eyes from violations of human rights anywhere in the world , should take action in response to them , and the dreadful things that happened in Andijan in Uzbekistan in May 2005 were another case in point ; we are a democratic institution and , as such , must not allow human rights to be trampled underfoot anywhere in the world .
Nor , too , however , must we allow cooperation between this House and other parliaments to put diplomatic relations at risk .
When considering the present state of affairs in Uzbekistan , what has gone on there in the past must also be taken into account , and it is on that alone that this resolution must be founded .
Last month , the delegation for relations with the countries of Central Asia - of which I am a member - planned to travel to Uzbekistan . That nothing came of this plan was not down to any lack of cooperation on the part of the Uzbek authorities , but rather to the lack of interest in any such trip on the part of sufficient Members of this House .
One consequence of this is that we have not been able to form our own impressions of the current state of play in Uzbekistan as regards human rights , democratisation and the establishment of an independent judiciary , and we have been obliged , instead , to rely on information from third parties .

Do not misunderstand me : I , too , take the view that human rights and attempts at democratisation often suffer repression in Uzbekistan , and that serious thought must therefore be given to keeping sanctions in place , particularly the embargo on weaponry , but I do not think that extending the sanctions to include such things as the denial of an EU visa to the President of Uzbekistan , Islam Karimov , would do anything to get us closer to what we want .
To do such things would amount to breaking off diplomatic relations , and that cannot be what we have in mind .
Nothing happening at the present time would justify such a forceful political response , and so I must ask you , as a matter of the greatest urgency , to endorse the amendment I have tabled and vote for its adoption .
Should I fail in this attempt at a compromise , I will end up having to vote against the resolution .

author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ' Reporters without borders ' , in their report , now rank Uzbekistan at number 158 - interestingly enough , below such countries as Belarus and Russia .
The state of human rights in Uzbekistan has been a frequent topic of debate in this House , particularly after what happened in Andijan .
The really hot question now is ' what will the European Union 's response be ? '
We have said that , if there are to be sanctions , they have to apply especially to the movement of weapons and troops .
It is vitally important that the German military base , at Termes in Uzbekistan , should be closed down , for , if sanctions are not actually to be complied with , a major exception must be made , and so it is for that reason that we see this as the litmus test for our human rights policy , not least here in this House .
It is for that reason that we have tabled this amendment to the effect that the German military base in Termes must be closed down .
The base is used by all NATO Member States , not least by those that are also Member States of the EU , and must therefore be closed down .
author . - Mr President , Uzbekistan is an authoritarian republic , previously part of the Soviet Union , which , while struggling for economic and political stability , has been fiercely violating the human rights of its citizens .
The memory of the Andijan massacre in May 2005 is very much alive in our minds today , especially since the numerous requests by the UN , the EU and others for an independent investigation appear to have fallen on deaf ears .
Furthermore , despite some recent attempts to improve the human rights situation in the country , the situation relating to civil liberties is still profoundly anachronistic .
According to credible NGO human rights watchdogs , such as Amnesty International , the most disturbing human rights violations concern torture , arbitrary arrests and restriction of religious freedom and freedom of speech , with members of religious organisations , journalists , human rights activities and political activists , including members of the banned opposition parties , being the main targets .
Despite existing sanctions , the rate and extent of democratic reforms in the country is exceedingly low and distressingly limited .
Therefore , in this motion for a resolution we call on the Council not only to renew existing sanctions for a further year but also to expand the sanctions to include EU visa bans and the freezing of assets held in the EU by a number of top officials in the Uzbekistani Government .
We do this with regret , but we feel that we have been left with no other option than to be tough in order to be kind .
We very much hope and wish that the Uzbekistani Government will understand our resolve when it comes to issues of human rights and will quickly rectify the large democratic deficits still existing in its country .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , little has changed in Uzbekistan since the last European Parliament resolution on the situation in that country and the republics of Central Asia .
The Government of Uzbekistan has still not agreed to an independent inquiry into the events that took place on 13 May 2005 in Andijan , where troops sent in by President Karimov crushed a popular uprising .
Several hundred people died in that bloodbath , which the government referred to as a terrorist rebellion .
Most independent journalists and human rights defenders are being intimidated by the security services and some have been exiled from the country .
The recent disappearance of Djamshid Karimov and Ulugbek Khaidarov has caused great concern about the future development of Uzbekistan .
Mr Karimov and Mr Khaidarov are said to be the last remaining journalists in the country who have dared to write critically about the government and its leader for the last 17 years .
When these two men were located a few days later , one had received a prison sentence for blackmail , and the other had been committed to a psychiatric hospital .
Civil society in Uzbekistan is demanding a more open society , where personal freedoms and human rights are respected .
The people of Uzbekistan would also like to see real progress along the road to democracy .
The war on terror must be fought without infringing international conventions .
It must never serve as a pretext for annihilating the political opposition , riding roughshod over human rights or restricting civil liberties .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , 15 years after the fall of the empire of evil , which is what the Soviet Union most definitely was , the situation has become fairly clear .
Only those former Soviet republics which decided to build a future according to the democratic Western model can guarantee that they will create a civil society on their territory and respect human rights .
By contrast , those countries that sought shelter under Moscow 's protective wings and where governments headed by former Communist leaders remain in power , are giving us cause for alarm and great concern .
However , I would like to draw attention to the fact that we tend to discuss individual cases .
Today , we are specifically discussing one of the many tragedies that have taken place in Uzbekistan .
It is surely time , indeed high time , to draw attention to the fact that the only reason why such events are taking place is because these regimes can count on Moscow 's assent .
They are protected by the Russian leadership and are therefore able to act in this way rather than any other .
It really is high time we said no to all of this .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Even in a region trampled on by autocratic dictatorships , the Andijan massacre has managed to put Karimov 's Uzbekistan out on its own .
The government says that 169 people died , whereas the opposition puts the figure at 745 .
Regardless of the numbers involved , those responsible needed to be identified and brought to justice . The EU has done this , albeit only partially and half a year late .
In November , the Council adopted an arms embargo and other restrictive sanctions .
A year on , and how have matters developed ?
The repression has worsened , with the work of the NGOs and the journalists having been stifled .
In March , the High Commissioner for Refugees was expelled from the country and , worse still , between November and July , in an act of rare hypocrisy , over 250 people were summarily convicted for causing the May massacre , in a series of grotesque , media-circus trials .
All of this demonstrates that it is not only vital that we extend the existing sanctions for a further 12 months , but also that we deepen them by freezing financial transactions and European visas for the main Tashkent torturers , and broaden them to include the ringleader , President Karimov .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clearly right and necessary to monitor the implementation of human rights , whether one is talking about Tibet , Guatemala or Uzbekistan , because these are inalienable rights in the era of globalisation .
In view of the discussions and initiatives promoted and taken forward by the European Parliament , however , I believe that this body would prefer to deal with human rights violations and related problems anywhere in the world except in the territory of the EU itself .
This leaves us completely indifferent , for example , to the appalling situation of the so-called Russian non-citizens in Latvia , child labour and child prostitution in some Member States , the terrible state of the media and the criminalisation and persecution of the Left in the Czech Republic , and the unparalleled growth of poverty and far-right extremism in Germany .
All the more reason , perhaps , to tackle Uzbekistan and Tibet , or perhaps Belarus and China and the like .
I would venture to say , however , that the conservative majority is deliberately and cleverly turning Parliament into a kind of tame guard dog that is happy to remain on its own side of the fence and bark at the neighbours .
We should always focus primarily on the problems affecting the EU Member States .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , firstly , I have to say that I was completely appalled by the statement the representative of the far Left in the European Parliament has just made .
The situation in Uzbekistan simply cannot be compared to the situation in any European country .
A great many countries certainly do experience problems , but to draw a comparison with the situation in Uzbekistan , where people are dying and being persecuted for their political views , is quite outrageous .
I am saddened to discover that , when it comes to discussing issues such as the defence of human rights , there are individuals in this House who break the consensus on the defence and promotion of fundamental European values such as human rights , democracy and freedom of expression .
The consensus ought to prevail from the Left to the Right of the House .
I shall support the resolution in which we call for an extension of the sanctions against the regime in Uzbekistan , as the European Union is more than a political body bound together by common economic interests .
I firmly believe in the European Union as a community of values and , as such , the Union must set an unequivocal example by condemning all infringements of human rights , regardless of where they take place .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , exactly a year ago we were also debating the situation in Uzbekistan , in the wake of the bloody suppression of a demonstration against President Karimov 's totalitarian regime and its infringement of human rights .
Uzbekistan 's independence is also constantly compromised by the bitter struggle for influence between the great powers .
In spite of the sanctions imposed , and despite successive Parliament resolutions , human rights defenders continue to be imprisoned and tortured in Uzbekistan .
So too are witnesses to the truth , and we all know that truth cannot be suppressed by decisions , laws or prison sentences of any sort .
The heavy hand of the regime is felt not only by representatives of the opposition but also by the whole nation , as it struggles for independence and democratic change .
Women are particularly affected .
Although they have been granted the right to divorce within the framework of equal opportunities , they very often have to deal with everyday problems on their own , having to provide for their children and families single-handedly .
We obviously call for respect for human rights and support for the resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , a single minute is simply not enough time to discuss infringements of human rights in Uzbekistan .
We can only draw attention to the fact that an independent inquiry into the events in Andijan 18 months ago has yet to take place .
These events led the authorities in Tashkent to declare war on independent reporters and defenders of human rights .
According to the UN , torture is still being used in Uzbekistan .
It is true that Islamic extremism is gathering strength in Uzbekistan , but this cannot be used as an excuse for violating human rights .
Uzbekistan plays a leading role in Central Asia , which is all the more reason for demanding that it respects the rules for democracy , the rule of law , and human rights .
Several thousand kilometres away from Uzbekistan lies a similar country , which is also unceremoniously violating human rights .
This country is Belarus .
Visa sanctions have been imposed on both Uzbekistan and Belarus .
Extending these sanctions seems to be a sensible decision and deserves our support .
Perhaps this so-called visa blackmail will enable Uzbekistan to understand what European standards are all about .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , my being here at all is something I owe to the Uzbek people , for my grandfather - an Austrian soldier in the First World War - was captured by the Russians and it was only thanks to Uzbek hospitality that he survived the cold winter around Tashkent .
While we all , I believe , have deep sympathy for the Uzbek people , it is for precisely that reason that we condemn the suppression of human rights there and lament the fact that a regime is in power there that does not in the least meet our standards where human rights are concerned .
I would like to see a quite forthright denunciation of these violations of human rights , and I also want to see the sanctions extended .
However , I regard additional bans on entry of the kind called for in paragraph 2 as worthless .
I do not believe we can sort out problems by grovelling to Mr Putin at one summit and perhaps inviting the Chinese President to the next one , while taking it out on the mini-Putins and tinpot tyrants , and so I recommend that we adopt reasonable standards .
Extend the sanctions ?
I say ' yes ' to that . Denounce human rights violations ?
' Yes ' to that too . But as for spending part of Thursday afternoon imposing travel bans on every Head of State you can think of , well , that , I have to say , I regard as demagogy rather than credible policy-making .
( DE ) Mr President , it is a matter of common knowledge that , on Thursday afternoons , we impose absolutely nothing .
All this House does in response to the various human rights issues around the world is to make demands of one sort or another .
By means of this resolution today , we are demanding of the Council that it extend the policy of sanctions and broaden it to include certain areas that have already been discussed .
The Government of Uzbekistan still refuses to allow an independent investigation