Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session suspended on Thursday 10 May 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Establishing a green hydrogen economy and a third industrial revolution in Europe ( written statement ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Oral questions and written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft of the agenda for this sitting , as agreed by the Conference of Presidents meeting on Wednesday , 16 May 2007 , in accordance with Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been circulated .
It has been requested that the draft be amended as follows :
Tuesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has moved that the final vote on Mrs Aubert 's report on organic production and labelling of organic products be deferred to the June part-session in Strasbourg .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to clarify our request to postpone the vote until the June part-session .
Our request is made for reasons of ' legislative technique ' , a somewhat mysterious term meaning that , in our opinion , postponing the vote for a few weeks could help our institution to negotiate an outcome that is positive , or at least more positive than the situation that would arise if we were to vote on this draft tomorrow .
As you are aware , this issue holds great importance for the citizens .
For this reason we have called for the legal basis supported by Parliament as a whole to be changed .
I call on my fellow MEPs to support our request for postponement of the vote , rather than referring the draft back to committee .
I take it that this justification was also an argument in favour of the motion , so now we need someone to put the case against it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , much as I hate to disagree with Mrs Frassoni , we deferred the Aubert report at the last part-session and sent it back to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
There seems to be little chance of achieving a legal base and for that reason all of the coordinators , bar the Verts / ALE Group , agreed that this matter should go to the final vote during this part-session - that vote is due to take place tomorrow .
I have to ask my colleagues and all the other Groups who agreed through their coordinators in committee that we reject this proposal from the Verts / ALE Group and that we have the final vote tomorrow .
( Parliament rejected the motion . )
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have requested that the debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Palestine should not be concluded by the submission of motions for a resolution .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , last time round , our group was very clear in expressing its position on the Palestine issue , particularly as regards the recognition of the Palestinian Government .
I do believe , though , that , in difficult times such as these , we in this House have to start by finding a line on which we can all agree , and for that there have not yet been enough talks , while , moreover , events in Palestine are threatening to overtake us , so that we are in a situation in which a half-baked resolution without any really broad basis would certainly not help , particularly when there is a visit by you in the offing , and so I propose that the resolution be withdrawn for these reasons - not out of any change of opinion on our part , but rather because we want to find sufficient time for talks with the other groups .
Mr President , I am not entirely opposed to the request .
Admittedly , I regret that we cannot have a resolution and that we cannot adopt the very constructive resolution on which the Conference of Presidents reached an agreement on Wednesday .
I do , however , understand Mr Swoboda 's argument .
If I express a few regrets , it is simply because this is exactly the message that we need , so that we can address it to this people and give it back a bit of hope and breathe a bit of life back into what remains of its very fragile institutions .
I am therefore in favour of Mr Swoboda 's proposal , but I propose that the Conference of Presidents examine calmly , on Thursday , how we might mark the 40th anniversary of Resolution 242 , since the mini-session will coincide exactly with this 40th anniversary .
I suggest that the consensus that we have managed to build together on this major issue at the Conference of Presidents should also be formalised on the occasion of this 40th anniversary .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( The agenda was therefore adopted . )
The exclusion of health services from the Services Directive ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bernadette Vergnaud , on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the impact and consequences of the exclusion of health services from the Directive on services in the internal market .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , health services constitute one of the pillars of the European social model .
That is why they have been excluded from the Services Directive and must be dealt with in their own right , as part of a more wide-ranging assessment of the health sector in Europe .
The Commission consultation cannot be reduced to patient mobility alone , but should be an opportunity to define what the role and the added value of the European Union might be when it comes to guaranteeing every citizen not only equal access to health care , but also a high level of health protection , in accordance with the powers of the Member States and with the principle of subsidiarity .
European health policy cannot be limited to the mobility of patients and health professionals and cannot aim solely at the implementation of an internal market in health services , as this would lead to a two-speed system , from which only the most well-off patients would benefit and where health care institutions would seek to attract the wealthiest patients .
Furthermore , due to the disparity in professionals ' income , medical demography problems will undermine access to health care in the Member States in which service providers do not earn as much , with these people being tempted to settle abroad .
Patients must have the right to receive health care in another Member State , in accordance with freedom of movement , but there is no question of promoting medical tourism .
Although health services are subject to the rules of the Treaty , they cannot be considered as ordinary commercial services because they are invested with a mission of general interest .
There needs to be a balance between freedom of movement and predominant national objectives connected with the management of hospital capacity , the monitoring of health care expenditure and the financial balance of social security systems .
Furthermore , the Member States remain responsible for organising , planning and funding their health care systems .
All European citizens , whatever their income and place of residence , must have equal and affordable access to health care , in accordance with the principles of universality , quality , safety , continuity and solidarity . That is how we will contribute to the social and territorial cohesion of the Union while ensuring the financial sustainability of national health care systems .
Patient mobility must not in fact serve as an excuse for the Member States to neglect their own systems .
The Court judgments have , according to how matters have turned out , introduced a number of concepts that are worthy of clarification .
This is the case for the distinction between hospital care and non-hospital care , as well as the notion of reasonable waiting time .
I regret that the Commission has made only fleeting reference to the mobility of health professionals , when this subject requires in-depth examination .
The shortage of staff in European health services will only get worse over time .
What is more , we are faced with an ageing population .
Is it sensible , then , not to tackle this issue starting today ?
I do not think so .
The Union must commit itself to providing comprehensive information to patients , so that they can make choices with full knowledge of the facts : who can care for them and according to which procedures ?
It is from that moment on , when all of these procedure- and criteria-related issues have been resolved , that we will truly have on our territory ' European patients without borders ' .
In terms of cooperation , the Union could encourage the implementation of a European network of reference centres , or exchanges of knowledge between the various countries regarding the best treatment methods .
It is regrettable that the consultation should have described social services in a restrictive fashion , because , when it comes to integration , there is a dimension to these services that goes beyond mere assistance and action to help the poorest people .
Furthermore , the artificial distinction between health services and social services of general interest ignores the reality of the services that are provided .
In many cases , social services and health services are provided in the same way .
This is particularly the case where health services with social support are concerned .
What about the provision of medical care for old people 's homes and specialised institutes for disabled people ?
Contrary to what the Commission consultation was implying , the judgments of the European Court of Justice no more stipulate that Parliament must limit itself merely to codifying the case-law than they prevent it from exercising in full its role as legislator .
The decisions of the Court , taken as they are with reference to specific cases , are not enough to define a health policy .
Decisions must be taken as part of the democratic decision-making process .
In view of the countless number of infringement proceedings brought by the Directorate-General for the Internal Market in the field of health care and of the unsatisfactory legal situation in which the user-citizens find themselves , we need , for consistency 's sake , to lay down a directive on health services that spells out the common values and the principles applicable to health care systems in the Union , and this , so that the citizens regain confidence in Europe in one area of their everyday lives - health care - for their health is their most precious asset .
The added value of the Union can be crucial in this sense and can also give impetus to the Lisbon Strategy .
Madam President , I am very pleased to have the opportunity to discuss this issue again with you .
We have discussed it on numerous occasions , including in committee .
We are dealing with a real situation today .
On the one hand , there are a series of judgments by the European Court of Justice and the jurisprudence created in this field and , on the other , the decision of the European Parliament , which the Commission has accepted and agreed to , not to include health services in the Services Directive .
As promised , at the time when the debate was taking place and upon the exclusion of health services from the Services Directive , we initiated action in a specific area of healthcare at European level ; hence our initiative to begin with a consultation document , to start public consultation and then to continue with a more specific proposal .
The public consultation is finished and we already have the results .
We have already had two ministerial discussions on this issue and , with your debate today , we will have a more complete picture of the position not only of the institutions but also of the European citizens and we will then be ready for the next phase , which will be the drafting of the proposal .
I can assure you that today 's discussion and of course the report will make a significant contribution as to how we will proceed in this respect .
Therefore I should like to thank the rapporteur and congratulate her on a very thorough and comprehensive report and I should also like to thank the other committees for contributing to it .
We are in the middle of this process , which allows us to bring the setting of policies back to the policymakers - those who have the mandate to decide and propose policies will do so in this important area .
As I have said , we have finished the consultation process .
We had more than 300 contributions from Member States , regional authorities , organisations representing patients and professionals as well as healthcare providers - even hospitals and individual citizens .
Even though there were different views depending on the background of each contribution , there was nevertheless one common approach : there is added value if European action is taken in this respect .
The debate goes beyond patient mobility and covers many other areas , such as information for patients , patients ' rights , the movement of professionals , cooperation of healthcare assistants , centres of excellence , exchange of best practice in all areas that could contribute to effective cross-border healthcare for the benefit of patients , the citizens - our foremost concern - without creating any unnecessary burden on the healthcare systems in the Member States .
All these contributions and your report today will be a very important reference point for our next step , which will be a specific proposal .
We recognise that health services have a specificity - they are distinct from other services in the European Union - and therefore the challenge is how to make a choice between the internal market and social values and put in place a framework that can bring both the benefits of freedom of movement on the one hand and respect for health objectives and social values on the other , especially as this was recently confirmed by the health ministers at the informal Council meeting in Aachen .
I believe that Parliament 's report broadly reflects the issues that were identified by many stakeholders and the ministers .
This underlines the need to take action at European level .
Concerning the instrument we can use , as I said at the beginning , last year health services were excluded from the scope of the Services Directive at the request of the European Parliament , and the Commission was invited to come up with specific proposals on health services .
The Commission agreed to this approach and therefore it does not intend to reopen the discussion regarding possible reinclusion in the Services Directive .
On the contrary , we are now in the final stages of preparing a specific proposal directed at those specific issues .
It will be a package with various measures , but the first one will comprise , as called for in the report , specific legislative proposals in this area .
We will follow this up with various other steps .
However , as I have said , the main objective for all of us is the benefit of European citizens , of European patients , with the principle of subsidiarity always being taken into account .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , all members of the European public attach great importance to high-quality health services , and health becomes even more important in view of the ageing population right across Europe .
Health services pursue the same objectives as do other social services of general interest and are founded upon the solidarity principle , fundamental values and equality of access , while universality , equal treatment and solidarity must continue to be ensured .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has once again confirmed that the exclusion of health services from the scope of the services directive was motivated by the desire to identify health services as a higher good for the European Union , and that the adjustment of the voting result from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection in the plenary is necessary if a false signal is not to be sent in respect of the ongoing process .
These services must be recognised by means of further legislation at European level and must not be made subject to free competition .
What is needed is a legal framework , a proposal , which might , for example , take the form of a sectoral directive for health care services on which the social partners and decision-makers would be consulted , and with a requirement for clear rules on liability for injury sustained by patients during treatment .

Reimbursement of costs must be transparent and comprehensible , and uniform social , labour and quality standards must be complied with when service providers establish themselves ; health services are not just services of any sort or kind , and we must handle them carefully , because , in the final analysis , it is your health , too , that they are all about .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I , in turn , should like to add my comments to this debate .
It is obvious that health services form an integral part of European social infrastructure ; if anything specifically typifies Europe and sets it apart out from elsewhere , it is the way in which we make a high level of health care available to all citizens , irrespective of their personal backgrounds .
Our guiding principle in this entire discussion is therefore that , in the final analysis , high-level care must be available to patients and ideally as close to their homes as possible , since that is what most patients appear to need .
There are , of course , situations where this is impossible , however ; it may not be possible by reason of waiting lists or in the case of rare diseases that can only be dealt with in a European context .
Although health care is first and foremost the responsibility of the Member States , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is glad that the Commission has taken the initiative in getting the consultation procedure started , in order to see what the best plan of action is for the European Union .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) We are not concerned in this case with the Services Directive , even though anyone listening to the debate might think we were .
What we are really concerned with is how we are to solve the problems to do with the fact that health care services are not covered by the Services Directive . In particular , we are concerned with how , in spite of that fact , patients and service providers are to be able to retain their cross-border rights .
Current rights have their bases in the Treaties and various legal cases and must not be impaired through secondary legislation , at least not without people being informed of what is happening .
It is not so much a question of introducing new services or new rights but of standing up for the rule of law and existing rights .
According to the European Court of Justice , advance notification is a normal method of limitation .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats do not wish to increase the use of advance notification .
We believe that the few cases approved by the Court as legitimate obstacles to the main rule of freedom of movement for people and services are sufficient .
Advanced health care often requires planning , with fixed structures and funding in place .
In this area , the Member States probably still need to have some freedom of movement of their own .
As many speakers have already pointed out , there are big differences between the Member States .
The Commission should choose suitable instruments for handling the various parts of this large package and focus on solutions that promote movement , freedom and security for the individual European .
We must protect people , not national bureaucracy .
We have nothing against specialisation within the EU leading to patients obtaining higher-quality care .
As citizens of the EU , we have to embrace cross-border solutions .
We are entitled to them , both as patients and as service providers .
These solutions exist and must be employed , even if health care is not part of the Services Directive .
The Commission is responsible for proposing solutions .
I would call on the Commission to codify the legal cases , to highlight the Member States ' responsibility for the content of care and not to accept citizens having fewer rights than they do at present .
Parliament and the Commission must support each other .
Mr President , Commissioner , we in this House acted with deliberation when excluding health services from the services directive , for these are particular services that needed a particular quality , a high standard of health provision , one , moreover , organised in such a way that everyone , irrespective of where they live or of how much is in their wallets , can actually have access to these health services .
That is at the heart of what we have to do , and that is why , as we have said , these are not commercial services , and the services directive must therefore not apply to them .
We were , then , all the more astonished when the Liberals and Conservatives in the committee joined in taking the decisions that health services should once more be included within it .
That is absolutely false and I must ask you to think this through again and withdraw this decision , because , as Commissioner Kyprianou has rightly said , we now need to come up with a proper answer to the issues around health care services , and do so taking into consideration the whole range of them that needs to be regulated .
Such is the task before us , so let us look forward rather than back , with a view to making possible the provision of health care services to a really high standard .
I call on the Conservatives and the Liberals to ensure that paragraph 71 is once more deleted from this resolution , which is in all other respects a very good one .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Vergnaud on her report , for the broad outlines incorporated in it make of it a positive and forward-looking work showing one way in which we can address these issues , and I am very glad that the Commission , in the person of Commissioner Kyprianou , as well as the Ministers on the Council of Ministers have expressed their wholehearted willingness to go down that road , so let us go forward and address these issues in a specifically sectoral directive , thereby completing a good work for the public .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his introduction and Mrs Vergnaud for her good cooperation .
Since I have heard it said on several occasions that health services are not to fall within the scope of the Services Directive , I wonder what all this is about .
The proposal that comprises the current article is the product of compromises that have been concluded , and due account has therefore been given to the condition on which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe all insist , that being that health services should be included in the Services Directive as a lex specialis .
Since , from what I gather , this has caused quite a commotion , I have tabled a replacement amendment which provides for what the Commissioner mentioned a moment ago .
After all , the right balance should be struck between the free movement of services , respect for patients ' rights , the freedom of practising a medical profession in Europe and the freedom of establishment .
This is where the new amendment comes in , and I hope that the PSE Group and the PPE-DE Group can accept this , that we can adopt the amendment jointly , and that we will eventually end up with a fresh proposal which provides for equal treatment and solidarity for all Europeans , and I mean all Europeans , and all European patients .
We must avoid a scenario where medical services are simply considered services of general interest , which means that they would be placed outside the scope of the European Treaty , with the effect that each Member State would again set up its own system , that borders would be closed , that there would be no freedom , that patients would not be recognised as having rights and that the rich would jet out to Peking to get the best treatment money can buy instead of seeking treatment in Europe .
If that is what Europe sets out to do , then I think we are at risk of reverting back to the seventeenth century , which may have been a golden age , but does not , I think , represent what Europe is striving to be .
I therefore hope that the amendment that has been tabled by the Liberal Group by way of replacement of Article 71 will meet with wide support , so that a separate directive for health services can be drawn up , and that all compromise amendments can be endorsed , which , in any event , they are by us , as the package is excellent .
I hope that we will succeed in what we are setting out to achieve .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has given its support to the work of Mrs Vergnaud , whom I should like , moreover , to thank for her receptiveness .
That being said , I must indeed confess that I preferred her first report , which consisted of fewer than 30 paragraphs .
I invite the Commissioner and our fellow Members to read the explanatory statement , which has not been amended and which I feel is much clearer than the 72 paragraphs that we have now .
My group has re-tabled a number of amendments , confirming for some the exclusion of health services from the Services Directive and clearly endorsing , for others , the need for specific legislation , while highlighting the fact that a number of regulations already exist , not least Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 , on the basis of which mobility and the reimbursement of a number of health services take place .

I believe that , in this debate , we can clearly see that the difficulty in this matter , as in others , is the advantage to be gained not only by the national governments , but also by those operating in the health care systems in each of the countries , on the one hand , in keeping control of the organisation and funding of health care generally , and , on the other hand , in not allowing the Court of Justice judgments alone to provide unwanted guidelines .
I am thinking in particular of what is referred to as ' promoting medical tourism in the European Union ' .
I believe , and many operators believe , that this is an undesirable development .
On the other hand - and , on this point , too , I would draw your attention not only to our own amendments , but also to the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left - I believe that we must reaffirm very , very clearly the responsibility that each of the Member States has to guarantee access to high-quality health care to its citizens and to all those residing on its territory .
I do not think that it is a good thing to have to travel 300 km , 500 km or 2 000 km in order to go , for example , and receive proper dental care , as is the case at present .
I do not believe that that is really the best solution .
It is in this spirit that we will therefore reserve our final vote , in view of the votes that will be cast on the various amendments .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , when it comes to health , our position is clear .
We think that it is a fundamental right for everyone that they be able to enjoy equal opportunities for high-quality local health care .
We therefore also wish to state that every single government in every single one of the 27 EU Member States is responsible for ensuring that its citizens receive proper health care .
It is also our clear view that those governments that do not wish , or are unable , to guarantee their citizens proper health care do not deserve the latter 's support .
We are therefore also opposed to the report that we are debating in this House today , which would transfer responsibility from the individual governments to market forces .
It is certainly no coincidence that the report concludes by calling on the Commission to reintroduce health services into the Services Directive .
We are not opposed to cross-border cooperation in the area of health .
We are in favour of close cooperation being established in border regions , partly with a view to ensuring easy access to hospitals in local areas .
We are also in favour of cooperation at European level on health care in relation to rare diseases .
However , we are opposed to a development whereby patients would be transported all around the EU to wherever would be financially more advantageous for those who pay the costs .
We have accepted this method for too long when it comes to pigs .
We must not introduce it where human patients are concerned .
On behalf of our group , I must therefore call on my fellow Members to vote against the proposal in its present form .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , health is a human right recognised by the United Nations .
The right to a high level of health is guaranteed by the Treaty in connection with all EU policies .
Instead of removing subsidies for unhealthy products , adherents of the internal market now want to see health turned into a commodity that can be sold freely under market conditions .
This would provide a wider range of health services to those who could afford them but a narrower range to those who could not afford to pay the market price .
It would provide low-cost services to rich people travelling to poor countries for health check-ups .
It would make it correspondingly more difficult for most people in the poor countries and for many poor people in the rich countries to pay for health services .
The Services Directive would provide for competition over salaries in the health sector .
Foreign companies would be free to establish themselves and offer health services of any type .
Danish taxpayers would be forced to pay the same subsidies to all suppliers , irrespective of quality and of the salaries paid .
We might as well send our Danish agreement model with its democratically adopted agreements to the museum of labour .
People might go to the polls , but we could no longer vote in favour of health care for all .
Instead , we should allow the Member States themselves to determine the balance they want to see in the health system between private and public provision and we should respect the Danish model with its tax-funded social and health-care rights for all , as well as our agreement model in the labour market .
( SK ) In her report the rapporteur deals with several very serious issues currently facing the European Union , including medical services reimbursement policy , the mobility of patients or health professionals and liability for errors .
I would like to emphasise that a patient must not in any way be considered a tourist or healthcare shopper .
Patients seek healthcare abroad because certain services are not provided in their home countries or because the waiting period is exceedingly long .
The risk of medical service provision becoming the object healthcare tourism is slim .
Patients would rather be treated in a familiar environment close to their relatives and where they understand the language .
According to statistics , patient mobility accounts for approximately 1 % of healthcare services .
Given the safeguards of the free movement of persons , however , this percentage will definitely go up in the future .
There can be no free movement of persons without access to healthcare services .
Therefore , it is our job to ensure such access without complicated negotiations with insurance companies .
This solution would also be consistent with the equal rights of citizens across the entire area of the European Union .
I have not found any reference in the report to disparities between Member States concerning an individual 's chances of survival .
Why do Slovak women suffering from breast cancer have a 30 % smaller chance of recovery than Swedish women ?
Why do Polish patients suffering from rectal cancer have a 30 % worse outlook for survival than French patients ?
For many people , patient mobility ( even though a mere 1 % ) seems to be a key problem .
However , no one is interested in the fact that a great number of physicians and nurses have left the twelve new Member States .
Why are we so preoccupied with the problem of patient mobility and yet disregard the mobility of physicians ?
I urge the Commission to come up with a new draft strategy proposing a solution for this issue in the future by promoting eHealth , the levelling off of disparities between the Member States and the use of structural funds for healthcare purposes .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the title of the own-initiative report that we are debating mentions the good reason for its being drafted : the exclusion of health services from the scope of the Services Directive .
I should like to remind you of the fact that this exclusion has been brought about as a result of the decision taken by a broad majority in this House , a decision in which both the Commission and the Council gave us their unanimous backing .
It was , as I see it , a fair decision , firstly because health services cannot be treated in the same way as traditional commercial services , secondly because a patient is not a consumer and thirdly , because the Member States have key authority and responsibility when it comes to organising and funding health care within their territory .
I am therefore relying on us being able to lay down a resolution on Wednesday that is consistent in this area .
Meanwhile , health services remain , of course , services within the meaning of the Treaty and as such , the rights and freedoms of the Treaty apply .
We refuse , as we did in the case of the Services Directive at the time , to leave everything to the Court of Justice , and once again , we are forced to reconcile various objectives with each other .
The internal market should work as efficiently as possible while room should also be left for health policy that is justified in every way .
What we need to heed in this is a sense of balance and legal certainty .
A codification of existing case law on the rights and duties of both mobile patients and mobile service providers is certainly called for , but it is not enough .
What remains a challenge is the creation of added value for people and in the area of the quality of care and of guaranteeing leeway for the Member States , thus enabling them , as before , to be responsible in making the choices that they have to make .
We have not yet reached consensus on what exactly should be covered in European legislation using what instruments , but I am persuaded that this report , the inquiry which the Commissioner has organised and also the earlier resolution on patient mobility are valid contributions to further develop policy in this area , and we are looking forward to the Commissioner 's initiatives in this respect .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the initial report by my esteemed colleague , Mrs Vergnaud , should , in theory , gain the support of all the Members .
The objective of enabling everyone - everyone in Europe - to receive adequate health care when they move around Europe , for professional and private reasons , simply falls within the realm of freedom of movement .
However , patients ' right to mobility can be guaranteed only if the EU Member States retain the power to regulate these health services , so that they can control the funding of them , because , while health has no price , it has a cost , and a growing cost at that .
This cost is becoming more and more substantial , and there is the risk that it will become impossible to manage the funding of social protection and health services for all in all of our Member States .
Certain political forces within this Parliament have a simplistic response to this concern , which is shared by virtually all of the ministers for health : leave the market alone and entrust the funding of social security to private insurance companies .
I suspect also that Commissioner Kyprianou shares these somewhat ultraliberal views .
He said to the Figaro that competition between European health services is inevitable and , to the Financial Times , that people can shop around .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament does not share that view .
It is in favour of the right to health care for all throughout Europe , but is against a market that will enable the wealthiest people to have the best possible treatment , while the poorest and least mobile people will have the right only to a minimum level of treatment .
Those who believe that the market , and the market alone , could guarantee high-quality health care for all should reflect on the situation in the United States .
In that great country , the cost of health care is the highest in the world , that is , some 15 % of GDP , or practically double the European average .
However , that very expensive system is excluding a growing number of US citizens : in 2006 , 46.6 million Americans had no medical insurance .
That is certainly not an example that Europe should follow .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mrs Vergnaud for the wonderful cooperation we enjoyed in the preparation of this report .
This Parliament recently adopted a resolution on cross-border healthcare and today we are discussing another one .
Why ?
Because , as access to healthcare and health services becomes an issue for Europe , the exclusion of health services from the Services Directive set us an urgent task to ensure that in future legislation people will have access to healthcare regardless of state borders .
The Court of Justice decision clearly recognised the application of internal market principles and freedoms when patients seek treatment abroad .
We should secure common levels of safety and quality of health services and implementation in practice of patients ' and citizens ' rights across the EU .
Patients ' rights should be part of future Community health legislation .
We should recognise the two dimensions of cross-border mobility and ensure that unjustified delays for patients and healthcare professionals will be removed .
Patients should have access to innovative treatments and technologies for their health .
We should govern the process and create an empowering environment for it .
Legal certainty is needed in medical practice , as is right of establishment to guarantee high-level safety and quality standards .
Current EU legislation does not cover the regulatory gap .
The Commission should introduce an initiative that observes the above-mentioned principles .

( NL ) Mr President , two years ago , when we were discussing the Services Directive and I was this House 's rapporteur for health care , I recommended that health services be excluded from the Services Directive , which advice the House proceeded to follow .
It saddens me deeply that , now that there is a proposal to undo this , Parliament , if it approves this reversal , will lose every ounce of credibility over it .
I am not just referring to Mr Manders 's repugnant amendment to bring health services back within the scope of the Services Directive - he seems , however , to be eating his words to some extent , but the essence of what he said remains the same - but also the whole idea of an EU directive for health services strikes me as excessive interference .
Needless to say , a proposal must be drafted to guarantee the right of patients to get care across the border in a decent manner , but this should not lead to Member States neglecting their responsibilities for providing good quality care and the right amount of it .
Patients prefer to be cared for well , close to home , and in their families .
Legal tug-of-war should certainly not be used as an excuse to liberalise EU health services .
Health services occupy a specific place in society .
Accessibility and quality , rather than making a profit , should always remain the foremost priorities .
Care is not a market , and Europe should not try to turn it into one .
Article 152 of the Treaty stipulates that health care is a matter for the Member States and this is how , as I see it , in the interests of the patient and employees in health care , it should certainly stay .
Mr President , this report is seriously advocating that cross-border healthcare should become a reality under the Services Directive .
It states that ' Member States should treat residents of another Member State on an equal basis with regard to access to health services , regardless of whether they are private or public patients ' . It also states that there should be ' a codification of existing case law on the reimbursement of cross-border healthcare ' .
Let us be clear exactly what these two statements mean as far as Britain is concerned .
The first is saying that a visitor or migrant from another EU country , who has not paid a bean towards the cost of the National Health Service , should be entitled to the same access to healthcare as a British resident who has been paying tax and national insurance all his or her working life , and means a delay in their treatment .
The second statement opens the door for the EU to override national governments and lay down the law on how cross-border healthcare is reimbursed , leading inevitably to how healthcare as a whole is funded and managed .
A single healthcare system run by the EU is a nightmare too horrible to contemplate ; it should never be unleashed on an unsuspecting world .
Mr President , health services will remain the province of Member States and healthcare organisations will be the responsibility of Member State governments .
But that does not stop our citizens from travelling , from falling ill while they are travelling , from moving permanently to other countries and wanting access to healthcare - perhaps something that Mr Titford might care to reflect on in a quieter moment .
I want to thank Mrs Vergnaud for this report .
It is an extremely comprehensive one .
It has many valuable contributions to the work that you , Commissioner , set out and it is extremely timely .
It is quite clear that health services are not going to be reintroduced into the Services Directive .
We will certainly support the compromise proposal that Mr Manders will table tomorrow making that clear .
That should not distract us from looking at some of the really important issues that are picked up in this proposal , because more and more people are going to be challenging the boundaries of the system .
One of the landmark Court of Justice judgments was because of a British patient who travelled to another country to have a hip replacement operation on the grounds that her own health service - sadly in my own country - could not provide that treatment within anything like an acceptable time .
The Court found in her favour and that is something that the Commissioner will reflect on .
I do not object to the basis of that judgment because it seems to me that this is a right that people should have across the European Union .
But there are going to be very difficult issues that we are just starting to face .
The innovatory treatments that one of the previous speakers mentioned , particularly in the areas of cancer , are already presenting really difficult issues to public health services .
Expensive , life-prolonging tailored treatments : what happens if they are available in another country but not your own and you travel to that country and ask for that sort of treatment to prolong your life ?
This is an important report .
It is an issue that we are going to be increasingly confronted with .
I commend it to you and I hope the Commissioner will come up with an imaginative response .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking our rapporteur , Mrs Vergnaud , who unfortunately had her work cut out with the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection because , as Commissioner Kyprianou pointed out to us , we have , on the one hand , case-law , that is to say , in fact , the Treaties as interpreted by the Court of Justice , and , on the other hand , the position adopted by the European Parliament during the vote on the Services Directive , a position that clearly stated that a choice needed to be made between what falls under the internal market and what , for the sake of defending the social values of the Union , must fall under other mechanisms .

I believe , in fact , that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection - not just Mr Manders , unfortunately , since , in order to have a majority , the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe had to support it - has done something very regrettable in seeking to re-introduce health services into the framework of the directive on services in the internal market : in none of our countries , in fact , are commercial services and construction , on the one hand , and hospital services and patient services , on the other , included in the same legislation .
There are , in fact , different rationales .
It is true , firstly , that we need to act in accordance with subsidiarity , with the mechanisms for funding our social systems and with the authorisation mechanisms of health care institutions , but we must also take account of the European area and of movement in that area , and thus promote access for all to health services .
This must , however , fall within the realm of specific mechanisms .
That is why , just as we need them for social services of general interest and , moreover , just as we need them for all the other services of general economic interest , I believe that we need specific directives , alongside the directive governing commercial services in the internal market .
I hope not only that the compromise will make it possible to clarify the fact that health services are not in the directive on services in the internal market , but also that we will actually demand a specific directive on health services .
( SV ) It is not long since the two large political groups reached a compromise on the Services Directive , and some people described it as a great success that health care and medical services had been exempted .
There is now nonetheless an attempt to introduce this deregulation through the back door , in which case medical and health care would cease to be human rights and become commodities in a market .
According to the Treaties , medical and health care are the exclusive responsibility of the Member States , and legislation at EU level is neither required nor desirable .
Cooperation is good , but legislation is not , in this instance .
I hope that those who thought that the removal of medical and health care services from the Services Directive was to be applauded will make sure that they consolidate that success by supporting the amendments by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left when we vote .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that all those who , in the committee , voted in favour of paragraph 71 , now at least realise what a disservice they have done to the debate , for we are now talking less about the substantive issue than about the methodology involved .
Our removal of health and social care services from the scope of the services directive was quite deliberate .
Why did we do it ? For the fact is that this is not about the free market versus the national interest , but about our understanding of the vulnerability of the health sector and social services , and about our willingness to regulate these sectors in very specific ways rather than evaluating them solely in terms of the workings of the market .
What we have to do is to define just which health services we are actually talking about , to decide just which services are covered by the subsidiarity principle , for such services cannot , indeed , by reason of their character , be seen as ordinary services subject to the operation of the market , and the public need to be protected .
I shall be very frank in saying that I am very sad that the vote in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Liberals ' amendment made things less than certain ; the overwhelming majority in this House rejects paragraph 71 , and that includes us , for it amounts to a backward step , and we want to make an active contribution to the process of consultation on the regulation which the services directive set in motion .
Let us not constantly confuse the mobility of patients with the way we handle the freedom to provide services .
Patient mobility is not a matter of dispute .
The issue of how to regulate the freedom of entrepreneurs to provide services demands a nuanced regulation and careful handling , and the Member States must not be discharged from their responsibilities in that respect , for it is they - and not those who make Europe 's laws - who have to ensure the highest quality standards .
( HU ) I welcome the fact that when numerous European Union Member States are working on reforming their health care systems , the European Parliament should also examine the question in a separate report , and I congratulate my fellow Member , Mrs Vergnaud , on her work .
Health care is an area in which tension between social and economic opportunities and obligations increasingly prevails .
The technological and digital revolution of the contemporary world tantalises us with ever more promising solutions in the field of prevention , treatment and cure , but the high costs of progress are beyond the reach of many .
We can say that the task of a social Europe , a Europe of solidarity , is to ensure that every citizen of the European Union can access advanced medical services , regardless of his or her nationality , income or national boundaries .
Certainly public health is not an economic , industrial or commercial service .
Yet the services that support and gravitate around health care are almost exclusively profit-oriented sectors , and indeed they need their profits to sustain further research and development and innovation .
Europe , and we European politicians , must therefore also find a solution to ensuring that the markets in prevention , nutrition , leisure , diagnostic tools or medicines and medical instruments do not rely solely on the already scarce public health resources in order to be able to grow .
Although we are only now looking for solutions to the above challenges , what is certain is that a precondition of every solution is that the burden be borne jointly , as something that is the responsibility of all 485 million inhabitants .
It is unacceptable , for instance , that in Hungary there are 1 million people , and not the poorest among them , who make use of universal health care without paying a single penny into common funds .
Social and economic solidarity demands that employees and employers contribute to the realisation of legal security and equality before the law .
( EL ) Mr President , the provision of health care is a public service and cannot be left to the unaccountability of the free market .
The appropriate framework for addressing the mobility of patients exists in Regulations ( EC ) Nos 1408 and 883 / 2004 .
All problems can be regulated within this framework , not by overturning it .
Addressing health services  la Bolkenstein will result in a lower standard of health services , in a reduction in public services for the benefit of private services and , of course , in less health protection for the socially weaker .
The effort to integrate health services into the Bolkenstein Directive ' through the back door ' with the famous Manders Directive and / or with the amended directive waiting in the wings must be rejected categorically .
For the European Parliament , which voted differently on this issue a few months ago , this stand is a serious question of credibility and consistency .
I trust that we will not change our tune again this time .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Member States must respect European Court of Justice rulings and the Commission must integrate them into social security regulations .
I am talking about the right to the reimbursement of healthcare costs abroad .
When patients receive first aid they do not have to seek approval first from their insurance company .
The Commission and the Member States must reach agreement on what is considered non-urgent care for which the patient has to request this prior consent .
Last year Parliament succumbed to false arguments and , under pressure from the left , the unions and some governments , removed healthcare from the services directive .
Consequently , this right has yet to be implemented in law , since Regulation 1408 from 1971 has not been updated .
The idea that mobility would lead to a deterioration in care is nonsense .
I therefore call for greater trust in foreign healthcare , and for the associated right of patients to information on the quality of healthcare facilities .
We call on the Commission and the Member States to coordinate healthcare quality control systems , without the Union impinging on the powers of the state .
The key programmes are Patient Safety and national or international accreditation for hospitals and ambulance services .
If patients are informed about which foreign hospitals are voluntarily abiding by international or national standards , they will feel more confident of being well looked after even if they perhaps do not speak the language .
This is the most important factor when it comes to trust in European healthcare and to rebutting expedient arguments against patient mobility .
I know that my proposal to remove obstacles to the provision of non-State - that is to say , private - services abroad has become a political issue .
It is my fervent wish that doctors and nurses may overcome the obstacles put in their way by politicians , who play down the public 's right to a wider selection of health services and are frightened of free choice .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to start by giving the Commission credit for consulting this House and all the stakeholders at this early stage concerning the new directive , something of which I am sure one could not always be certain .
This makes me confident that the new directive is being planned carefully and will incorporate not only the relevant assessments of impact on society , lawmaking , and subsidiarity , but also European citizens ' rights .
Rules on health care across borders have become necessary , and many members of the public expect them to be in place - I am referring to workers in our border regions , to migratory workers , to pensioners in south-eastern Europe and Greece , and , indeed , to Europe 's long-distance drivers , about whom I have just been reminded - and not only to all these , but also to all the other workers who were formerly unable to benefit from these things , which were - as has been said a couple of times - reserved to private patients .
It is for that reason that I find it all the more absurd that the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left in this House want to further entrench the privileges of those with private health insurance .
If the opening up of the national systems is done with caution and care , it will be something from which we can all benefit .
Constructive competition among service providers , competition between the best methods , the most useful research and the most successful strategies in the health sector - all these things can be useful , subject , of course , to the criteria to which I have already referred and which do not apply in the internal market , namely quality , safety , solidarity and sustainability .
I am sure that this House will not fail under any circumstances in allowing those criteria to prevail .
( SK ) I would like to thank Mrs Vergnaud and the shadow rapporteurs for their work .
First of all , I would like to speak about the different types of mobility possible in healthcare .
For example , the cross-border provision of medical services , meaning that a service is provided from one country to another without patients and health professionals leaving their home territory .
Such services include telemedicine , remote diagnosis , remote drug prescription and others .
Secondly , there is patient mobility in the conventional sense , which we are mostly talking about .
More specifically , it is the use of services abroad , when a patient goes to where the provider is established in order to be treated .
Thirdly , qualified persons may be temporarily present in another Member State , which is known as the mobility of health professionals with the aim of providing services .
The fourth possibility is to provide such services permanently , by establishing healthcare facilities in another Member State , as my colleague , Mr Karas , indicated before me .
For all of these types of mobility to be gradually legislated and subsequently implemented , we must first formulate and answer several basic questions .
These are as follows : Are there common values and principles for healthcare which all EU citizens can rely on ?
How can we ensure a reasonable financial compensation mechanism ?
How can patients and experts identify and compare healthcare providers ?
To what extent are Member States flexible in eliminating unjustified obstacles to free movement ?
How can we ensure long-term care and social services ?
There are many more such questions .
The Commission , as well as the Council and Parliament , must jointly find answers to these questions through legislation dealing with the effects and consequences of healthcare services being excluded from the directive on services in the internal market .
( EL ) Mr President , health is not and cannot be approached as a commodity which , even worse , must be subject to market conditions and competition .
Health has a public utility mission and that is why it must meet a series of criteria such as quality , accessibility , universality and solidarity .
We must put an immediate stop to efforts to extend the market philosophy to the health service sector on the pretext of modernising it , which the Court of Justice has facilitated in its own way and which the spokesmen of economic liberalism are now bringing back on stage .
Unfortunately , this has already happened with some social services .
Let us not allow it to be repeated here .
There is no point in bringing health services back within the scope of the Services Directive .
This approach was rejected by the European Parliament last November .
The European Commission must have the courage , it must use its right to take legislative initiatives and propose a sectoral directive on health services .
It must also have the courage to propose a framework directive regulating social services of general interest .
You , my honourable friends of the right-wing majority , have contributed once again to the lack of credibility of the Union , by unexpectedly reintroducing the question of bringing health services under the Services Directive , known as the Bolkenstein Directive .
Act in accordance with your responsibilities and do not play with the lives of European citizens .
Prove with your vote that health is not a commodity .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , I shall begin in French for the purposes of saying something to Mr Goebbels .
I have been described in many different ways during my political life , but this is the first time that I have been called an ultra-liberal .
That is why I should like to explain myself , because I believe that the statement that I made to the Figaro and also to the Financial Times has not been understood correctly .
So that I can ensure that I am understood correctly , I shall continue in English .
What I was saying to the newspapers was that the existing situation was not my policy .
What I was describing - and I would like to come back to this - was the reality after the European Court of Justice judgments , which stated that internal market rules apply to healthcare even if it is publicly funded .
Probably it is not Parliament 's policy , but it is a reality with which we have to work .
It is inevitable that , if people can travel to seek treatment abroad , there may be some competition ; people should have the choice .
So the challenge for us is how we can make this right , recognised by the European Court of Justice , work primarily for the benefit of European citizens but not so as to undermine and destroy Member States ' healthcare systems .
A lot has been said about the subsidiarity in Article 152 and I would like to remind you of what the Court said on that .
The Court said that , even though Member States have the right to organise and deliver health services and medical care , this does not exclude the possibility that Member States may be required under other Treaty provisions to make adjustments to their national health systems .
Hence the application of internal market rules .
So this is the first legal reality we have to work with , but of course we also have a factual reality .
Unfortunately there are inequalities in European healthcare systems : Member States cannot offer the same level of healthcare to their citizens .
People who seek treatment travel abroad and , if they are refused this right , they go to the Court of Justice .
I think you will agree with me that we cannot have every citizen going to Luxembourg and seeking a judgment from the European Court of Justice to decide whether he or she can have an operation .
That is why we are faced with the challenge of how can we make these principles established by the Court work both for citizens and Member States .
I must emphasise that our main target is to deal with the inequalities that exist in the European Union .
We have policies and strategies , which we will be able to discuss later this year , on how to achieve this .
It is also very important that we recognise what has been said already , i.e. that citizens would rather have treatment at home , near where they live , and this is the main priority for all of us .
But , until we deal with inequalities , people will need to seek treatment abroad .
Also , as we have already said , it makes more sense in border regions to cross the border than to take a long journey to your country 's capital .
There are also scientific reasons : sometimes specialised treatments may be better provided in another Member State .
The existing legislation does not cover these issues because it is not just a question of patient mobility .
We are also working on safety , quality , patients ' rights and the patient 's right to information .
All these require legislation that is more thorough than the existing legislation .
Furthermore , the principles in the existing legislation are different from those described by the Court , so we also have to deal with this .
The challenge is how to make all this work .
I believe that we are now dealing with one of the most important initiatives in this area .
Patient mobility should complement , not replace , the provision of healthcare at home .
This is the main objective , but all citizens should have the same opportunities , irrespective of their income or education or language skills .
They have to be able to take advantage of this right in a way that will be decided by the policymakers , but it must be decided on the basis of equality for all European citizens .
Medical tourism is a totally different issue .
We are not dealing with that , we are not touching on that , we are not encouraging that .
This is something that is dealt with by the private sector , private citizens , and private funds .
It is not something that we will be working on .
Again , it is a reality : people travel because they want to combine holidays with medical treatment , but that is not something we are working on at this time .
It is important to deal with the issue of overall cross-border healthcare as soon as possible - now , proactively - before it becomes too big to handle .
It is not just the issue of paying for health assistance , but also the availability of health assistance which may be overburdened by incoming patients .
That is another issue we will take into account .
We will combine all the interests of the patients .
In view of the realities that we face and in spite of different approaches and different ideologies on the details , it is therefore very important that we work together to achieve what is best for the European citizens .
I intend to do that and I hope the European Parliament will work with us to this end .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to acknowledge formally to Commissioner Kyprianou that he is not an ultra-liberal and I have listened very carefully to him explain his general outlines .
That being said , Commissioner , what really shocked me in the Commission communication was the following sentence , which I shall quote : ' Any Community action must respect the principles already laid down by the Court of Justice in this area ' .
True , we must comply with the case-law , but , in all of our countries , the legislators are there to , if necessary , change the legal texts if the courts venture into dangerous territory .
I believe that the judgments of the Court of Justice are often too liberal .
It is up to us , as colegislators , and to the Commission , to get things back on an even keel , if necessary .
Madam President , I shall be very brief because I do not disagree , but it all depends on the context .
I shall not go into the legal argument now , but we will take everything into account .
I have said from the beginning , and I do not hesitate to say this publicly , that I believe policy decisions should be taken by the policymakers , not by the courts .
We will have the opportunity to discuss a specific proposal , but always bear in mind the parts of the Court 's judgments that interpret the Treaty .
When it is the Treaty , which is the ultimate legal instrument in the European Union , legislation has to comply with that .
When it is not the Treaty , we have flexibility .
However , as I have said , we have legal services to advise us on that .
Let us agree on the policies first and then we will find a legal way of doing it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 23 May .
Halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Adamos Adamou , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
Madam President , the report on which we are to vote is about halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
This is a subject , the topical nature and importance of which is something on which the majority of us agree .
That is also the reason why such a small number of amendments was tabled by my honourable friends , together with the fact that the report was passed unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I should like to congratulate the Commission on its communication , on its conceptual approach , its priority objectives for 2007-2008 and its key supporting measures .
Nonetheless , I must at this point express my profound concern at the continuing loss of biodiversity and the related decline of ecosystem services .
I believe that we all recognise the urgent need for an effort to meet commitments to halt the loss of biodiversity in the European Union by 2010 .
The action plan is a vital tool and is our last opportunity to bring together actors at Community and Member State levels on key actions to meet the 2010 commitments .
I recognise , however , that the action plan will be insufficient to conserve biodiversity and sustain ecosystem services in the longer term .
To continue , I must stress that it is exceptionally important for the Natura 2000 network to be completed on land and at sea and for effective management and adequate financing of the network .
I must also stress the importance of timely and effective implementation of the Water Framework Directive to attain good ecological status of freshwaters .
I urge the Member States to ensure that projects funded by Cohesion and Structural Funds do not harm biodiversity and ecosystem services but optimise benefits to biodiversity .
Passing on to another issue , we must recognise and address the fact that invasive alien species are a key threat to biodiversity and that the spread of invasive alien species is exacerbated by the increasing movement of peoples and goods .
As far as trade is concerned , no one can ignore the ecological footprint arising from EU trade on biodiversity .
I call on the Commission and the Member States to take immediate action to adopt measures to prevent or minimise negative impacts from such trade on tropical forests .
The Commission must come forward as soon as possible with an analysis of options for further legislation to curb imports of illegally harvested timber .
Climate change is a very important chapter and a separate policy area in the Commission communication .
It is of vital importance to develop an ecosystem approach for adaptation to climate change , in particular in relation to policies which affect land , water and marine use .
As far as funding is concerned , I cannot hide my disappointment and strong concern at financial constraints for support to biodiversity actions resulting from Financial Framework decisions .
It is the responsibility of Member States to take up all available opportunities under the CAP , CFP , Cohesion and Structural Funds , LIFE + and the Seventh Framework Programme and to allocate national resources .
Greater consideration must be given to financial needs in the 2008-2009 budget review , during which there should be an assessment of the sufficiency and availability of EU financing for biodiversity , especially for Natura 2000 .
I wish to thank my two honourable friends , Mrs Avril Doyle and Mrs Marie Anne Isler Bguin for their amendments , especially Mrs Bguin for adding hydroelectric energy to paragraph 67 , which I had omitted to do .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw your attention to the conclusions of the survey requested on biodiversity on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety : it would appear that initiatives to halt the loss of biodiversity are unsuccessful due to the impossibility of implementing them and the lack of political will .
The European Union action plan up to 2010 is very ambitious but , unfortunately , it does not propose simple solutions to the problem of implementation and the lack of funding and political will on the part of the Member States .
It is up to us to send a strong message and to exert pressure on our governments so that the ambitious objectives of the action plan are achieved .
Madam President , first of all I would like to apologise on behalf of Commissioner Dimas , who regrettably could not be here today .
It was precisely one year ago that the Commission adopted its communication on halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 and beyond .
Given that tomorrow is International Biodiversity Day , it is a fitting time for Parliament to debate its report .
I am pleased that Parliament is using this opportunity to send a clear message to the world on the importance of protecting the planet 's biodiversity .
The theme of this year 's International Biodiversity Day is ' biodiversity and climate change ' .
I have said before , and wish to underline today , that biodiversity loss is as great a threat to the planet as climate change .
Like climate change , biodiversity loss is an economic problem , a social problem and a growing threat to global security .
Both issues are closely linked .
Climate change is a major force behind species loss while at the same time the loss of ecosystems contributes to climate change .
Fighting climate change is now at the heart of the European project and is at the top of national political agendas .
Unfortunately , the same is not yet true for biodiversity loss .
Perhaps the threat is less apparent , but when we stop to look at the facts the situation is every bit as worrying .
Human activities mean that extinction rates are already between 100 and 1000 times the natural background rate - around 30 000 species a year , or three species every hour .
If this process remains unchecked , we will have erased millions of years of evolution within the next few decades .
This dramatic species loss matters because it weakens ecosystems of which species are the building blocks .
The UN 's 2005 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment has two key messages .
The first is that we are all ultimately dependent on ecosystem services , such as raw materials , medicines and clean water , for our prosperity and wellbeing .
The second is that ecosystems are being fragmented , degraded and destroyed to the extent that some two thirds of the services that we receive from ecosystems are in decline .
Combined with environmental threats such as climate change , increasing population levels and increasing per capita consumption , this means the pressures on species and ecosystems are intensifying .
Without urgent action we will soon reach a point of dangerous and irreversible change in global ecosystems , just as without action we will soon reach a point of dangerous climate change .
As with climate change , the window of opportunity to prevent dangerous ecosystem change is rapidly closing .
Last year 's biodiversity communication represents a first attempt by the European Union to set out a coherent response to the problem of biodiversity loss .
It should be seen as one of the most important policy documents issued by the Barroso Commission , and there are two innovations which are of particular significance .
The first is that the communication introduces the concept of ecosystem services into the EU-level debate .
It highlights the extent to which these services are essential to our prosperity and wellbeing and makes the vital link between biodiversity loss and the decline of those services .
The second innovation is that the communication sets out a very specific action plan for the period 2007-2013 .
The action plan is an important step forward since it spells out what needs to be done both at Community level and at Member State level .
It is only through complementary actions at these two levels that we will be able to make the necessary progress .
The action plan also makes it clear what needs to be done to meet the European Union 's commitments to halt the loss of biodiversity in the EU , and to reduce significantly the rate of loss worldwide , by 2010 .
With the inclusion of a process for regular evaluations against a clear set of targets , both the Commission and the Member States can be held to account on its delivery .
I am very pleased to know that Parliament 's report welcomes the communication and its action plan .

I wish to thank the rapporteur Mr Adamou for his efforts , and Mr Berman and Mr Gklavakis from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Fisheries respectively for their contributions .
The report echoes the equally warm reactions of the Council , the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee , as well as that of environmental NGOs .
It seems we have a broad consensus on what needs to be done .
The challenge now is changing this political support into real actions on the ground .
There can scarcely be a more important question for any parliament to debate than the survival of life on earth .
I urge you to use this opportunity to send a clear message on the gravity of biodiversity loss and the need for full and vigorous implementation at all levels of the biodiversity communication and its action plan .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( NL ) Madam President , with this important report by Mr Adamou , Parliament is sounding the alarm bell .
The pattern is all too familiar .
The Commission and Parliament show their ambition as regards the environment ; the Heads of Government and Ministers follow suit by making solemn pledges and even go so far as concluding agreements , only then , however , to fail to put their money where their mouth is .
The Member States put up barriers where Europe 's general interest calls for action .
Despite consensus in Brussels concerning them , ambitions come to nothing due to short-term interests in the Member States .
Protecting biodiversity should be a priority in all areas of policy .
From the vantage point of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the assessment of the agricultural policy in 2008 will represent an important new opportunity to halt the loss in biodiversity , although this requires a bigger budget for rural development and more emphasis on protecting nature and the landscape .
This also calls for a critical assessment of measures in the framework of cross compliance .
It is , after all , wonderful and logical that farmers should be paid for their services in the environment , provided this initiative proves its effectiveness in terms of biodiversity and a sustainable Europe .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( EL ) Madam President , first of all , I should extend my warmest thanks to Mr Adamou for the very fine work he has done .
I do not , however , wish to congratulate the national governments which undertook in 2001 to take certain measures which , alas , they have failed to take , and has resulted in the continued decline of biodiversity and loss of organisms .
As Mr Borg said , three species become extinct on our planet every hour .
I see from UN statistics that there is a danger of 54 % of freshwater organisms becoming extinct in the European Union .
There are numerous reasons for this decline , of which two are the most important : the contamination of waters and overfishing .
We are responsible , as are fishermen .
Our objectives must be to reduce the contamination of waters , regardless of whether it is contamination that comes from the land , from industry , or contamination that comes from the sea , because we must not forget that , over the last 15 years , 55 000 tonnes of oil were spilled into the Mediterranean from shipping accidents alone .
The second objective must be to increase fish stocks .
We must understand one thing : we should only fish the quantities of fish that the sea can replenish .
If we fish more than that , we are committing a crime against the environment .
We must also use best fishing practices .
We need to launch a global effort here so that third countries also adopt these best fishing practices , because we who live in the Mediterranean want to save the Mediterranean , but the Mediterranean washes the shores of 27 countries , 7 of which belong to the European Union , and third countries often do much greater damage .
Overfishing must be reduced and best fishing practices must be used .
Otherwise we are committing a crime against our children 's future .



on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Doyle , the shadow rapporteur , let me thank our colleague , Mr Adamou , for his report .
It is a positive report and it pushes all the right buttons : it talks about the Natura 2000 and the Birds and Habitats Directives ; it talks about the effective implementation of REACH and water and pesticides legislation ; it expresses the concern we all share over the financial constraints on Natura 2000 and other biodiversity actions .
I also welcome what Commissioner Borg has said along these lines , and I particularly echo what has been said about the inaction of Member State governments in the European Union .
Our target was 2010 - not ' 2010 and beyond ' - but we are nowhere near reaching our target of halting biodiversity loss by that year , which is not so far away .
On the way here , I read an article in The Times , which again referred to the loss of habitat , the use of pesticides and the introduction of alien species that we have heard so much about .
This article was about birds - thousands of bird species under threat .
Overall , 2 033 species are in danger ; 86 % of the most threatened species are threatened because of the loss or deterioration of habitat due to factors such as dams , fishing , cattle numbers , etc .
Alongside this is the issue of alien species , and Mrs Doyle , if she were here , would refer to the grey squirrel and the damage it has done to the red squirrels native to our continent , particularly in Britain but now in Italy and spreading north through France and Spain .
We see the damage of the harlequin ladybird .
We see the Chinese mitten crabs .
They are there , they are damaging and they are dangerous not only to human health but also to the health of our environment and our natural native species .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to thank Mr Adamou for his report and to welcome the measures and actions that he presents in it .
Those measures are many and varied , but it seems to me that , today , things would be clearer and more effective if we organised our priorities into a hierarchy and if we targeted the most urgent matters , even if it is not easy to do so .
Indeed , as we fall further and further behind in applying our decisions , the measures to be implemented are , for their part , becoming ever more numerous and necessary .
We also know that , when it comes to the environment , everything is interwoven .
It was almost two decades ago that we realised that we had reached the limits of the biosphere and that we were at a standstill .
And yet , we are not taking in practice the strong decisions that we advocate in our texts , in spite of the increasingly alarming prospects before us .
Protection of biodiversity , as has been said , must take place at all levels of public policy : transport , agriculture , territorial planning , tourism , fisheries , and so on .
We know this too , and yet Cardiff is well and truly buried in the drawers of the Commission .
Let us hope that , as part of the work to be carried out within the temporary committee on climate change , the cause and effect link that exists between this phenomenon and the loss of biodiversity will make progress possible .
Finally , I should like to highlight a specific point in Mr Adamou 's report regarding GMOs .
I strongly support the request put to the Commission to evaluate the impact of GMOs on ecosystems and the potential risks that they carry where biodiversity is concerned .
Let us not forget that human beings are part of biodiversity .
So , as you just said , Mr Borg , and , since we are playing from the same score in this House this evening , let us act , let us implement our action plan and let the European Union finally set an example !
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to start by saying a few words in praise of the progress we have made in the European Union .
We have banned some products , pesticides and practices ; we have cleaned up our rivers and have protected some significant areas from development and the results are there to be seen .
In Britain , for example , red kites and raptors are in greater numbers in our skies , otters are returning to our rivers , but as is so often the case it is one step forward and then one or two or three steps backwards , with habitat destruction continuing , with invasive alien species causing havoc , and all too often our own direct activities killing .
Sometimes we are wholly at fault , the classic example of the way in which we are denuding our seas out of sight all too often out of mind , and our policies there , as Commissioner Borg knows better than anyone , are simply unsustainable and ludicrous .
Sometimes the damage is inadvertent .
Changing farming practices , for example , are not intended to wipe out bird species , but that is one of the effects in some instances and we wait with interest to see whether the results in the changes to the common agricultural policy produce positive results .
Sometimes we do not know who or what is at fault , but as politicians we still avoid adopting the precautionary principle .
How else do you explain the mad decision of those Member States who voted to reject the Commission 's plans for the recovery of eel stocks , numbers of which have fallen catastrophically ?
Short-term considerations like these mean that species are now heading too often towards extinction .
Setting a target for halting the loss of biodiversity is easy - especially when it is nine years off - it is the most easy thing in the world to find a target a long , long time off .
But now that deadline is fast approaching and some hard decisions have to be taken if the target is to be reached .
More than half way through their term , I think some Commissioners can start to see the end of their own positions starting to loom .
I hope they will use the remaining time well .
Decisions based on short-term political expediency will be quickly forgotten , but firm steps to reverse negative trends and protect species will earn them the respect of history .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I too should like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur on his excellent work .
Of course , the title is very ambitious : how can we halt the diversity and disappearance of vegetable and animal species by 2010 and beyond ?
How we would so very much like to think this possible !
However , we know how difficult it is , in the short term , to set to music the various European and multilateral instruments for which we are writing the score every day in this House .
At a time when the citizens ' and the media 's attention is focused on climate change , we need to highlight the importance of biodiversity , because there is no better strategy for combating climate change than to promote the dynamic development of ecosystems : Commissioner Borg made this point very effectively a few moments ago .
As you will have gathered , biodiversity requires a dynamic approach , and when we reason about in situ biodiversity in Europe , we are talking about the preservation of vegetable and animal species from territories that are managed and planned as close to the local populations as possible .
Accordingly , the political will and governmental capacity to open a dialogue are imperative when it comes to developing and supporting special environmental networks , such as Natura 2000 .
On the other hand , ex situ management of biodiversity refers more to the practice of conserving animal and vegetable species .
Above and beyond the collections - the dusty collections , I would say - in our museums , ex situ conservation , as we conceive of it today , means , of course , avoiding the worst by conserving genetic material in agricultural centres : it is being put in a safe place , allegedly .
For my part , however , I wonder about the funding of the advisory groups for international agricultural research and about the way in which they operate , as they must integrate local and indigenous communities .
To conclude , I should like to stress , of course , how important it is for our populations and our territories that European regulations are implemented properly , because we know that everything is connected and , for example , the water framework directive must be applied .
As far as biodiversity is concerned , water is a medium that makes ecosystems dynamic right from the start .
Thus , instead of referring to a vague notion of ' good ecological status ' , it is crucial that we ensure that freshwaters do not deteriorate .
( LT ) Madam President , together with the rapporteur I join in loudly ringing the warning bells .
In the three decades leading up to 2000 the diversity of animal and plant species in the world has diminished by 40 % .
At that time the European Union resolved to stop the reduction of biological diversity by 2010 .
Time is running out .
If we do not manage to stop the extinction of animal and plant species in the world , we shall have to raise a white flag and admit that human activity is destructive of nature and that our limitless lust for profit and pleasure may destroy the human family itself .
In many of the new EU Member States there is a lack of information about the disappearance of animal and plant species , and about the importance of this problem .
Amid the implementation of projects funded by the Cohesion Funds and the Structural Funds , there is still seldom any thought or discussion about avoiding doing harm to biological diversity .
The European Commission should expand the network of ' Natura 2000 ' territory involving the 12 new Member States .
In those countries biological diversity is generally greater than in the old EU Member States ; therefore , it is essential to protect it , using it for ' green ' tourism .
EU citizens need to understand the benefits to be derived from biological diversity and ecosystems . Considering that the reduction of diversity has an effect on the production of food , fuel , materials and medicines , on the regulation of water , air and climate , on the maintenance of agricultural soil fertility , and the circulation of foodstuffs .
Unfortunately , at the moment we are living on credit and depriving our children and grandchildren , who may find themselves in a more and more barren world in which they can only see formerly living creatures in museums , photographs and films .
The Commission is correct in proposing the integration of biological diversity and the care of ecosystems into the policies and programmes of all important fields , likewise the protection of the biological diversity of the oceans and the reduction of pollution in farming and industry .
Much financial support and attention is needed for this .
The means employed to control climate change must not be detrimental to biological diversity .
The EU must set an even clearer example to the world of how economic growth can be coordinated with protection of the natural environment and preservation of animal and plant species .
Madam President , let me first start with my appreciation for the quality of this evening 's debate .
I am also greatly encouraged by the report and would like to comment in particular on three of the issues .
First of all , you welcomed the conceptual approach of the communication , which places an emphasis on the link between biodiversity loss and the decline of ecosystem services .
You recognise the vital importance of healthy ecosystems for prosperity and wellbeing .
You suggest that the main tenets of ecosystem services should become a fundamental goal of all EU horizontal and sectoral policies and you call on the Commission to study and make proposals for practical measures to internalise the cost of biodiversity loss .
We are already working on these matters and I would like to highlight a new initiative of the Commission and the German Presidency to prepare an economic review of the costs of biodiversity loss similar to the Stern review on the Economics of Climate Change .
I believe that such a review could prove a turning point .
By raising awareness of the costs of inaction , we will have an opportunity to focus political opinion on the need for unprecedented action to halt the loss of biodiversity .
Second , I would highlight your opinions on the theme of biodiversity and climate change .
You stress the importance of an ecosystem approach to climate change adaptation .
Third , you recognise that the action plan is a vital tool to bring together those involved at Community and Member State levels to meet the 2010 commitments .
What matters now is the extent to which this action plan is actually implemented .
On the point raised by the rapporteur with regard to alien species , let me say that work is ongoing , and if gaps are identified that warrant new legislation at Community level , then we will consider the need for proposals in due course .
Indeed , in my area of responsibility , a proposal for a Council regulation on the use of alien species in aquaculture is ready for adoption .
On the issue of financing , I would like to state that in 2004 the Commission proposed that future Community co-financing for Natura 2000 should be integrated into the major financial instruments .
Also , provision has been made for nature biodiversity funding in LIFE + , Community international development cooperation funds and in the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
However , let me underline that the communication points out that the financial decision of the European Council in December 2005 influences the funding available under these instruments .
It makes clear that Member States will need to ensure adequate funding also through own-resources .
Regarding the target of halting biodiversity loss in the EU by 2010 , although time is fast approaching , achieving this target is possible , but will require accelerated implementation at both Community and Member State levels .
Regarding the points on fisheries , which is my own area of responsibility , I cannot agree more with Mr Gklavakis that we need sustainable fisheries and we need to work in this direction both in Community waters and in international oceans and seas .
I would like to say in this regard that the targets and actions for biodiversity in the field of fisheries policy , as laid down in the communication , are fully consistent with the common fisheries policy and most of them are already in our work programme for the coming years .
I can quote a number of examples of the common fisheries policy 's contribution to the protection of biodiversity , for example the recovery plans for several stocks of fish , the catch and fishing effort limitations , legislation to protect cetaceans against by-catch and protecting habitats , such as deep-sea coral reefs , and the Mediterranean Regulation , which was adopted last year , contains important provisions to reduce the impact of fishing on the seabed .
More measures are in the pipeline .
I could mention the March 2007 communication with regard to gradually reducing unwanted catches and eliminating discards in European fisheries .
It involves the adoption of a progressive fishery-by-fishery discard ban and the setting of standards for maximum acceptable by-catch .
Work is also progressing on the extension of the Natura 2000 network to marine areas in coordination with DG Environment and on the fight against IUU fisheries .
On eel stocks , I intend to go back to the Council in June , and I agree that this time round the regulation needs to be adopted without any further watering down .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
No one is entirely sure how many life forms exist on Earth , but the number of species is estimated at approximately 20-30 million , of which we are familiar with barely 1.8 million .
Unfortunately , many species died out due to the ravages of civilisation before we had a chance to discover them .
In the past century , the loss of biodiversity has occurred on a larger scale than ever before in human history .
Research shows that each year 140 000 species disappear from the Earth . The responsibility for these disappearances lies squarely with human activity : the destruction of forests and water , soil and air pollution .
According to a recent report , between 20 and 30 per cent of all plant and animal species could die out if the rise in global temperature exceeds 2.5  C.
Therefore , it is essential that the European Commission propose a long-term strategy that will truly put a stop to the loss of biodiversity .
In the interests of this effort , it is important that direct financing from EU sources be given to the Natura 2000 programmes as soon as possible , since these were set up in order to protect biodiversity .
In Hungary , too , it is very important that landowners to whose territory protection under Natura 2000 has been extended should not be disappointed by the European Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) Biodiversity is more than a priority , it is a necessity , and we need to act swiftly in order to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
The European Union is the first to set itself real objectives in this area ; let us hope that it sets an example to the rest of the world .
Sustainable development and sustainable hunting are not just terms of the moment ; they are indeed the symbol of a change in industrial and production practices and in the world of hunting .
Hunters and hunting organisations have not , incidentally , waited for the European Union , the MEPs and even less this report to set themselves obligations in terms of respect for species and areas ; this is thanks mainly to the foundations for the protection of habitats and wild flora , which have been taking effective action for several years now .
That is why I should like hunting not to be condemned but , rather , supported in its efforts to promote good environmental management .
In view of this , I can only regret the wording of Article 20 , which makes hunting partly responsible for the deterioration of biodiversity , thus failing to take into account the existence of sustainable hunting .
Financial Instrument for the Environment ( LIFE + ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Marie Anne Isler Bguin , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , concerning the Financial Instrument for the Environment ( LIFE + ) ( PE-CONS 3611 / 2007 - C6 0105 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have come to the end of a particularly long journey , and , in order to conclude this conciliation on the financial instrument for the environment ( Life + ) , I should like first of all to thank my fellow shadow rapporteurs : Mrs Gutirrez-Cortines , Mrs Ries and Mrs Lienemann .
I believe that , without them , the conciliation could not have been brought to a successful conclusion because , I must point out , if we have obtained entirely positive results , it is because we defended a strong position within the European Parliament and because , together , we stood up , I would say , to the Commission and to the Council on several points .
I should like also to thank Parliament 's services and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I am grateful also to the Commission and to Commissioner Dimas , in particular . I wish him a speedy recovery .
I know that he cannot be with us this evening , but I thank him , as well as his services , for having helped us to carry this conciliation through to a successful conclusion .
I should like , finally , to thank the Council , even though it is not present this evening .
I believe that we can thank Mr Gabriel and the Council representatives who helped make a success of the conciliation because I recall that , on the evening of the conciliation , we had the impression at times that facing us were ministers for the budget rather than ministers for the environment .
Indeed , as MEPs , we were defending a solid budget for the ministers of the environment , while they were giving the impression that they did not really want it .
To conclude the list of thanks , I should like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , who chaired Parliament 's delegation at the conciliation , together with the chairman of our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , Mr Ouzk .
With your permission , I shall remind you of one or two things .
We are at the stage of third reading and , therefore , of conciliation .
I would remind you that the work on this Life + report began at the same time as the examination of the financial perspective , since we felt that a Life + budget - which comes under the financial package for the environment for the next seven years - could not be established outside the financial perspective .
That is why we forced the committee responsible for the financial perspective and Mr Bge in particular , since we felt that the environment budget for the next seven years was nothing but a meagre budget and that it needed to be increased .
We wanted to increase it to the figure mooted by the Commission .
Thus , by integrating , for example , the management of Natura 2000 , we should have increased the Life + budget by EUR 21 billion .
We knew full well that that was an absolutely enormous sum and that the resources did not allow it , but we had banked on that strategy in order to show that , in actual fact , there was no budgetary heading specifically devoted to Natura 2000 in the EU budget .
That was our strategy at first reading , and it won us virtually unanimous support .
Yet , of course , at the stage of the common position , we were not really heard .
The rapporteur for the budget , Mr Bge , did us a good turn by agreeing to grant EUR 100 million .
One hundred million euros for Life + is a derisory sum given the needs that we have , given the needs that we make so much of when faced with our fellow citizens : the fight against climate change , the fight against the loss of biodiversity , the decontamination of our soil , the purification of our rivers , the fight to save our groundwater , and so on .
I shall stop there .
The fact remains that those EUR 100 million were of course welcome , because we take everything that there is to take , but to our great surprise - and this is what made us angry - of the EUR 100 million that had been allocated to us , EUR 50 million had disappeared , had been allocated to the general budget .
That made us very angry , but what made us angrier still was the fact that the sharing out of budget-related management activities was totally unacceptable to us , as the European Parliament .
We believed , and still believe , that environmental protection must be managed at European level : this is a policy that is a positive point for the European Parliament , a positive policy , with which our fellow citizens identify .
This policy therefore needed to remain at European level , and the strategy implemented by the Council and the Commission at second reading allocated 80 % of the management of the budget to the Member States .
We were unable to accept this kind of re-nationalisation of European policies .
That is why our aim was to ensure that the Council agreed to keep the management of the environment budget in the hands of the Commission .
I believe that we have been truly successful since , during conciliation , the Council did in fact agree to several things : that the management of the EU budget be centralised , that is to say , that it be managed at European level ; that the Commission double its resources for the management of the environment , that is to say , that there be an increase from 1 % to 2 % ; that 50 % of the budget be allocated to biodiversity and to environmental protection ; and , finally , that it be possible for the 2007 budget to be applied this year and for NGOs to obtain financial resources starting this year .
I therefore believe that we have done some very good work , Madam President , and , once again , I am grateful to everyone , to the Council and to the Commission , for having been able to conclude this conciliation , and for having done so , I might add , along the lines proposed by Parliament , for the good of our fellow citizens , because we are here to represent our fellow citizens .
Madam President , first of all , on behalf of Commissioner Dimas I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Parliament 's delegation which took part in the conciliation meeting with the Council on 27 March .
In particular I would like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , who led Parliament 's delegation , and the rapporteur , Mrs Isler Bguin .
I would specifically like to commend the rapporteur for her excellent contribution throughout the negotiations , not least for the decisive compromise proposal she made in the evening of the conciliation meeting , which helped us reach a quick deal on LIFE + .
I am delighted that we have been able to resolve the outstanding difficulties and to arrive at a satisfactory outcome .
As now proposed , LIFE + will co-finance projects which will contribute to improving Europe 's environment .
It will strengthen networking , communication and environmental governance and help share good practice throughout the European Union .
Many stakeholders are waiting for the first call for proposals under the new programme which the Commission intends to publish shortly after the entry into force of the regulation in the early autumn .
The Commission fully supports the conciliation text and I would encourage Parliament to endorse the good result obtained by its negotiating team .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for her remarks .
I have taken good note of them .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , the LIFE programme procedure , particularly during the final stage of the conciliation procedure , demonstrates the extent to which we are seeing a series of contradictions in Europe and how necessary Parliament still is as direct representative of the citizens .
The LIFE project has always been a reference project : many NGOs , many professionals , many municipalities , have learnt what European policy is and have learnt to compete and wish to be involved in environmental policy thanks to the LIFE programme .
Any people , however small it may be , is proud to obtain a LIFE project , and the same is true of the consultancies , of the officials who work on these projects and of society itself .
Nevertheless , with the contradiction we are seeing now , when , on the one hand , we are ' intergovernmental ' and , on the other , we want a European Constitution , at the end of the first reading it had been decided that the funds would be managed by governments with national agencies .
Parliament was opposed because it believed that , if something is working perfectly - as in the case of LIFE - there is no need to change it .
If we already have European added value , and if an image of excellence and quality has been created , why not keep it ?
Following a long battle , therefore , we have achieved a situation in which the money is partly allocated to the countries , but we have maintained the situation - and we have managed to persuade the Commission and subsequently the Council to agree to this proposal - in which all projects have a right to be heard and assessed by the Commission , although firstly there will be a filter of countries .
I want this message to be recorded clearly in the Minutes : they all have the right to be assessed by the Commission .
Finally , ' transnational projects ' mean that , for the first time , the rivers , the water that passes from one country to another , the birds and the air itself , have been provided with an arena for work at international level .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Isler Bguin , who has used a great deal of her energy , skill and talent to secure this very positive decision today .
I should also like to thank my fellow shadow rapporteurs , because I believe that it is the united front of all the groups in this House and the understanding of the Commission that have enabled us to succeed .
The political signal sent out by our Parliament is clear : we want to defend environmental policies with budgets , because , while it is important for Europe to enact rules and to set objectives , it is just as important for it to release financial resources so as to pave the way for action at local level and also for innovation , exchanges of experiences and new practices .
The second message is that we are defending a Community principle , a European principle , and not simply an intergovernmental principle .
Environmental policies are the policies that are regarded as being the most legitimate by all of the EU Member States - they are policies that are regarded as having a Community dimension .
It would have been stupid for LIFE to have been re-nationalised when our fellow citizens expect more in the way of integration , and I shall not reiterate here the arguments put forward by my fellow Members , who have pointed out that the Member States were obviously making proposals , but that the final arbitration fell to the Commission , and that it was then crucial to provide the Commission with back-up resources , as much for the purposes of studying the dossiers as for those of taking stock of the innovations , via communication , exchanges and activity weeks - well done !
Well done on doubling the amount of appropriations that will thus be devoted to the Commission !
Well done also on the transnational projects .
It is truly important for practices to unite different countries that have common aims , countries that , at times , do not see the link that unites them with regard , for example , to biodiversity , and that , thanks to LIFE , may have the opportunity to demonstrate their similarities when it comes to their actions and exchanges of experiences .
Finally , I should like to conclude , Commissioner , with a wish , and that is that the Commission honours the commitment that it made to our rapporteur and properly takes stock of all the appropriations that have been harnessed for Natura 2000 , so crucial is it for this major fight for biodiversity to be supported locally because , in many cases , on the ground , people are still doubtful or are not always aware of what is at stake .
In any case , well done on this conciliation - on this final agreement - and long live LIFE !
Madam President , my first words of thanks today go , of course , to our rapporteur , Mrs Isler Bguin , and also to my fellow shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Liennemann and Mrs Gutirrez-Cortines , for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , with whom for two years - as they have said - we have constantly tried to convince the Commission , and above all the Member States , I would say , of the relevance of this Brussels-initiated and controlled environmental policy .
In this regard , let us not deny ourselves a good thing today : the outcome of the conciliation , which you publicised brilliantly on 27 March , Madam President , is a tremendous learning experience .
In politics , we are fond of saying that fights are often won in adversity : the European Parliament 's delegation for Life + will have provided the proof that fights can also be won in unity , beyond political divisions and in the general interest of the citizens , of Europeans .
My second remark is that I note that the European Commission has nothing to gain from limiting itself to a common role , I would say , when the Treaties grant it clear responsibilities , such as those in the field of environmental policy .
Mrs Isler Bguin has already done a brilliant job of summing up all the progress made by this conciliation .
I shall not go back over it .
For my part , I should like to emphasise what I feel is our most symbolic shared success : I mean , of course , the gaining of a Nature and biodiversity section , which should cover at least 50 % of the budgetary revenue , of the operational budgetary resources .
It was crucial to increase this funding for Natura 2000 .
Firstly , I would say , because Natura 2000 is going well .
Mrs Gutirrez-Cortines mentioned the pride of those who were due to receive this funding .
In the Brussels-Capital region , which I know well , there are no fewer than 2 333 hectares , or 14 % of the regional territory , with the famous Sonian Forest and the Woluwe Valley , among others , that are part of these protected sites .
At EU level , the figures also very much speak for themselves : Natura 2000 consists of more than 25 000 sites ; it is a network that is present in 16 capitals and that covers nearly 20 % of the terrestrial area of the EU-27 .

Next , as Mr Adamou and other Members pointed out in the preceding debate , the European Union committed itself , in 2001 in Gothenburg , to halting the loss of this biodiversity by 2010 : three years from that deadline , we are far from having fulfilled that commitment , and that is an understatement .
True , the budget for Life + may seem obscene , is obscene : 1.51 % of the EU annual budget , or EUR 1 894 billion over seven years , but I remain hopeful that the European Union , the Member States , and the regions and towns will come into line with the aim of guaranteeing the ongoing funding of Natura 2000 .
I also hope that we will not be told that , with EUR 308 billion , or the combined budget of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , the budgetary resources are not enough to protect the environment .
This is nothing more and nothing less than a question of priority and of credibility with regard to the citizens of Europe .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for the Europe of the Nations Group in the debate on the LIFE + instrument , I should like to highlight the following issues .
Firstly , the LIFE + Financial Instrument for the Environment ( 2007-2013 ) amounts to a continuation of most of the programmes already undertaken by the Environment Directorate-General , for example the LIFE 3 Programme which supports the sustainable development of cities , and the non-governmental organisations ' programme .
Secondly , we should welcome the fact that through the conciliation procedure Parliament was able to convince the Council that the European Commission should be responsible for central management of the programme as it has been so far .
Thirdly , it is right to point out also that Parliament 's stance was taken into account and funding for implementation of the instrument was increased by EUR 40 million .
Fourthly , the Council also took account of Parliament 's stance in so far as at least 50 % of the LIFE + budgetary resources shall be allocated to projects concerning environmental protection and biodiversity .
Fifthly , it was also decided jointly that at least 15 % of the LIFE + budget shall be allocated to transnational projects .
As most of the key European Parliament amendments were accepted during the conciliation procedure , the UEN Group will be voting in favour of this report .
As I conclude , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur and all those who contributed so effectively to the conciliation procedure .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating all those who took part in the conciliation process on LIFE + and reached an agreement that we consider very positive , insofar as Parliament has managed to secure a significant increase of EUR 40 million in relation to the Council common position .
This is a win-win situation , in particular for the European environment .
Among the measures eligible for LIFE + I should like to highlight the monitoring of the forests , actions aimed at information and communication and , in particular , awareness raising campaigns and training for agents involved in forest fire prevention initiatives .
These measures meet our concerns , as expressed in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety 's own-initiative report on natural disasters , for which I was the rapporteur .
Another very important point is the guarantee that at least 50 % of budgetary resources for LIFE + is to be used to fund projects supporting the conservation of nature and biodiversity .
The Council , in its common position , had proposed to provide only 40 % , which is clearly inadequate in view of the requirements for funding the Nature 2000 network and the implementation of the Habitats Directive .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to thank Mrs Isler Bguin for the report on the Financial Instrument for the Environment ( LIFE + ) .
The conciliation committee agreed the text of the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council .
This regulation is a sound financial instrument and will promote the interests of the environment in European Union Member States .
The fund will be used mainly to limit the changes resulting from the greenhouse effect such as droughts and floods , and which are detrimental to forests , nature and biodiversity .
The directive rightly points out that these funds may not be used on administrative expenditure that is not directly related to implementation of LIFE + actions .
Monitoring of expenditure from the LIFE + fund by the European Parliament will ensure that the money is used correctly in the most appropriate areas .
Continuous monitoring is essential due to the wide range of actions involved and the limited resources available .
Implementation of all the projects will bring added value to the European Community .
Resources for this programme must also be increased as favourable circumstances arise .
If the regulation is implemented correctly , I believe LIFE + resources will make it possible to implement the actions planned .
I should also like to thank everyone who worked so effectively in the conciliation committee .
( DE ) Madam President , tomorrow , in its third and last reading , we will be adopting the Regulation on the ' LIFE + ' financial instrument for the environment , and I should like to congratulate Mrs Isler Bguin on the outcome of conciliation as part of the overall lawmaking process and thank her for her dedication , which was made more than necessary by the very different positions taken up right through the lawmaking process .
LIFE + has as its general objectives the implementation , updating and further development of the Community 's environmental policies and environmental law .
For these things , money is needed , and precisely that was the sticking-point ; the subject of the most heated debates was that of how much money we needed , and , above all , of how such money should be managed .
We have not achieved everything that we thought we would through the conciliation procedure , but we have managed to get an increase of EUR 40 million , and have also managed to secure the retention of a system of central administration , for the Member States wanted to administer 80 % of the funds themselves , but we have ensured that the policy for this will continue , in future , to be Community-based .
Under the LIFE + Regulation , the only projects funded will be those highlighting exemplary practice or conducting demonstrations relating to the management of Natura 2000 areas ; that is why it is necessary that appropriate funding be guaranteed for the management of the Natura 2000 networks , and it is the Commission and the Member States that will have to do this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Environmental quality standards in the field of water policy ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Anne Laperrouze , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy and amending Directive 2000 / 60 / EC C6-0243 / 2006 .
Madam President , I am pleased to open this debate on the proposal on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy , which complements the Water Framework Directive , which is the centrepiece of water protection for the European Union .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for its considerable efforts .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Fisheries , and in particular the draftsman and draftswomen , Mr Rbig , Mrs Bourzai and Mrs Corbey respectively , for their very constructive and supportive input on this important file .
Protecting rivers , lakes , the coastal and marine environment from pollution caused by hazardous substances is a key priority for the Commission .
Since the 1970s when the Community took its first decisive action we have made significant progress .
However , as we solved some pollution problems , others emerged .
The chemical cocktail in our waters has become more complex and the sources of pollution are no longer concentrated at one point but are widespread and diffuse .
There has never been a time for complacency .
To tackle the pollution problems caused by these dangerous substances the Commission has proposed or adopted more than 30 Community acts since the Water Framework Directive was agreed .
I cannot list them all , but let me highlight some as an example .
First , the Commission has banned or restricted the marketing and use of 16 of the priority substances of the Water Framework Directive .
Further decisions on some pesticides , biocides and other existing chemicals are in the pipeline .
Second , the milestone agreement on REACH , the new EU chemicals policy , will require authorisation of the most hazardous substances and reduction of risks for all other chemicals regulated under the Water Framework Directive .
In summary , I underline again that also in the future the Commission is committed to providing the necessary instruments for emissions control where they can result in the most efficient and proportionate action to resolve pollution caused by priority substances .
At the same time I am committed to the principles of better regulation and to coming forward with additional proposals only where it can be demonstrated that the Community is the most appropriate level at which to act .
I shall now turn to the Commission proposal for a directive on environmental quality standards for priority substances .
The objective of the proposed directive is to set harmonised and transparent criteria for assessing good chemical status of surface waters , which must be achieved by 2015 .
Thus the most important part of the proposal is Annex I : the quality standards which must be respected in all rivers , lakes and coastal and territorial waters .
As you know , for marine waters the proposed Marine Strategy Directive will ensure the same level of protection regarding hazardous substances pollution in areas where the Water Framework Directive does not apply .
I underline that the proposed values for quality standards already reflect the risk to the marine ecosystem that these substances may pose .
In addition , the proposal identifies two additional priority hazardous substances and repeals several directives which were adopted between 1982 and 1990 .
However , the proposal does not include additional measures for emissions controls for the reasons that I outlined earlier .
The Commission believes that emissions controls are adequately covered through other existing Community legislation such as the directive on integrated pollution prevention and control .
As a closing remark , I would like to emphasise that we share the objective of a high level of protection of the water environment .
The Commission published its first implementation report for the Water Framework Directive on 22 March 2007 , World Water Day .
It highlighted that , despite the progress , there is much work to be done , in particular by the Member States , if we want to achieve sustainable water management by making the implementation of the directive a success .
The current proposal is another step in this direction and I am committed to working with the European Parliament and the Member States to achieve the goals that we jointly set for ourselves in the year 2000 .
However , there are many more steps to take and I call for your support in this process .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you pointed out just now , Commissioner , that the chemical pollution of surface waters was a threat to the aquatic environment , the ecosystem and , hence , human safety .
You said , in fact , that the aim of this daughter directive of the water framework directive was to combat the spread of toxic substances in surface waters .
To this end , an inventory of emissions , discharges and losses is to be implemented with the aim of verifying whether the objectives of reducing or phasing out emissions and losses of pollutants have been met , in accordance with Article 13 ( 7 ) of the framework directive , the deadline for the phase-out objective being 2025 .
In fact , this directive will result in the abrogation of the existing daughter directives that are cited in Annex IX to the framework directive .
This directive therefore sets limits in terms of the concentration in surface waters of certain types of pesticides , heavy metals and other chemical substances that endanger aquatic flora and fauna and human safety .
The impact studies that have been carried out by the Commission have resulted in the definition of environmental quality standard levels , expressed as an annual average offering a level of protection against long-term exposure and as a maximum allowable concentration , for protection against short-term exposure .
However , some of the EQS values are still subject to debate , not least those relating to benzene and cadmium , hexachlorobenzene and hexachlorobutadiene , mercury , nickel , lead and poly-aromatic hydrocarbons too , because some impact studies have not been finished , a state of affairs that has , in spite of everything , hampered us in our debates .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety highlight the desire to establish common methodologies aimed at guaranteeing an appropriate level of protection and at preventing distortions of competition among the Member States .
We also wondered about the possibility of authorising transitional areas of exceedance .
Indeed , if we deleted this paragraph , would we be any further forward ?
What matters , in fact , is the area of analysis .
If we did not define any transitional areas , there might be a perverse effect , whereby we avoided controls in those areas and , therefore , were unaware of what was going on there .
We have therefore proposed to allow the Member States the option of establishing transitional areas , but with the obligation of reducing these areas in order to reach the environmental quality standards in the long term .
We also mentioned the special case of port areas where , due to the mixing of bodies of water caused by the dredging of rivers and estuaries , the quality standards and analysis methods appear unsuitable .
We discussed at length the advisability of adding highly toxic substances to the list of substances initially proposed by the Commission .
A compromise was finally reached on this matter .
We call for the Commission to carry out an analysis of these new listed substances and for it to give its opinion on their final classification , as priority substances or as priority hazardous substances , and to do so at the latest 12 months after the entry into force of this directive .
Our compromise relates to new emission control measures .
We would emphasise emissions control .
While the Commission is in fact relying on the existence of other legislative provisions on chemical pollutants , such as REACH , IPPC or indeed the Pesticides Directives , we call for the Commission to carry out a thorough assessment of the consistency and effectiveness of all the legislative acts that exist and that are liable to have an impact on water quality and , if necessary , to adapt or propose new acts .
To conclude , I should like to thank the Commission representatives and the various people who helped me to draft this report and , of course , my fellow draftsmen of the opinion , for their constructive cooperation on a very technical matter .
I must say that it was a pleasure to work with them .
I now call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to endorse this report so that we obtain a text that makes it possible to monitor the effectiveness of EU environmental legislation , that is to say , a text that makes it possible to know whether , by 2025 , we will have succeeded in eliminating the emissions from these substances that are highly toxic for human beings and for the environment .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Laperrouze for her outstanding cooperation on what is a technical and difficult dossier , albeit one that is of great importance in terms of the 27-Member Europe , since the efforts at harmonisation serve also to prevent distortions of competition within Europe .
As is the way of things with technical dossiers , though , there are also approval procedures and administrative burdens , which need to be constantly reviewed in the light of the need for better regulation , with its present target of a 25 % cutback in administrative regulations in Europe .
I believe that considerations of better governance make it necessary to set the right priorities , because , for small and medium-sized firms in particular , technical regulations and reviews involve not always or only costs , but are also associated with burdensome administrative chores .
It is for this reason that I am asking the Commission to keep on reviewing the technical practicability of these rules , to keep them up to date and , of course , to scrutinise their costs as to their proportionality .
That will be a fundamental requirement as time passes and bearing in mind the various stages that are planned .
That brings me to the absolute ban on deterioration , which , in practice , can bring in its train numerous problems in industry and agriculture .
We all know that , when we are dealing with water , we can have floods one day and areas of drought the next .
If this absolute ban on deterioration were brought in in this area , these rules would make for enormous problems in agriculture and industry within a short period of time .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , may I also express my congratulations to Mrs Laperrouze .
We started off on a very good footing and we worked well together throughout .
We started off by putting the safety of the public and the environment first .
I think that was particularly important .
The proposed directive sets limits on concentration in surface water of a number of substances including some pesticides , heavy metals and other dangerous chemicals and substances already mentioned by the rapporteur .
These chemicals pose particular risks to both human health and animal and plant life - particularly aquatic life - and therefore this dovetails well as the final piece of the jigsaw in the Water Framework Directive .
It is important that pollution is controlled and that there is a coherence with the Water Framework Directive .
The Commission must establish common methodologies for guaranteeing an adequate level of protection while avoiding distortion of competition .
The amendments proposed for plenary for the EQS vote are designed to make the text less confusing , more feasible and easier to implement .
The suggestion of two new recitals aims to ensure coherence with the Water Framework Directive requirements on priority substances .
There is currently no consensus on how to take measures , again mentioned by Mrs Laperrouze on the sediment and biota , and until we get the scientific data set on these levels , we need to look very closely at it .
Instead of setting levels now for Member States , we should monitor the concentrations of substances in the sediment and biota with a view to reaching a framework standard .
The purpose of this proposal is to protect the environment and human health .
This is a very important aim but it is important that all elements of the Water Framework Directive are workable and realistic .
Part of this is keeping the cost to a reasonable level and to bear in mind that the targets cannot be met without necessary technical ability .
I thank the rapporteur once again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have here an extremely important daughter directive of the water framework directive .
I would remind you that this framework directive provides for the restoration of the good ecological status of surface and fresh waters in the European Union by 2015 , and I must tell you , Commissioner , that its very slow implementation worries us greatly .
The fact remains that it was crucially important to provide a framework for the ban on priority substances and priority hazardous substances , some of which must disappear , and to enact standards relating thereto .
Originally , the framework directive provided for complete consistency with the international conventions on seas , not least the OSPAR Convention .
This convention contains a list of substances that are destined gradually to disappear , and my group felt that it was vital systematically to integrate into the list of priority hazardous substances in the directive those that appear in the OSPAR Convention .
However , for the sake of compromise , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament accepted the proposal made by our rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze - to whom I should like to pay tribute for her sterling work and personal commitment - and withdrew its amendment .
In any case , the PSE will ensure that , once the work of the experts and the impact studies are complete , the Commission actually sets to work on achieving the highest level of protection because , as you know , what is at stake is not only the quality of our waters , but also the quality of our seas and oceans and consistency with the ' Marine strategy ' draft directive , which we examined at first reading .
As for the rest , we fully endorse the proposals that have been supported by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which I shall summarise as follows .
Firstly , that there be identical measuring methods throughout the European Union , which , I might add , will be easier for the Member States and clearer for Europeans .
Secondly , that there be transitional areas , of course , but with a cut-off date that was set , or in any case proposed , at first reading as 2008 , if I remember rightly .
Thirdly and finally , the very important point that we gradually ensure that our legislative proposals are fully consistent , so often criticised are we for accumulating different ideas , and the final arbitration must be made clear to Europeans .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) The environment is one of the EU 's top priorities , and drastic measures are needed if we are to succeed in creating an environmentally sustainable future .
The Baltic is one of those seas that is in desperate need of tougher environmental regulations if it is to recover and survive .
I therefore wish to draw attention to a number of those aspects of the Commission 's proposal concerning environmental quality standards that we must get to grips with .
There is a conflict between the Commission 's proposal and recommendations by international organisations such as the Helsinki Commission , for example on subjects such as DEHP .
It is also contradictory that , according to the Water Framework Directive , the Commission is to check that the Member States meet their obligations to reduce emissions by no later than the year 2015 whereas , in the new proposal , this has been changed to 2025 .
What is more , a new article is proposed that would permit what are called transitional areas in which the permitted levels for environmentally hazardous substances might be exceeded .
The Commission provides no satisfactory explanation of why these transitional areas should be introduced . Nor does it propose any mechanism for achieving satisfactory water quality in these areas .
This may lead to our environmental legislation being seriously undermined .
We need common , strict and clear sets of regulations if we are to get rid of the environmental poisons in our waters .
That is something we must not compromise on or put off until some future date .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , in 1995 , the countries around the Baltic Sea agreed to put a stop , in the course of the next 25 years , to discharges of a number of the most dangerous substances .
The objective was included in the OSPAR Convention and in the revised Barcelona Convention .
We in the European Parliament also adopted this principle in the Water Framework Directive , although no deadline was set .
The Commission then apparently forgot all about the matter , however .
A long time went by - not two years as agreed , but four and a half years - before the Commission came up with its proposal .
Furthermore , the list of dangerous substances was far too short .
Ambitions in relation to the aquatic environment collapsed .
That is bad not only for water but also for the EU 's reputation .
The aquatic environment is something of concern to the peoples of Europe , and we in the EU must live up to people 's expectations .
We must not renege on the promises that we have made so clearly and so often .
Fortunately , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety thoroughly aligned itself with the Commission 's proposal .
We owe a debt of gratitude to Mrs Laperrouze for the work she has done among the group chairmen on bringing about important compromises .
The committee has since voted through a number of improvements to the Commission 's proposal , so we do now in fact have a splendid outcome .
As usual , we have experienced considerable pressure from the reactionary industries that refuse to modernise their production methods .
In the vote tomorrow , however , we , in the European Parliament , are the ones who must ensure that the EU complies with the objectives in the OSPAR Convention and the Water Framework Directive .
We must not defer to old-style industry that causes pollution .
We owe it to our environment , our health and our descendants to stand firm .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for the work she has done .
There are , however , two points I should like to make .
My first comment is about cases in which compliance with environmental quality standards in a Member State is technically unattainable or gives rise to disproportionate costs , both socially and economically .
I should like to see a derogation for these of the kind provided for in Article 4 of the framework directive on water .
My second comment is about the inventorisation of losses .
Shipping and tidal action , for example , result in polluting substances being released from the sediment .
These substances have previously been dumped and should not be designated as losses , since these were dumped at an earlier stage .
In order to make these changes , we in the Independence and Democracy Group have tabled two amendments , Amendments 66 and 67 , which I trust you will support .
( SK ) I would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for her report on water policy .
The report under discussion today is closely related to another one , of which I am a rapporteur , namely the one concerning a thematic strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides .
All of the eight substances listed in the group of other pollutants are pesticides , as well as most of the substances from the group of priority pollutants .
The pollution of European water by pesticides and other chemicals is very serious .
This justifies the need to deal with the problems of surface water and pesticides at the level of the European Union rather than individual Member States .
I therefore warmly welcome the introduction of the Environmental Quality Standards , which will become binding on all 27 EU Member States .
In my report I deal inter alia with water environment protection .
Recently proposed measures aimed at improving protection include the creation of protective zones at least ten metres wide along watercourses and a ban on aerial pesticide spraying , including a ban on the use of several pesticides in the vicinity of watercourses and quantitative restrictions on their application .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to reclassify as priority pollutants the eight substances in the group of other pollutants .
However , water-related issues are not merely a problem of the European Union , and cooperation with third countries is therefore also important .
The implementation of these measures in the European Union will be ineffective as long as polluted water continues flowing into EU Member States from third countries .
Some regions of East Slovakia , which are among the poorest parts of the country , have inadequate ground water supplies .
Drinking water is prepared through the treatment of surface rather than ground water .
These regions of Slovakia often face very basic problems , with sewerage systems being inadequate or even absent in some regions .
Hence it is understandable that this part of Slovakia is characterised by a high incidence of gastrointestinal diseases .
As a result , we are spending large amounts on treatment and vaccination .
We must prevent such problems by providing healthy drinking water .
Investing in the quality of surface water is investing in health .
Slovakia has been using only about 25 % of available structural funds for environmental purposes .
This percentage is disconcertingly small .
I propose a higher percentage .

( HU ) The directive before us fills a gap and is extraordinarily relevant ; nowhere is this more evident than in the fact that for six years now there has been an increasingly vehement debate between two Member States precisely because of the lack of such a regulation .
At the centre of the European Union , the relationship between Austria and Hungary is increasingly strained by the fact that three Austrian leather factories are releasing their industrial waste water into a river on the border between the two countries .
This causes the river to foam , but the Austrian authorities continue to defend themselves with a straight face , claiming that current EU regulations permit this to happen . They argue that each of the factories is observing the limit values for effluent , that is , emissions .
However , they brazenly keep silent about the emission effects of the several tonnes of industrial waste water that is poured daily into this river , with its low water yield .
This directive finally takes into account the carrying capacity of natural bodies of water and , moreover , would ban 70 dangerous substances , including for instance pesticides , detergents , and solvents as well as heavy metals .
These substances endanger the sustainability of the ecosystem as well as human health .
My proposed amendments , which include the naphtalene sulfonate emitted by the aforementioned Austrian leather factories among the dangerous substances , received the support of a large majority of the Committee .
For this reason I am confident that Parliament will adopt a strict regulation at the vote tomorrow .
I would ask my fellow Members to support my proposed amendments as well as those of the Commission , and let us use our political efforts to protect our natural waters against becoming industrial sewers .
And another thing : I consider the timeframe , according to which the directive would come into effect in 2015 and would ban the direct flow of discharge or pollutants into the surface waters by 2025 , to be too long .
Madam President , I welcome this report on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy .
However , I feel that this policy is not comprehensive enough for Ireland 's water supply system problems .
In Ireland so much of our drinking water is surface water ; up to 25 % of public water supply in the country is at risk of contamination from the cryptosporidium parasite .
In 2005 the water supply of Galway was identified as being at very high risk , and now today households cannot use water in Galway .
There are outbreaks of gastrointestinal illness in both the city and the county of Galway .
Another factor contributing to the water problem in Ireland is the waste effluent from factories like Aughinish Alumina , County Limerick , which has been a major source of pollution to the local and surrounding area with its toxic red mud deposits leaking into the water supply .
In Ireland we add hydrofluorosylic acid to our drinking water as a so-called medicinal product in order to prevent dental decay .
It is illegal to force-medicate populations with this dangerous toxic waste substance , which has caused an increase in bone disorders .
Water is a basic human right , a necessity .
We hope that this directive will ensure high-quality water for the Irish people .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I rejoice that we are now at last deliberating on the last foundational piece of legislation needed for a comprehensive European policy on water provision and also for the implementation of the Water Framework Directive .
It is better to provide in the first place than to make up for deficiencies afterwards , and that is particularly true in the case of water , which we need for our own survival .
The Water Framework Directive stipulates that the priority list of substances is to be revised regularly and updated in line with current scientific knowledge , and so the list we are drawing up is not static or final , but part of a dynamic process that has to make it possible to include new knowledge and new substances , substances that are developed and then used , as is demonstrated by the many examples adduced by Members today .

We cannot always list and take into account all the effects of a substance ; for example , when the contraceptive pill came onto the market in the 1960s , it was at first hailed as a revolutionary triumph , and it was only later that it turned out that the hormonal substances were enriching themselves in our waters , so it follows that ongoing observation is necessary , and that is our understanding of the list of substances in Annex II , in which , by way of a compromise , the rapporteur has compiled the substances that Members regarded as actually or potentially hazardous .
It is now for the Commission to examine what is to be done with these substances and then to put proposals to that end before Parliament .
This list is to be seen as no more than a list of substances that have to be examined ; it neither categorises them nor pre-assesses them , nor does it claim to be exhaustive .
All the substances must be assessed scientifically , and , if it emerges that they are to be categorised as dangerous , they should be classified as such at once .
Any good European water policy must , if it is to act to protect people , take account of the latest knowledge and assessments .
( DE ) Madam President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for this outstanding report .
It is of the utmost importance that we produce this directive , which is to complete the Water Framework Directive , in good time , and , as the rapporteur has said , no less vital that pollution be combated at its source and point of origin and that various sources of pollution be dealt with using the same methods , while guaranteeing the prevention of distortions of competition and good water quality throughout the EU as a whole .
I would like to say something about a couple of amendments that I see as very important .
In particular , the absolute ban on deterioration , to which Mr Rbig has already referred , brings with it a number of problems when it is put into practice ; we have to ask ourselves whether it is appropriate for us , in this place , to enact something that will then make economic activity markedly more difficult .
To some extent , that question misses the point , for restricting the applicability of transitional zones to lower waters alone also constitutes an extremely serious hindrance to the management of water resources .
We should also examine ways in which the selection and categorisation of the priority substances may be accomplished in a scientifically correct manner , and this will require the submission of a few more studies if we are to have a proper scientific basis for the imposition of the relevant requirements .
I would like , in particular , to express my support for Mr Sturdy 's Amendment 75 , which highlights the need for technical feasibility and , in particular , the avoidance of disproportionate costs .
Mr Olajos referred to a bilateral problem between Austria and Hungary ; as far as I am aware , a commission has already been appointed to look into it , and we do , of course , take a particular interest in its being resolved by the two countries together .
( SK ) I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Laperrouze , for her excellent work in drawing up this important document .
The fact that we have been discussing water purity in the European Parliament over the past two years demonstrates that this issue is very much on the public agenda .
Today 's topic is related to the Ground Water Directive , both logically and in terms of substance .
I am glad that in discussing the two preceding standards the European Parliament and Council have reached a result , even though it is known that their differences had to be overcome through conciliation efforts .
I firmly believe that as Members of the European Parliament we must be more ambitious than the Commission 's proposal and that we should put forward some additional entries which are currently missing from the list of particularly harmful substances .
I am referring in general to teratogenic and carcinogenic substances , as well as to heavy metals , which find their way into surface and even ground water because of the defective processes employed by industrial companies .
Last but not least , it is necessary to punish severely those whose negligence and gross indifference cause seepages of petrol , oil , and oil products into surface water and reservoirs of ground water .
As it happens , Slovakia , like the neighbouring Czech Republic , has had the unfortunate experience of a massive pollution of water , including ground water , in connection with the deployment of the Soviet armed forces that occupied the country for 21 long years .
It is also necessary to prevent the seepage into water of particularly harmful pesticides that are used excessively in agriculture and that directly jeopardise the health of the population .
However , in setting the number of extremely harmful substances we should take into account scientific information and evidence as to their harmfulness to humans and other living organisms .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to draw up draft legislation in order that new binding standards may come into force by 2015 at the latest .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I speak in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on this proposal for a daughter directive resulting from the water framework directive .
I should like first of all to congratulate Mrs Laperrouze on the excellent work that she has done in relation to this complex and highly technical matter .
I am particularly pleased with the vote cast in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , since 12 of the 21 amendments that were tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have been adopted .
To put it briefly , our committee 's aims were : firstly , to point out the precautionary , preventive action and ' polluter pays ' principles ; secondly , to highlight the need for the rational use of land as part of an ecological form of agriculture ; thirdly , to establish national and Community complementary measures for implementation , such as the definition of other pollutants and specific monitoring programmes for sediments and biota ; fourthly , to highlight the need for a formal evaluation of the consistency and effectiveness of the various Community acts on water quality ; fifthly , to call for the coordination of monitoring programmes and national inventories when a watercourse runs through several Member States ; and sixthly - finally - to demonstrate the need for the Member States to accompany their inventories with a timetable for implementing the objectives for reducing , and indeed phasing out , emissions .
Madam President , I am pleased to note that the amendments under discussion are supportive of the proposed environmental quality standards as put forward by the Commission .
Furthermore , the principles of introducing the new concept of the transitional areas of exceedance and the establishment of the inventory seem also to be acceptable to the European Parliament .
I thank you for this support because I believe that these elements are the cornerstones of the proposed daughter directive .
In addition , there are many amendments in relation to which I fully share the underlying intentions and objectives .
Let me say , first , that I too am concerned about the potential risk that some of the priority substances pose .
I understand that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety proposes that 11 of these chemicals should become new priority hazard substances in amendments 53-62 .
I believe that we can already manage these risks and avoid negative impacts on human health and the environment by implementing REACH and other Community legislation .
I would also like to stress that I share the worries that new emerging pollutants are increasingly being detected in the waters we drink or bathe in .
I understand that the Environment Committee proposes , in amendments 65 , 68 and 78 , the addition to the priority list of 30 new chemicals not previously included in the Water Framework Directive .
The Commission is working on several initiatives , including the collection of recent monitoring data for these and other substances .
The Commission will report to you on the outcome of these initiatives in 2008 as part of the review of the priority list that the Commission will be proposing .
Third , there are many amendments which set out a link with other relevant legislation or which place additional tasks and obligations on the Commission .
Although the Commission is not in a position to accept any of these amendments , mainly for reasons of legal clarity , the Commission fully shares their underlying intentions and objectives in many cases .
Depending on further negotiations , I am committed to using the available resources in the Commission to address the concerns that the European Parliament expresses through those amendments .

On the point raised concerning the possible conflict between international conventions , like HELCOM , and new legislation , I can reassure Mr Lax that there is and will be consistency between international conventions and EU legislation .
This House is currently debating the Marine Protection Directive , which will use existing regional agreements , such as HELCOM , as the key implementation platforms , thus ensuring consistency .
In summary , on the proposed daughter directive , I am pleased to say that the Commission can support 30 amendments fully , in part or in principle .
I will give Parliament 's Secretariat a list detailing the Commission 's position on the amendments .
Finally , a number of additional points have been raised during this debate .
I assure you that I have taken good note of them and will forward your ideas , positions and concerns to Commissioner Dimas , who will certainly give them studied consideration .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Annex - Position of the Commission
Laperrouze report
There are 30 amendments that the Commission can support fully , in part , or in principle .
These are amendments : 1 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 40 , 43 , 48 , 52 , 73 and 79 .
The amendments which the Commission cannot support are numbers : 2 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 19 , 20 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 32 , 33 , 37 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 80 , 81 , 82 and 83 .
Combating violence ( Daphne III programme ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading by Lissy Grner , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing for the period 2007-2013 a specific programme to prevent and combat violence against children , young people and women and to protect victims and groups at risk ( Daphne III programme ) as part of the General Programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' ( 16367 / 1 / 2006 C6-0089 / 2007 .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , standing as I do , not in a full Chamber , but in more of a family atmosphere , I rejoice that this is a good day for the millions of women , children and young people who are on the receiving end of violence , for we have adopted , in an accelerated procedure , the Daphne programme for the prevention and combating of violence and for the protection of its victims , for the 2007-2013 period as a part in its own right of the framework programme for fundamental rights and justice .
At the very outset , it did not look as if we would manage it , and I want to thank Commissioner Frattini for having taken on board this House 's arguments and rejecting the original plan , according to which Daphne would be run in tandem with the anti-drugs programme .
By means of intensive negotiations with , among others , the Council and the Commission , we have succeeded in putting together a clearly-defined programme , Daphne III , as an important element in managing the rising tide of violence in an enlarged European Union .
Parliament having achieved a policy agreement with the Finnish Presidency of the Council as long ago as November 2006 , the Council then , in its Common Position of March 2007 , adopted most of the amendments from first reading - not , admittedly , word for word , but the principles contained in them .
I would remind the House that , for many women , their own homes are the most dangerous of places ; for many of them , from every Member State , abuse meted out to them by husband , partner , father or brother is a fact of daily life .
One out of every three to four women has already experienced some sort of physical or sexual abuse ; what they have gone through in their minds cannot be measured in figures .
The things we are talking about here know no borders : trafficking in women , with the women getting younger and younger ; genital mutilation among immigrant communities ; violent crimes committed for the sake of honour ; the online trade in child pornography ; homophobic violence - the list of areas in which action under the new Daphne III programme is needed is long , and the one I have given is far from complete .
Having , as rapporteur , fought for Daphne for years on end , I rejoice that the increased budget of EUR 116 million makes it possible for us to reach far more NGOs ; the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality insisted on more transparency , on the removal of bureaucratic obstacles and on easier access with the smaller organisations in mind .
We have also managed to retain the helpdesk service and to bring together the expertise available in all the Member States and among our partners outside the EU , drawing on it in a multidisciplinary think-tank with the aim of keeping it better in step with our political efforts .
My expectation is that the Gender Institute , which is soon to be established , will continue to devote itself to this priority of combating violence .
It has to be said , though , Commissioner , that there are two other aspects that have to be addressed without delay , for you promised us , in the debate on the Daphne programme 's first reading , that you would endeavour to establish a legal basis for the campaign against violence , yet , now , in 2007 , we find ourselves in the position - which I , for one , find intolerable - that Daphne III has to be founded on Article 152 , which has to do with health .
This is where it would be appropriate to take another step forward .
Secondly , it was planned - as recorded in the Council 's additional statement on the Daphne programme , and as promised by Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , on 8 March - that an initiative would be set in motion for a European Year against the violence suffered by children , young people and women , which occurs in very many different ways .
Having gained experience from getting Daphne I and II really up and running in every Member State , many of which have benefited by having adopted for themselves the Austrian exclusion law , we will continue to fight for the benefits of shared experience at European level , and for the introduction of national plans of action and legislation in areas that were formerly taboo , by which I mean the private battlefields onto which we hope to shed some light where that was formerly unthinkable .
I therefore recommend that this honourable House extend Daphne III without further amendment , thus enabling us to proceed speedily with its implementation and bring private terror to an end .
Madam President , combating violence in all its forms , and in particular against women , young people and children , is an important priority for the European Commission and for me personally .
The Daphne programme is indeed a key element of the Commission 's effort to combat violence in Europe and give support to victims of violence .
Since the first Daphne initiative in 1997 , Daphne has funded around 460 projects .
This represents a very important European contribution .
This year , 2007 , marks the 10th anniversary of the Daphne programme .
I am very glad that the Daphne III programme is now ready to be adopted .
This new programme will allow the Commission to strengthen its actions to combat violence and that is why - and I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Grner - I agreed from the very beginning to keep the Daphne project separate from any other European programmes , for example the one dealing with drugs .
Daphne III will run from 2007 to 2013 with a total budget , as the rapporteur has said , of more than EUR 116 million , which is an increase of more than 50 % compared with the Daphne II programme .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the European Parliament for the strong support it has shown throughout this process .
I look forward to further collaboration with you in our joint fight against violence .
I take note of the very interesting idea of establishing a European Year against violence towards women and children .
I would just like to highlight one point . Combating violence and protecting women and children is of course a question of awareness-raising , but it is also a question of improving operational cooperation on the exchange of information .
So the idea of having a proper forum where ideas and contributions can be exchanged is a very good one .
We confirm our commitment - and I personally confirm my commitment - to exploring a better way of addressing the issue of violence against women as far as the legal basis is concerned .
Unfortunately , we have thus far been a bit limited on the legal basis , but I can confirm my personal commitment to trying to find a better legal basis to expand the substantial scope for combating violence .
I think that proper implementation of Daphne III will give us good suggestions and ideas which can be translated into practice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Commissioner , there can be no doubt that it is a fundamental right of European citizens and of everyone living in the European Union to enjoy conditions of freedom , security , justice and health protection .
However , daily reality casts doubt on the success of these objectives and the presence of violence is becoming perceptible both in private life and in public places .
The expression of violence is without doubt an instinctive reaction which , however , can be cancelled out if the values and principles imposed by coexistence in a constitutional state and the view of human life and dignity as a supreme value which cannot be compared with any other value prevail in every human conscience .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I congratulate Mrs Grner and everyone who contributed to the formulation of the common position on the adoption of the new programme and I believe that the broad financing will add value to the results of actions from ten years of successful application of the Daphne programmes and the initiatives of the Member States to highlight values and prevent outbreaks of violence , while at the same time offering support for victims .
I would qualify as successful the new combination in the proposal and the potential for cooperation between the Member States and the European institutions .
My comments are confined to their application .
Combined , multilevel actions whose primary objectives are education and the creation of a social conscience which will resist any form of violence and respect human life , from its creation to its natural end .
Transparency and honest evaluation during the selection of action plans , combined actions with other Community programmes and strategies , such as Progress and the future strategy on the rights of the child .
I hope that progress in combating violence within the European Union will be so rapid that , if one of the coming years is declared to be the European Year Against Violence , it will relate mainly to actions to eradicate violence at international level .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , since the issue of funding has been raised a great deal , there is something I should like to clarify .
As we now total 27 countries , and the programme is to run for two years longer , it follows that the 50 % increase is not quite right if we do - as we do - want to make it much more effective , happy though we are that the programme can now get underway , albeit with a late start .
I think it is thanks to the stubbornness of our rapporteur that we have been able to secure certain very important things that we had demanded , namely the removal of the bureaucratic obstacles , increased transparency and the setting up of the helpdesk .
The joint statement , with its support for the year against violence , is something for which we have been calling for a very considerable time .
I would like to make an urgent appeal for us to actually put what it says into practice in order to be able , for the space of a year , to put violence in all its forms at the centre of political activity and , I hope , see better clear-up rates achieved , particularly as regards the trafficking in human beings - women and children in particular .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , one important component of the Daphne programme is sexual violence and combating it .
Unfortunately , international trafficking in women is the world 's third largest grey economy , right after drugs and weapons .
It has been estimated that in Europe alone the turnover figure for trafficking in women is around EUR 200 million .
That is a lot of money , and this is something that actually affects a lot of people .
Trafficking in women is modern-day slavery : a slave trade .
If we want to weed out trafficking in women in Europe , something that on a scale that resembles slavery , we need to take vigorous action .
According to research , just one in four of illegal migrant prostitutes knows beforehand that she will be working as a prostitute .
The others have been lied to or forced into prostitution .
I am glad that the Commission and the European Union have focused attention on this matter , but both the European Union and the Member States still have much to do .
Secondly , I would like to say a few words about violence in the family .
I prefer to speak of violence in the family rather than violence against women , as , regrettably , we women can also be violent , and studies show that women are sometimes even more violent than men , and that when they start to become violent there is no limit to what they might do .
It is good to talk openly about violence in the family , because it improves the chances that women and men will seek care and report those responsible for violence .
Today it is often the case , however , that victims feel so ashamed , especially if the perpetrator of the violence is someone close , that they are reluctant to talk about it .
The more it is spoken about , though , the more people will have the courage to say they have been victims of violence .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , our heartfelt thanks go to the rapporteur .
We know that Daphne is quite outstanding among the EU 's programmes ; it may be small , but it is successful , and has already been able to achieve some crucial advances in the fight against the violence endured by women and children .
Daphne is Europe 's way of showing just how much importance it attaches to combating violence against women , and , as a programme , must be a constant reminder and encouragement to us to put the campaign against that violence - directed not only against women but also against children - centre stage .
In the European Union , one in every three women , and one in every four children , becomes a victim of domestic violence , but fighting that sort of violence is , even now , not yet at the top of the political agenda .
Although I am aware , Commissioner Frattini , that you have had many occasions to mention it in this House , and the rapporteur has done likewise , I would have liked to see us find an independent legal basis and give the war on violence a more central and prominent position .
I would have liked you , Commissioner , to have presented us today with a timetable and made it clear when we can expect the European Union to have a policy specifically devoted to this , so that political support may find expression in action .
What is clear is that violence against women must be stopped ; it is because Daphne is no more than a drop in the ocean that we need , once and for all , an anti-violence directive , and I hope that we will not have too long to wait for it .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , there are three points I should like to make in the context of this debate .
Firstly , I welcome the retention of a specific programme aimed at preventing and combating violence against children , young people and women , and protecting victims and groups at risk .
This is something that we have advocated from the outset and we welcome this result .
Secondly , I should like to state that , although there has been an increase in funding in relation to previous programmes , I am disappointed that the Commission did not accept in full the proposal we tabled , aimed at securing a bigger increase in order to take proper account of EU enlargement and of the serious , ongoing problems of violence against women , including sexual exploitation and the trafficking of human beings .
Thirdly , I wish to call on the Commission as briefly as possible to present the proposal , on which we agreed , to establish a new European Year against Violence against Women , Children and Young People .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , people have encountered violence and aggression from the dawn of history down to the present day .
This represents a serious health issue , testifying not only to illness , personality and psychological disorders but also to the action of individual evil .
The root cause of violence may be traced back to early childhood .
Contributory factors include congenital conditions , illnesses and above all inappropriate upbringing bereft of ethical and moral principles .
Such upbringing promotes the development of narcissism and self-centredness .
Clearly , efforts to combat violence must be directed against physical violence .
They must also , however , target psychological violence which is even more damaging and widespread .
Psychological violence does not occur only in private and daily life .
It is also a feature of different types of lobbying , and of pressure brought to bear ever more frequently in the political arena .
Financial resources must be devoted to preventing violence by teaching how to behave with empathy , and not simply to alleviating the effects of violence .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I particularly welcome the many efforts made by my fellow Members , and also by the Commission , to guarantee the implementation and proper functioning of the Daphne programme - which is designed to prevent and combat violence against women , adolescents and children - by providing it , among other things , with a specific budgetary heading and by substantially increasing its budget .

I should like to take this opportunity to emphasise a particularly disgusting development , incidences of which are becoming ever more apparent in our societies : the ill-treatment of newborn babies .
Indeed , in France in particular , not a week goes by without our reading in the ' news in brief ' section about a new case of a baby being ill-treated or abandoned .
This development , which is linked not only to poverty and social and emotional problems and to the inherent violence generated by our societies , but also to human behaviour tending ever more towards hostility and frustration , to selfishness and to a general lack of respect , could be curbed if more psychological and material support were given to women and to families in difficulty .
There is in fact an urgent need to take preventive measures for these families and these women in distress .
However , these measures should also be supplemented by genuine criminal sanctions .
Whether we are talking about rape or other forms of physical violence that sadly all too often result in death , the scale of sentences is not repressive enough .
The fight against violence also necessarily hinges on the way in which we treat the promoters of such violence .
I am thinking of the Internet , where perverts and psychopaths can give free rein to their obsessions ; I am thinking of video games , where sex and violence are legion ; I am thinking of drugs and other psychotropic substances that put each consumer into a state of trance ; and I am thinking of alcohol which , when consumed in excess , causes enormous damage , not least through its effect of ridding people of their inhibitions .
The fight to be waged against violence begins at the stage of educating our children and of building the future that we want to offer them .
( SK ) When a few years ago voluntary organisations in my country launched a campaign against violence under the slogan ' Every Fifth Woman ' , some sections of the political elite as well as the public were outraged .
They said that what might be true of Austria was definitely not true of Slovakia .
At that time there was no data on violence available in Slovakia .
The most recent surveys indicate that the situation is much worse , with approximately 40 % of pupils claiming that they had witnessed or had even been victims of violence .
Arguably , my country is no better or worse in that respect than the neighbouring countries .
Violence is a particularly grave social problem , as evidenced by the dialogue held with a thousand children and young people in preparing a strategy for children 's rights .
One of the first priorities formulated during the exercise referred to violence experienced by children .
In this respect I welcome the report by Mrs Grner , who has promoted it with extraordinary commitment .
I am extremely pleased that this programme has been so successful and that it is now better funded .
However , it is imperative to establish a better legislative framework to underpin the struggle against violence .
The report on trafficking in human beings underlines the importance of cooperation and , to a certain extent , harmonisation of European and national laws .
I think this is indeed essential in this case , too , and I greatly appreciate Mr Frattini 's efforts on this front .
I would like to highlight the positive and irreplaceable role of voluntary organisations in this area .
In this respect I would also welcome moves to facilitate access to funding for voluntary organisations .
( ES ) Mr President , violence against women is a scourge which no democratic society can tolerate .
Eradicating gender violence is therefore crucial if we are to achieve a society in which there is genuine democracy , justice and solidarity .
Hence the importance of this report .
I would therefore like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent work .
The Daphne programme is an essential instrument for supporting women 's organisations that are fighting gender violence , and its separation from the prevention and information programme in the field of drugs has strengthened it and made it more visible .
It has been a genuine success for this Parliament , as have the increase in its budget , the inclusion of people trafficking and forced prostitution as forms of violence and the reference to genital mutilation and honour crimes .
Ladies and gentlemen , my country , Spain , has a pioneering law for tackling gender violence from all perspectives .
We believe it to be a necessary tool in order to put an end to these crimes within a reasonable space of time .
For all of these reasons , I believe it to be extremely important to draw up a European legal framework as soon as possible for combating violence against women in an integrated manner in all Member States .
I agree with Mrs Grner that we must make urgent progress in that direction .
( SV ) I want to thank Mrs Grner and Commissioner Frattini for their excellent work .
In the Committee on Civil liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I was responsible for sending this report back to the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , where it belongs .
Daphne is an issue dear to the heart of Swedish Social Democrats because it was Swedish Commissioner Mrs Gradin who made such a vigorous commitment to the EU 's role in combating violence against women .
As long as men perpetrate violence against women and children , as long as the sex slave trade involving women and young girls exists , as long as not all women in the EU are entitled to free abortion , as long as women in the EU are affected by honour crimes involving violence and as long as women 's rights in the EU need to be strengthened , we Social Democratic women will continue to fight for Daphne and for proper financial support for the programme .
I regret the fact that we did not obtain support for setting up a network of children 's ombudsmen but , on that issue , I shall get back to Commissioner Frattini and others when we take a decision on the strategy for children .
What is so fantastic about Daphne is that it is the organisations ' ability to try out new ideas and to take inspiration from examples of good practice that we can make use of in the fight against violence throughout the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , the Daphne programme was set up in 1997 and has already helped to fund over 370 projects supporting non-governmental organisations , institutions and associations working to prevent and combat violence against children , young people and women .
A budget amounting to approximately EUR 117 million is planned for Daphne III .
We must welcome the fact that the Council decided to accept most of Parliament 's amendments from first reading , notably those aimed at reducing bureaucracy and providing technical aid for proposals .
It is partly due to Parliament that the very effective special hotline for victims of violence will be able to continue operating .
In addition , a team of experts providing support and advice for victims is to be set up .
The aims of Daphne III are worthy of particular support .
They include support for a common policy on public health protection , combating domestic violence , protecting children 's rights and combating human trafficking .
In this connection , the European Commission must , as soon as possible , consider the proposal by Parliament and by the Council concerning the possibility of an initiative for a European year to combat violence towards children , young people and women .
In conclusion , I should like to thank Mrs Grner , the rapporteur .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
Violence against women within the family is a serious social problem , which is related to the structurally disadvantaged position of women and discrimination against them that unfortunately still exists in this male-dominated society .
We are talking about a humiliating and unjust phenomenon that - albeit to varying degrees - may be found in all countries and social strata , and that adversely affects women 's living conditions , daily lives and participation in the labour market .
I emphasise : violence committed by men against women is unacceptable in a modern , democratic society !
The earlier successes of the Daphne programme make it clear that the programme must be continued .
I consider it an outstanding result , as well as a significant opportunity , that the new programme has more than twice as much funding than the previous one , and thus we will expect even more from it .
Particular attention needs to be devoted , in implementing the programmes , to increasing transparency , goal-oriented approaches and effectiveness , and to making sure that they reach an ever greater segment of society .
In the struggle against this destructive phenomenon , a major role is played by raising awareness and extending social prevention to all areas .
Unfortunately , on the subject of violence against women within the family , there are still no truly reliable and revealing statistical data available that are harmonised on an EU level and thus would be sufficiently comparable .
Every possible means must be used to create the conditions for this to be done .
in writing . - ( HU ) I welcome the initiative whereby Parliament and the Council in a joint statement invite the Commission to consider an initiative for a European Year to combat violence against children , young people and women .
I consider it a significant achievement that upon adopting a common position , the Council acknowledged the success of the DAPHNE programme , and gave its unanimous support to the continuation of the programme for a third phase , which will run until 2013 .
I would like to emphasise as a further positive result that the budget has been increased to nearly 117 million euro , which in comparison to the 50 million budget for Daphne II and the 20 million for Daphne I represents a significant step forward .
I think we can regard as a joint success the fact that in the negotiation process , Parliament succeeded in defending a number of its amendments , for instance facilitating access for NGOs .
The fact that we have been able to ensure that the helpdesk service will continue to operate , and that a think-tank providing expert advice will be set up , is a significant achievement .
I see my own efforts and initiatives reflected in the fact that an agreement was reached regarding the preparation of a joint statement on the European Year to combat violence against children , young people and women .
Finally , as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament 's spokesperson for Roma affairs , I wish to draw attention to the fact that within the Roma minority , which is itself so often defenceless , the most vulnerable members , namely children and women , face multiple disadvantages .
They are the most vulnerable to violence , and therefore I urge special emphasis for their support and protection within the framework of this programme .
Structural policies and EU cohesion ( debate )
The next item is the report by Francisca Pleguezuelos Aguilar , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the impact and effects of structural policies on EU cohesion .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the European Commission on the timeliness of this initiative report .
It is timely both in terms of the fourth debate on cohesion and in terms of the forthcoming debate on the review of the European Union budget 2008-2009 , since the cohesion policy will probably be the European Union 's biggest budget line , and this policy 's added value will be clear to all of us .
My intention in this impact report has therefore been to deal with that impact in four broad areas : the social , the economic , the territorial and governance , making a series of proposals pursuing various objectives .
Firstly , of course , to optimise the synergy between the European Union and the Member States ' various public policies .
Also to strengthen innovation and the territorial dimension of cohesion .
We also aim to measure more precisely , with new indicators , the convergence between the regions and the impact of the cohesion policy .
Finally , to improve governance and raise the cohesion policy 's visibility , because our aim is to bring that policy closer to the European citizens .
In this regard , I would like to highlight some of the proposals in the report .
On the one hand , the need to strengthen administrative capacity in the implementation phase of the new cohesion policy , through the setting up of a network of accredited trainers in order to implement all training measures and , in particular , to implement them at all levels , especially at local level , where I believe most work needs to be done .
With regard to the synergies between the various public policies , this report urges the Commission to explore new ways to combine the Structural Funds with other policies and other Community aid with a view to promoting competitiveness , research and innovation .
To this end , it proposes , in addition , of course , to promoting good practices and measuring the impact of this Fund , that ESPON be endowed with the resources and functions needed to enable it to act as a genuine observatory of good practices .
Furthermore , we aim to strike a territorial balance between rural areas and urban areas , and it is therefore proposed to stimulate the exchange of good practices in networks - in territorial networks - and in particular to support economic areas that are remote from major urban areas .
We must also work on the leitmotiv of the territorial dimension , which is polycentrism , and , of course , the use of new technologies .
With regard to innovation , a factor that is clearly implemented by the cohesion policy , the report proposes , on the one hand , adopting the Aho report , which proposes earmarking at least 20 % of the Structural Funds for promoting R + D + i , and that it be used not just for major projects , but also for smaller projects and particularly in the least-favoured regions .
Similarly , given that more than 90 % of Europe 's productive fabric is made up of small and medium-sized businesses , we believe that it is vital to provide them with easier access to European aid and programmes , particularly with regard to innovation .
We have therefore proposed technology tsars at regional and local level , who , in association with regional projects and networks , will undoubtedly help to make these SMEs more dynamic .
I am sure , ladies and gentlemen , that these and other measures proposed in the report will make it possible to raise the visibility of the cohesion policy and its practical results for the European citizens .
Furthermore , to a certain extent as a result of the events that have recently been taking place in relation to possible relocations in all production sectors and in all countries , including my own , I would like to mention that I have tabled three amendments to my own report that stress and , above all , reiterate the measures already taken up in resolutions approved by this Parliament on relocations of companies and ways to guarantee that companies that receive Community funding do not relocate their activities .
And , above all , that , should they do so , sanctions are imposed on them .
I would call upon you to support these amendments , because I believe that they have already been debated and approved in this House .
I would like to end by thanking all of the shadow rapporteurs and all of the Members whose proposals have enriched this report , which I hope you will support .
Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to come before Parliament to exchange views on the report by Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar , launched by the Committee on Regional Development .
I am told by my colleague , Commissioner Hbner , who apologises for not being able to be here today , that , as in the case of the previous reports , it shows again how excellent and efficient our collaboration is .
I fully share the view that cohesion policy is essential to reducing internal EU disparities on the one hand and closing the gap between the European regions and the world-leading economies on the other .
This is so because cohesion policy is based on a modern paradigm of sustainable development which may be best described as a conditional grant .
In order to benefit from the policy , Member States are required to draw up a medium-term strategy for the use of the resources , to cofinance European aid from national budgets , to work in partnership at national , regional and local level and to respect EU laws and policies .
These conditions have resulted in the development of an efficient management system shared between European , national , regional and local levels - a system of multi-level governance .
On top of this , as the report correctly points out , cohesion policy makes a substantial contribution to the increase of commercial flows within the internal market and , as a result , has spill-over effects outside the regions and countries in which the policy is implemented .
We all have to admit , however , that the impact of our policy has probably not been sufficiently measured , explained or appreciated .
Clearly , cohesion should be assessed on the basis of multiple dimensions and should not be limited only to GDP since , in the short- and medium-term , this fails to reflect many important aspects of the impact of European cohesion policy .
Therefore , the fourth cohesion report will carry out a thorough analysis of economic , social and territorial cohesion in the European Union with the help of a wide range of indicators .
Certainly , one of the keys to its success lies in the fact that cohesion policy is an integrated , fully-fledged policy .
It is not a bundle of sectoral approaches , but a policy that integrates different policies in the overriding context of development strategy .
That is why it can deliver specific tailor-made solutions for each European region or territory .
At the same time , it is a new policy that critically depends on coordination and synergies with other EU and national policies .
This brings me to the link between the strategy for growth and jobs , and cohesion policy .
As early as this year , each Member State will set out how cohesion policy contributes to the implementation of the national reform programme .
Equally , the Commission will , in its annual progress report to the Spring European Council , summarise the progress towards achieving the Union 's priorities of promoting competitiveness and creating jobs , including meeting the objectives of the integrated guidelines for growth and jobs for 2005-2008 .
We have also introduced an earmarking approach which assures that the predominant share of policy resources is invested in key Lisbon drivers .
As you know , the programming phase has not yet been finalised .
However , according to the available data , we can already state that the reinforcement of the strategic approach of cohesion policy and its concentration on the growth in jobs agenda has been a success .
In fact , around EUR 200 billion will be invested in Lisbon priorities between 2007 and 2013 .
If we add to this cofinancing and private resources leveraged by cohesion policy intervention , we may well see this figure double , and we need to compare this to EUR 150 billion in 2000 to 2006 .
In addition , in the new 2007-2013 period , we have reinforced the coordination mechanisms inside the Commission , both in the context of the programming documents and in day-to-day operation .
In a way , the preparation for the 2007-2013 programming period became a meeting point between different EU priorities .
Take , for instance , research and development and innovation .
At EU level , new synergies have been established between cohesion policy , the seventh Research and Development Framework Programme and the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme .
The last two programmes will take more account of the specificities of the regions that are lagging behind .
Cohesion policy , on the other hand , will significantly increase its contribution to the financing of R [ amp ] D and innovation activities .
The departments within the Directorate-General for Regional Policy , in cooperation with those of Mr Potonik , are working on a communication to provide information and advice on how to combine the resources of cohesion and RDT policy in order to increase their respective effectiveness , which is to be adopted in July .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to thank you for giving me the floor as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
Indeed , during a unanimous vote , the Committee on Budgets issued an opinion on the impact and consequences of the structural policies on EU cohesion .
It is not necessary , here , to point out at length that these policies are the supreme expression of the solidarity of the European people .
However , while , in fact , it is clear that these policies help gradually to align Europeans ' living standards by means of economic lever effects , we note that there is a lack of common indicators to measure their real impact .
Our Parliament which , I would remind you , is jointly responsible for the budget , must be able to have these EU-wide indicators so that it can make best possible use of the Community budget resources and also improve the way in which the budget implementation is monitored .
That is why I should like once again to stress the need for us to create a new measuring instrument that is shared by all of the Member States and counterbalanced by the various indicators .
These indicators would take account - as was highlighted a moment ago by the Commissioner , to whose remarks I fully subscribe - not only of economic growth , of course , unemployment , the level of equipment and the level of research and innovation , but also of points connected with people 's quality of life , such as life expectancy , birth rates and the level of earnings of our fellow citizens .
We could therefore genuinely improve the lever effect for the well-being of all Europeans .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like first of all to pay tribute to the very high quality of the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar .
I should also like to say what a pleasure it was for us to work together on drafting this report .
I believe that the rapporteur has covered all the main points , as has Mrs Griesbeck , with whose remarks I wholeheartedly agree .
I should like , however , simply to draw your attention to four points .
Firstly , we need to evaluate the situation properly and , to that end , indicators , which have just been mentioned , seem crucial .
At the moment , we only have GDP , which is really not enough .
Secondly , we also need to integrate properly the new territorial challenges that we are going to , and that we already , face .
I am thinking about the ageing of the population , energy , climate change and also agricultural policy , which unquestionably influences cohesion policy .
Thirdly , the EU structural policies will very soon represent the first EU budget .
That is why an integrated approach not only with the other EU policies , but also with those practised in each of the Member States , is extremely important .
As for the fourth point , Commissioner , I believe that we need to discuss it seriously : it concerns the structural policy and the Lisbon Strategy .
Of course , the structural policy must contribute to the practical expression and success of the Lisbon Strategy , but let us be careful to ensure the balanced development of the territories .
It seems entirely obvious to me that , in itself , the Lisbon Strategy does not make for balance : I believe that we must be very mindful of that .
Very soon we will have a further opportunity to speak about this matter : when Parliament receives the fourth report on cohesion and when we carry out our work on this subject with the aim of knowing how to develop this policy in the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying how very grateful I am to the rapporteur for her dedicated work on the fine report that she has put before us .
Like a number of others that are currently under discussion in the Committee on Regional Development , this report is one of the building blocks of a future structural and cohesion policy , and by ' future ' I mean that , while this will be reviewed in the course of the 2009 mid-term review , 2014 will see us having to start redesigning the cohesion policy that we are preparing today .
I am very grateful to Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar for having brought three important points back into the debate and given them added emphasis .
There is no doubt about it : the competitiveness of the European Union as a whole is one of the challenges of the twenty-first century , and , as the rapporteur rightly points out , the development of research and technology is an essential element in that , one that must , of course , also be , in the areas of cohesion policy , the basis of development , not least of the less developed regions .
Territorial cooperation is something else that needs to be put much more at the heart of our policy-making now that the European Union has 27 Member States , for urban centres , and the issue of how they relate to rural areas , constitute a challenge that we will , over the coming years , have to face with greater determination .
The third problem that Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar addressed - and I fully endorse the way she did it - is the requirement that we do much more than we have before for the regions that are affected by depopulation , which young people are abandoning because they see no opportunities for themselves there .
The issue of demographic change throughout the European Union , in every one of its Member States , is a completely new challenge for cohesion policy , and the rapporteur is right to treat migration as a problem .
Let me conclude with a personal observation , which I will address to my good friend Paca .
Paca , I am so glad to see that you are able to be here again today and to take part in the debate on your report .
I speak for all our group when I say that I wish you lots and lots of strength and energy for the coming days and the coming week , so that you may come back here restored to health and vigour , ready to carry on playing your part in the work of this House .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) The coordination of efforts in the area of structural policies will be a challenging administrative test for those countries that joined the European Union in 2004 and later .
It is in everyone 's interest for this to be carried out as smoothly as possible .
If , at the end of the budget period , we are to speak about the success of the integrated European structural policy , we need to encourage communication among the various parties at both national and regional levels , to foster the exchange of experiences and to encourage people to learn from good examples .
The rapporteur proposes indicators which would serve to compare individual practices with each other .
Our political group also believes that the amount of funding from structural funds that is allocated to innovation will determine the fulfilment of the development goals for the entire European Union .
An orientation towards renewable energy sources is an area where national development interests are interwoven with the goals of the Community .
Moreover the sustainable development of cities demands some coordinated thinking about the use of various structural policy tools , since this touches upon numerous objectives , ranging from housing to employment and waste management , as a special aspect of the attitude towards natural resources .
We agree with the rapporteur that the indicators for measuring progress must be such that they encourage those implementing structural policies to seek synergies in various fields .
The promotion of competitiveness , especially in the small enterprise category , is one of these possible synergy effects that should be closely monitored and analysed .
Finally I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Pleguezuelos , for her successful work .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Regional Development has recently tabled a couple of important own-initiative reports .
Today , we are to debate the document drawn up by Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank her publicly for her work .
We have already talked a great deal about cohesion within our community .
Essentially , cohesion means levelling out the differences between the richest and the poorest regions .
Implementation of this policy is always linked to solidarity within the Union .
This should not be forgotten , bearing also in mind that under the current Financial Perspective EUR 310 billion is allocated to regional policy .
That equates to almost 36 % of the Union 's expenditure .
It is our taxpayers ' money and must be used as sensibly as possible .
It is therefore worth emphasising the usefulness of creating an integrated structural policy , linking the effects of actions undertaken in the framework of the structural funds and the Cohesion Fund with the other areas of Union policy .
In his address to the House , the Commissioner referred to scientific research and to the Seventh Framework Programme .
Full cooperation between the Union 's institutions , Member States and regional authorities must be ensured .
This involves recognising the particular circumstances of individual regions , and taking account of both economically backward areas and also of areas with difficult geographical or social conditions .
What is at issue is not giving equal shares to all , but promoting equality of opportunity for all , notably as regards access to education , healthcare , and environmental protection .
Such equality must also apply to the disabled .
It is worth emphasising the achievement of harmonised development of urban areas , where some 80 % of the Union 's inhabitants reside .
Appropriate action in rural areas is also required , to ensure that living conditions in the latter are not significantly different from those in the cities .
In addition , the House must keep in mind the need to take account of issues pertaining to the family and family policy in the broader Union action programme .
I am glad we recognise the virtues of inter-regional and cross-border cooperation .
A levelling-out policy based on solidarity is called for , together with a sustainable development policy also based on solidarity .
We also have a practical question to pose : what is the best indicator with which to assess cohesion ?
It is right not to restrict ourselves exclusively to per capita GDP .
I am quite sure that this report will do much more than simply stimulate an interesting debate .
It will also make it possible to draw on experience to date and on best practice relating to Europe 's actual economic , social , territorial and cultural cohesion .
We deserve as much .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) In the context of the own-initiative reports that Parliament has presented on the future of the EU 's structural policy ahead of a fourth report on cohesion and the debate on the Community budget set for 2008-2009 , we wish to restate our view that the objective of regional development policy should be that it become the main instrument for effectively reducing regional disparities and for promoting genuine convergence between Member States by means of economic and employment growth .
For this to happen , the redistribution element of the Community budget needs to be guaranteed and boosted . Similarly , funds for cohesion must be increased , and cohesion should take precedence over any other objectives such as those enshrined in the Lisbon Strategy .
Accordingly , we are opposed to the attempts at making the award of resources under future cohesion policy conditional on the implementation of what are known as ' beneficial growth ' policies at national level , such as those forming part of this report .
We disagree that the granting of funding under cohesion policy should be conditional on economic performance criteria laid down at Community level , which would be an extra instrument to exert pressure on the Member States over the way in which they define their economic and social policies .
As such , the economically least developed countries would be penalised twice over .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar on this report , which deals with the important issue of the effectiveness of structural policies .
The European Union 's cohesion policy draws on structural policies and is a permanent and ongoing element of the European Union 's policies , although its content and methods change over time .
It is worth emphasising that the Lisbon Strategy is just such a transitional and temporary policy .
Cohesion policy , however , is a permanent and ongoing European Union policy .
Cohesion policy is effective when it attains its aims , thus increasing economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Its effectiveness depends on several factors .
Firstly , it is essential to ensure the complementarity of individual European Union policies , both Community policies and national ones , coordinated at Union level .
Secondly , cohesion policy should be adjusted to the European Union 's current development challenges , for instance reducing the discrepancies between regions regarding development of a knowledge-based economy and the rate of innovation .
Thirdly , all types of public authorities must be committed to the implementation of cohesion policy .
Mrs Pleguezuelos Aguilar is therefore to be commended on her many references to national , regional and local authorities .
Multi-level management is a sine qua non of effective cohesion policy .
The debate on this report coincides with the European Commission 's presentation of the Fourth Progress Report on Cohesion and represents a useful political recommendation for the analysis of data contained in the report and for developing conclusions based on the analyses contained therein .
( PL ) I should like to highlight the following issues relating to the new cohesion policy .
Firstly , in the programming period currently under way , cohesion policy is particularly important for the new Member States , because most of the resources from the structural funds are allocated to these countries .
Secondly , the new Member States have established ambitious aims within their development strategies .
For example , one of the aims Poland has set itself in its national strategic reference frameworks is to increase employment from the current 50 % to 60 % .
Thirdly , it is important to achieve a territorial dimension of cohesion , and above all to strive to reduce the imbalance regarding the development of rural and urban areas .
Fourthly , new indicators to assess the impact of cohesion policy are needed .
Per capita GDP is not sufficient on its own .
It very often happens that the GDP level in a particular area is close to the Union 's average , even though many parts of that same area are significantly under-developed .
This is the case in Mazovia , the Polish Vovivodship I come from .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the House for this debate and Members for their comments .
Let me make two points here .
First , it is true that the cohesion policy is working , but we still need more visibility and more knowledge about its impact .
We have already reinforced our communication strategy so as to enlarge the visibility of the interventions .
The Commission also counts on Members of the European Parliament to help in this communications effort in your national and regional contexts , and the Commission is open to any new ideas coming from your side .
Secondly , globalisation entails new challenges but also opportunities .
Consequently , cohesion policy must be able to face the former and to seize the latter .
We must ensure that our labour force is adaptable to new challenges so that economic restructuring can take place as a continuous and low-intensity process , with no negative effects accumulated in space and time .
In addition , we must ensure that the approach to the competitiveness of our regions takes proper account of issues like population ageing , migration flows , climate change , energy and increased commercial competition .
However , we should not be too pessimistic : there are many regions in the Union which rank among the most competitive and innovative regions in the world and which are benefiting from globalisation .
This has been achieved by investing in new skills , building or attracting new reservoirs of talent and encouraging networks and clusters .
It is by building on these successes and development strategies that the Union can mobilise all its potential and place its economy on a high-growth , sustainable path .
On the point concerning the importance of research and development , I would like to stress that the R [ amp ] D Framework Programme has evolved over time and now incorporates specific measures for the benefit of the regions , in particular those with the weakest R [ amp ] D capacities .
Likewise , the importance of an integrated EU approach to innovation , mobilising a mix of instruments from R [ amp ] D to cohesion policy , has been acknowledged .
Cohesion policy , on the other hand , has substantially increased its investments in R [ amp ] D and innovation , up to almost EUR 50 billion in 2007-2013 , in order to make it possible for all EU regions to have sufficient capacity to access the framework programme on a competitive basis .
Regarding the issue of new indicators , I wish to underline that the cohesion policy framework was fixed from 2007-2013 .
On 7 June 2007 Commissioner Hbner will present the fourth cohesion report in Parliament 's Regional Development Committee .
Finally , I would like to assure you that I have taken due note of your suggestions , ideas and concerns , which will be forwarded to Commissioner Hbner , who will certainly give them her full attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) Cohesion policy , which is going to become the main item in the EU budget , must better combine the Structural Fund measures with the other Community policies , in order to increase the synergies aimed at promoting competitiveness , research and innovation in our regions .
The structural policies conducted in the outermost regions would have an even greater impact if the Union demonstrated greater flexibility in agreeing to rid itself , as and when necessary , of certain ' Community dogmas ' and in respecting the special conditions of the outermost regions , whose territories are cramped , far from the single market and subject to regular natural disasters .
An analysis of the multiplier effect of the Structural Funds , in terms of how it attracts private investment , must make it possible to increase cooperation between the public and private sectors , for the benefit of sustainable , polycentric and balanced development in the European Union .
Accordingly , the EU structural policy must stimulate the spirit of initiative , with the aim of developing centres of excellence in the outermost regions . It must do so by relying on sectors that make the most of their skills and know-how , such as waste management , renewable energies , student mobility , research into climate change and crisis management .
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Denmark and Greenland ( debate )
The next item is the report by Joop Post , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community on the one hand , and the Government of Denmark and the Home Rule Government of Greenland , on the other hand C6-0506 / 2006 .


Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Mr Maat , who started the work on this subject , and the rapporteur , Mr Post , for their excellent work .
As you know , on 2 June 2006 , the Commission , on behalf of the Community and Greenland , initialled a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement after three years of long and complex negotiations .
The Agreement came into effect as of 1 January 2007 for a period of six years .
Currently , a provisional application of the Agreement is in force through a Council decision which was adopted on 21 December 2006 .
Before making a short presentation of the new Fisheries Partnership Agreement with Greenland , I would like to outline just a few points relating to the previous agreement , which dated back to 1985 when Greenland had left the Community .
Shortly after the Fourth Protocol entered into force on 1 January 2001 , the Court of Auditors and Parliament strongly criticised the protocols under the Greenland Fisheries Agreement for including ' paper fish ' , for not including the ship owners ' payment and for not being transparent enough .
As a consequence , the Commission emphasised the need for adjustments during the mid-term review of the Fourth Protocol in order to make a clearer distinction between the value for fish and support for the development of Greenland 's fisheries sector .
The revision of the Fourth Protocol led to a division of funds , under which 25 % of the financial contribution was earmarked for budgetary support to the fisheries sector .
' Paper fish ' were removed , real fish quotas and licence fees were introduced and provisions for an annual scientific review of the quotas were incorporated .
These important changes were also incorporated into the new agreement .
On this basis , during negotiations on the new agreement , the Commission has insisted on obtaining quotas for real fish and eliminating ' paper fish ' , on maintaining and even increasing the shipowners ' payment and on having a clear sectoral policy programme for the fisheries sector to be supported by the Community .
Another outcome of the mid-term review was the Council conclusions of February 2003 , in which the Council stated that future cooperation between the Community and Greenland would be based on a two-pillar approach with a broader cooperation arrangement in areas other than fisheries and a fisheries agreement .
The broader agreement takes the form of a Council decision including a joint declaration and will provide up to EUR 25 million per year to Greenland on the basis of cooperation in areas other than fisheries .
Therefore , one can conclude that the initialling of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement does not merely represent the closure of the negotiations conducted over the past year , but also the closure of what was initialled back in 2003 with the mid-term review of the Fourth Fisheries Protocol and the Council conclusions of February 2003 .
Turning now to the new agreement , let me outline the following .
The financial contribution of the previous Protocol was EUR 42.8 million per year , making it one of the biggest bilateral fisheries agreements .
The value of the new protocol has decreased considerably given the changes to the Community quotas .
Some have decreased due to the poor state of the stocks , the needs of Greenland 's fishing industry and the rate of utilisation by the Community , while others have increased due to the sound state of the stocks and based on the needs of Community industry .
As a result of these changes to the quotas , the Community 's financial contribution is now EUR 15.85 million per year .
This sum includes a specific sum of EUR 3.26 million to be used for a multiannual fisheries policy programme in Greenland .
In addition to this contribution , a payment from ship owners of EUR 2 million in the form of licences is also expected .
With regard to the amendments put forward by Parliament , I would like to stress that the Commission fully shares the concern of the Parliament on each amendment proposed .
However , with respect to amendments 1-3 , we feel that these are already covered in the Protocol itself and we therefore consider them unnecessary .
Furthermore , in relation to amendments 4 and 6 on the reporting requirements to Parliament , I would like to stress that the Commission already complies with the transmission of this information in line with the current interinstitutional arrangement .
Moreover , concerning amendment 5 on the Member States ' compliance with reporting requirements , it should be stressed that the Commission already examines whether catch reporting is respected .
In addition , it is stated in the annex and the appendix to the Protocol that vessels must comply with the reporting requirements of the previous fishing year in order to obtain a licence .
On this basis , therefore , the amendment is not necessary .
Finally , on amendment 7 , I would like to make it clear that , given the previous criticism put forward by both the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament itself of the Commission 's financial management of the external fisheries agreements , the Commission finds it hard to understand this amendment , which , in essence , is no different to the mechanism found under the modified Fourth Protocol and does not make it possible for the Commission to manage the under-utilised fishing opportunities in the best possible way .
Therefore , taking the financial responsibility of the Commission into consideration , the Commission cannot accept this amendment .
In conclusion , let me thank Parliament and , in particular , the members of the Committee on Fisheries and the rapporteur for their constructive engagement on this important fight .
- ( NL ) Madam President , it is unlikely I will need all of the five minutes allocated to me .
What the Commissioner said in this introductory speech was clear .
The main focus of the report , which is largely the work of my predecessor Mr Maat , is the objective of fisheries policy in general - sustainable fishery , in other words - and , although the term ' sustainable ' is clear , its meaning is also obvious from what Mr Borg said a moment ago and from what is stipulated in the agreement and the protocol .

The main objective of the partnership agreement with Greenland is to strengthen relations between it and the EU .
Cooperation based on mutual trust is called for , now more than ever .
After all , we have all known for some time that the fishing industry is facing drastic changes in the next few years .
Due to the reduction in fish stocks and migrating fish stocks - mainly caused by marine warming , cod being a case in point - but also due to the prescribed reduction of catch quotas , the fishing industry will need to operate differently .
This has been made clear to the sector , and the sector , having itself also come to realise this , is increasingly taking appropriate action .
To many fishermen , this represents a drastic change in their business operations .
New business operations must , in future , eventually - by which I mean in the longer term - lead to an improvement in the fish yield , in other words , to sustainable fishing , where the catches from the sea are proportionate to the production and where , moreover , the industry 's impact on the marine environment is minimised .
According to the report , fishermen must become managers of the sea , rather than merely hunting fishing grounds and fish stocks .
This requires cooperation , not only mutually , and by that I mean among Member States , but also with partners such as Greenland , particularly with a view to improving the production chain in the longer term .
As rapporteur , I note that the Commission is committed to this , as also is the Commissioner in particular , and I note that our Committee on Fisheries has come to the same conclusion .
I am grateful to my fellow MEPs for the constructive input and would warmly recommend the report for which Mr Maat did most of the groundwork some time ago .
That ends my contribution , and I hope that the report will be adopted at the next plenary meeting .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I , too , am glad to see that there are to be clear rules for the two pillars , the one being the fisheries agreement with Greenland and the other the broader cooperation agreement , and would like to say , speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , that we are , of course , concerned about whether European taxpayers ' money is being spent as properly as we have to want it to be .
On the one hand , that does mean - and this is where I really do want to give you , Commissioner Borg , a lot of encouragement - that there really do have to be very precise checks on what is caught by the individual vessels , and , on the other , that illegal fishing - on which you have declared war - is avoided come what may .
The Committee on Budgets takes the view that no more money should be forthcoming unless and until these two states of affairs are brought about , for we have to be careful that , under fisheries agreements too , European funds are indeed expended in the spirit of those agreements , in other words , that there must be no illegal fishing going on and that fish stocks must be protected , for if they are not , there will be no more work for the fishermen of the future .
It is for that reason that combining economy and ecology here is a smart move .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , it is a great pleasure finally to be able to debate a fisheries agreement with Greenland that begins to respect the minimum rules of financial transparency and non-discrimination between shipowners and Member States .
We must acknowledge the progress made since previous agreements , including the mid-term modification of 2003 , to bring them into line - as the Commissioner has said quite rightly - with the guidelines of the Council of Ministers and the demands of the Court of Auditors and of this Parliament , which focussed essentially on that lack of budgetary transparency , the worst example of which was the institutionalised custom of paying astronomical sums for ' non-existent fisheries ' or paper quotas .
In any event , this Agreement still has too much small print and its content is still too different from other agreements .
So that we do not have to relive past situations , therefore , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he can commit himself to guaranteeing that we will never again have to hear about paper quotas or see grotesque situations such as that of the fishing of queen crabs - whose quotas , which had been repeatedly requested by Community shipowners , were returned in the end to Greenland unused and having cost a fortune - and whether fishing opportunities not used by the Member States to which they are allocated will be able to be used by those who request them , as happens in the case of the other agreements .
Having said that , Mr President , it only remains for me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Post , who has had the difficult job of continuing with a report that was begun by another Member , Mr Maat , and who has done a tremendous job .

Mr President , since I have a few seconds left , I would like once again to protest about the fact that , in this House , fisheries reports are always debated at the end of a night sitting .
I would ask you , as a Vice-President and a Spaniard , to try to do something to ensure that this does not happen again in the future .
Mrs Fraga , the advantage of debating at this time is that only women Members speak , because it appears that only women work at this time of night , apart from the rapporteur and the President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , in one minute I would simply like to say that I am absolutely delighted with what Commissioner Borg has said about this Agreement .
Just this afternoon I was looking back over my speeches on Greenland in the plenary of Parliament , in 2003 and also in 2002 , and I believe that we are getting closer to what we were saying at that time and to what we have been saying since : that we want the Fisheries Agreement with Greenland to be as similar as possible to any other fisheries agreement signed by the Community .
In this regard , I can only express my pleasure at the fact that there is finally now a balanced distribution of its cost between shipowners and the Community budget .
I can only express my delight at the fact that the financial payments have been brought into line with the real fishing opportunities offered by Greenland and , of course , I entirely agree with the Commissioner that Amendment 7 should be rejected , because fleets without quotas must be able to take advantage of fisheries opportunities that are not used .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , the ALDE Group welcomes the fisheries partnership agreement with Greenland .
We take this opportunity to repeat our thanks to the home rule government for the very fruitful discussions on this and other issues that a delegation from the group had with them when it visited Greenland last autumn .
We are clear that the agreement is a matter of mutual benefit .
However , we have serious concerns about one aspect of the regulation , namely Article 3 ( 2 ) .
This would allow the Commission to reallocate licences between Member States in cases where fishing opportunities have not been fully taken up .
We understand the Commission 's wish to ensure full value for sums expended by the Community , but we do not believe that the same procedure can be used in the case of agreements where access to resources is based on vessels and tonnage .
The Greenland agreement is based on the purchase of quota .
It also differs from other agreements in allowing for quota exchanges with Norway , Iceland and the Faeroes for which there is no monetary compensation .
In addition , the parent regulation for the setting of quota entitlements allows only for Member States to exchange quota with other parties .
Article 3 ( 2 ) is therefore of dubious legality .
It also undermines the principle of relative stability .
Amendment 7 offers an alternative mechanism to achieve the optimal use of fishing opportunities and one that does not give rise to such problems .
We hope that the Commission will accept that the grounds for concern are justified and that Parliament will give its support to the amendment .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur .
In Article 3 ( 2 ) of the proposal the Commission has suggested that , should quotas be under-utilised , the Commission could reallocate Member States ' licences to other Member States .
This appears to be legally questionable , a point underlined by the Council 's Legal Service in a recent working group .
As uptake is already high , it is also unnecessary and would undermine the principle of relative stability and remove the opportunity for Member States to swap quota with other Member States rather than seeing the Commission reallocate it .
I want to keep the current mechanism , which brought about much higher rates of utilisation and preserved the respective rights and responsibilities of each party .
The concept of relative stability is vital to the Scottish fleet and gives our fishermen the historic rights that they have enjoyed for centuries .
Undermining this amendment puts all of this at risk and ignores the basic differences between southern fisheries agreements , where fishing licences are at stake , and northern agreements , where quota is at stake .
I urge colleagues to support Amendment 7 , which upholds the principle of relative stability and historic fishing rights .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , first of all , thank you all for your comments and for your overall support of the Commission 's proposal for a revised agreement with Greenland , which is an important part of the network of fisheries partnership agreements that are currently in place .
As I have already stated , the review was necessary for two primary reasons .
First , we needed to ensure value for our money through better and full utilisation of fishing possibilities and second , further to a critical assessment by the Court of Auditors and by this Parliament , the Commission is obliged to inject transparency into the agreement , and we hope to have managed to do so .
I agree that there will be scrupulous checking of the use of the fishing possibilities under this agreement and the use of the funds provided .
I would like to stress that , regarding the financial contribution to be paid under the protocol , the Commission cannot guarantee sound financial management without having the legal basis .
This means , in other words , that there is a need for a transfer mechanism which habilitates the Commission in case of under-utilisation and with due respect to the principle of relative stability and to Article 25 of the basic regulation to transfer in due time unutilised fishing opportunities to ensure their optimum utilisation .
I would also underline that the new mechanism of the agreement provided in Article 3 ( 2 ) is specifically to make possible maximum utilisation of fishing possibilities and to eliminate ' paper fish ' .
On the question of relative stability , raised by Ms Attwooll and by Ms Stihler , the temporary transfer of fishing possibilities from one Member State to another by the Commission is not contrary to the principle of relative stability , which , in accordance with Article 21 of Regulation ( EC ) No 2371 / 2002 , governs the allocation of fishing possibilities amongst Member States .
Such a transfer will not have any effect on the allocation of fishing possibilities between the Member States in Greenland 's waters in the future .
Each year the allocation will be done on the basis of the allocation keys - that is , on the basis of relative stability .
The intention behind Article 3 ( 2 ) is to ensure the highest possible utilisation without affecting relative stability .
This article exists and is implemented in all other third country agreements with financial compensation .
The only agreement which does not have this article is the current Greenland agreement .
As the new FPA is an agreement with financial compensation and involves a significant amount of public funding , it is crucial that the Commission has the legal means to act .
I would also like to underline that , notwithstanding the improvements that have been achieved under the existing agreement , the rate of utilisation is still not the optimum .
Taking into account the transfers to Norway , it ranks at around 80 % .
If one eliminates the transfers to Norway , it will go down to about 65 % utilisation , and I think that we owe it to the public to achieve much better results than that .
Indeed , this article is subject to discussions in the Council and will be debated in the Council and decided upon , hopefully , on 11 June .
Admittedly , the wording could be clearer and improved upon , maintaining the principle of relative stability while ensuring the highest utilisation of possibilities .
So , we will do our utmost to achieve an agreement in the Council whereby we will polish the wording so that , without prejudicing the principle of relative stability , we will ensure the maximum utilisation of the fishing possibilities under this new agreement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 22 May .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
( ES ) Madam President , I do not intend to speak for five minutes .
I would just like to ask you , given your generosity and knowledge of the region to which I am going to refer , to allow me to speak on a point of order .

Madam President , I wonder whether the President of this Institution could express his support , if he has not already done so , for the Secretary-General of the United Nations ' , Mr Ban Ki-moon 's , call for a cease to hostilities in Lebanon , which are causing huge loss of life .
I believe that this is essential and that it would reflect the feelings of every single Member of this Parliament .
I know that we have a debate on the situation in Palestine this afternoon , but the truth is that , at this very moment , innocent civilians are still dying in Lebanon .
That is what I am asking for .
Your request will be passed on to the President , who will certainly also put it to the Conference of Presidents .
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
The EU 's Aid for trade ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the EU 's Aid for Trade .
rapporteur . - Mr President , before turning to the substance of this report , I should like to thank my shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation in the preparation of the report and in particular to thank the Commission 's Trade DG and Development DG , which , I am pleased to say , have been very keen to engage with Parliament on this particular issue .
Finally , I should like to thank Pelayo Castro Zuzuarregui , the Parliament official I worked with on this report .
He is leaving us for a year - we hope it is only for a year ! - to work for the Spanish Prime Minister .
I have worked with him on this report and a number of other reports ; I have found it intellectually stimulating to be in his company and I wish him well .
On the substance , Aid for Trade is a vital tool for linking developing countries to the global economy .
However , I want to stress at the outset that it is not a substitute for the Doha Development Round , but a complement to it .
It is clear that liberalising markets is not sufficient in itself to link developing countries into the global economy .
You just have to look at the experience of the last 40 years : LDCs have seen their share of world trade almost halved from 1.9 % to 1 % , and this is despite tariff reductions following the Uruguay Round and other tariff reductions and recent efforts such as the European Everything but Arms scheme , which gives duty-free and quota-free access to developing countries .
Therefore , liberalisation , which I would argue is important , clearly of itself has not been enough to engage the developing countries fully in the global economy .
I also do not argue - and I want to make this clear - that Aid for Trade is of itself a panacea .
However , it is quite clear that there is now a growing consensus on the benefits that Aid for Trade might bring .
The WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong in December 2005 set out an ambitious work programme for Aid for Trade and called for more assistance to help developing countries into the global economy .
This followed Mr Barroso 's commitment at the G8 Summit in Gleneagles of GBP 1 billion of European Union money and GBP 1 billion of Member States ' money to assist in the Aid for Trade budget line .
While this is all most welcome and sounded quite dramatic at the time of the announcement , we have to realise that the increases are quite modest in substance : the European Union 's contribution will increase from a base of around EUR 850 million at the moment to EUR 1 billion , while the Member States - if they deliver - will go from EUR 300 million to a EUR 1 billion .
Last October the General Affairs Council called for a trade strategy to map out how we fulfil these pledges .
My report indicates some of the key points I hope we will see in that strategy .
Firstly , in relation to the scope of Aid for Trade , I want the measurement of the Barroso billion to be against the existing base , which has two categories : one being trade policy and regulation , the other trade development .
However , I welcome the fact that the WTO task force has added three further categories : trade-related adjustment , trade-related infrastructure and productive capacity .
These are vital aspects of the Aid for Trade agenda and I hope additional resources can be found to assist developing countries to deal with such matters as the phasing-out of preferences , reductions in government revenue as a result of tariffs being lowered , or help in adjusting to new competitive pressures due to regionalisation , such as EPAs .
My report argues that Aid for Trade should be demand-led and country-owned .
In this context , the WTO 's enhanced integrated framework should become the key diagnostic tool for developing countries , assisting them to identify where Aid for Trade can bring maximum benefits .
Within developing countries we must also ensure that the private sector and civil society are engaged with the process .
While Aid for Trade undoubtedly represents a different approach to general development aid , it should , in my opinion , be based on the same fundamental principles of poverty reduction and sustainable development , and our main point of reference should continue to be the Millennium Development Goals .
I am pleased that much of what we called for in this report was reflected in the Commission 's communication published in April , and , perhaps naively , I like to believe that was part of the intense interaction between the Commission 's DGs and the European Parliament .
I hope that , when the final joint EU trade strategy is adopted over the summer , it will also be reflected in that strategy document .
I have called in my report today for biannual reporting back to Parliament so that we can check that the Member States and the Commission have delivered on both the quality and quantity of the aid that they are promising .
All institutions so far have shown a willingness to deliver collectively on what I believe is an important strategy that can make an important , if modest , contribution to linking the poorest countries of the world into the global trading system .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , David Martin , for what I regard as a very rich report on aid for trade .
I am very glad that he has referred to the Millennium Development Goals , because they represent our guiding idea and targets .
I agree with him that free trade , whilst a necessary condition for development , is not a magic wand , just as I agree with him that aid for trade , whilst a necessary component of any development strategy , is not a panacea .
I believe that this report expresses a very strong commitment to the aid for trade agenda which I fully share .
I have also read the very useful suggestions and guidance regarding the content of the EU joint aid for trade strategy , for which I am very grateful .
Furthermore , I welcome Parliament 's engagement in this process .
Since 2005 , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have developed a clear common vision on the main principles of aid for trade .
We all agree that trade can be an important catalyst for growth and poverty reduction in developing countries , but the successful integration of developing countries into the world trading system requires more than better market access and strengthening of international rules .
In this respect the General Affairs Council conclusions of 14 and 15 May this year recall the crucial role of aid for trade .
The challenge we are now facing is to put these principles into practice in the context of the EU aid for trade strategy on which the Commission and Member States are jointly working .
This strategy should set out a roadmap to meet our financial pledges , give guidance to improve the effectiveness of our aid , provide a framework on monitoring and reporting of aid for trade , and address the capacity of the Commission and Member States to deliver aid for trade .
The strategy will be ready in October of this year and will then be presented at the WTO aid for trade review , so this Parliament 's report is extremely timely .
I would like to address some specific concerns raised in the report , and first of all the issue of the broadening of the scope of aid for trade in relation to the EU financial pledges .
Let me emphasise that the credibility of our pledges is of great importance and make it crystal clear that there will be no changes to the scope of our pledge .
The EUR 2 billion target remains related to the categories of trade policy and trade development .
I attach great importance to the wider aid for trade agenda , which includes building productive capacities beyond trade development , infrastructure and adjustment aid .
For these areas , which are very capital-intensive , we need clear political commitment to do more , but let me stress once again that these efforts will not be counted in relation to our financial pledges .
Regarding the lack of additional resources for EDF funding to ACP countries , we would be happy to do more , but the Commission does not decide on the budget for the EDF .
EU Member States do that .
There are limited exceptions only and these are also approved by Member States and dedicated to very specific purposes such as adjustment arising from the sugar reform .
Regarding the integrated framework , I am glad to confirm what I announced in Hong Kong .
The Commission is ready to commit EUR 10 million over the first two years to the multilateral part of the enhanced integrated framework .
In addition to this , the Commission will complement the multilateral window with substantial bilateral and regional funding to implement activities identified through the integrated framework and prioritised by the respective partner governments .
We will also provide human resources and capacity in the field to contribute to a better functioning of the integrated framework .
The issue of adjustment aid is rightly highlighted in the report .
However , I do not agree that the EPA negotiations deserve a special mention in this context .
Adjustment aid is relevant in relation to all external trade shocks .
They may result from trade negotiations but could also be a consequence of unilateral reform as in the case of sugar .
In any outcome of the EPA negotiations , the implementation of obligations of ACP partners will be phased in over a very long period and this will facilitate adjustment and identify requirements that we need to help meet .
Finally , we noted your request to look into the IMF 's trade integration mechanism as part of the EU aid for trade strategy .
We think that this is more appropriately addressed in cooperation with other international donors , for example as part of the global aid for trade review at WTO level .
Let me once again express my deep appreciation for this Parliament 's political support for aid for trade , as well as our willingness to cooperate with the European Parliament to make further progress , and I look forward to doing so .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Commissioner was right to point out how trade and development cooperation are very much intertwined .
If we want to achieve the Millennium Goals in 2015 , aid and trade must - as they indeed can - complement one another .
The developing countries need our help in order to further develop their regional markets , and the rules of origin must be improved as a matter of priority if they are to do that .
Europe and developing partners must join forces in a bid to locate a task force for development , one that can flesh out this construction of local markets .
This task force should be made up of experts in the area of trade and development policy , and could help develop and implement specific trade-enhancing measures .
We should , in this context , think along the lines of alternative tax revenue , the reinforcement of the production capacity and the standardisation and creation of joint external border control .
Human resources , in particular , should be developed further .
Practical support of this kind would be a real help in getting the local markets and mutual trade off the ground .
With regard to the large infrastructure , we thought the EIB was a better bet .
This trade-specific aid should not , however , come out of our own pocket ; it should not , then , be funded from the existing development budget .

The Socialist Group in the European Parliament wants to see new funds made available for this , because otherwise , fewer funds would be available for achieving the Millennium Goals which are , after all , the chief goal to which the Commissioner , a moment ago , pledged 100 % commitment , and in that respect we would like to wish him success .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , for a long time , we supported developing countries in all kinds of areas , except for that of trade .
Partly as a result of that , countries and their economies have largely remained subsidy-dependent .
Economic growth proves indispensable to fight poverty effectively .
The tremendous progress which countries in Asia have made proves this point , Korea being a prime example .
Little by little , we are finding out that trade offers immense opportunities for the economic growth of poor countries .
Invariably , developing countries still lack the right infrastructure to be able to operate within the global market .
This is why these countries need our support , and this is where aid for trade comes in , whose goal is to enable developing countries to function within the international market .
Thanks to aid for trade , countries can , for example , improve the rules in areas that are related to trade , such as taxes and customs , and seeking to improve the road network and waterways , to fight fraud and corruption , and both enhance production capacity and also diversify .
After all , many countries depend on one agricultural product only .
The diversification of products makes for a more stable economy .
It is also necessary to increase capacity in order to train good negotiators .
I welcome this aid for trade initiative , because it offers poor countries aid in order to strengthen their economies and increase their independence .
As has already been mentioned , aid for trade is not a panacea for development , but a necessary tool to allow developing countries to tap into the international market .
I compliment Mr Martin , the rapporteur , on the report and also thank him for his good cooperation , as a result of which the report that is before us is not only sound in terms of content , but will also enjoy widespread support .
Mr President , Commissioner , in order to render this instrument effective , I would ask the Commission for a sound work programme - one that is both feasible and realistic - and for good cooperation with the Member States .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for the way he has dealt with this report .
As ever , Mr Martin has been open and willing to engage in compromise with colleagues , producing a report which demonstrates a real consensus in the Committee on International Trade .
That said , having asked the shadow rapporteurs not to bring forward amendments at the plenary stage in order to preserve the spirit of that consensus , it would have been respectful had the PSE Group kept to that agreement .
Nevertheless , I think we have done enough to ensure that the consensus will hold through the plenary .
I was unsurprised by the depth of common ground between us on the crucial issue of the EU 's Aid for Trade .
The G8 summit in Gleneagles where the Commission and EU governments both pledged EUR 1 billion in aid to the world 's poorest people was preceded by a hugely popular campaign .
Through the Make Poverty History marches , the Live Aid concerts and other efforts , millions of people have made their voices heard .
They are angry , and right to be , about unfair trade rules and highly protected markets that work against those living in poverty and they are passionate about the need for change .
If we are to build on the phenomenal mobilisation of public opinion , the pressure must continue at every level , domestic and international .
The key question is whether there is the political will to drive that change .
Aid for Trade must ensure that the poorest nations have the capacity to benefit from increased trade liberalisation , efficient customs agencies , better infrastructure , tax regimes which do not rely on import and export duties and anti-corruption measures to ensure that the money gets to the people who have earned it .
Ultimately we will be judged not by how much is promised but by how much is delivered .
Pledges on aid are always more easily made than kept .
We are all too familiar with the double counting and relabelling tricks that recycle all pledges as new money .
The EU 's Aid for Trade package has a unique role to play to ensure sustainable development , growth and prosperity in the developing world .
As such it must be new money over and above existing commitments and trends and it must not come at the cost of monies already earmarked for other crucial development projects such as health and education .
Whilst Aid for Trade is a long-term driver of development , meeting short-term targets , such as the Millennium Development Goals , must remain central to the EU 's international development policy .
There too we must do better : some USD 50 billion more a year rather than the current commitment over a five-year period .
If sustained political will is required to deliver Aid for Trade , then political courage is needed to ensure we deliver the MDGs in sub-Saharan Africa .
Aid works best when it is delivering a common set of objectives agreed between donor and recipient .
We have to concentrate on finding solutions which best fit a country 's needs .
That means responding to the demands of civil society and the private sector .
As a Parliament , we have already thrown our weight behind the fair trade movement .
If we are to help reduce the poverty in which they live , we need mechanisms to ensure the aid reaches the people who need it most .
This report provides the Commission with some clear and reasonable guidelines to that end .
It is up to you , Commissioner , to deliver on them .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we , too , wish to thank Mr Martin for the good work he has done , and I would like to begin with a positive political development .

It is good that the ' General Affairs and Foreign Relations ' Council , which is responsible , acknowledged on 15 May that reductions in tariffs made enormous inroads into the state revenues of many developing countries , and it is good that it stressed the need for , and necessity of , compensation payments to address this .
Had it not done so , we would run the risk of our trade policy possibly bringing about the rapid collapse of any development policy whatever in the countries affected .
It is absolutely vital that we do something about this , but for that we need additional funding that cannot be set against the development aid funds if we want to achieve the millennium development goals .
What has to be avoided is the occurrence of a sort of ' displacement effect ' , with a move away from the combating of poverty and from the millennium goals campaign towards promoting an orientation towards exports .
That would be a misconceived tendency , one that could be triggered by the injection of these two billion in the absence of deliberate political action on our part to counteract it .
In terms of development strategy , the stabilisation of local markets takes , as a rule , precedence over the preparation of the most vulnerable and poorest countries to become exporters ; what matters is that our policy be consistent .
' Aid for Trade ' must not be allowed to relativise the fight against poverty , and so it follows that additional funds are needed in order to finance it .
It is in this regard that I would be really interested to know from which Budget lines the money is being taken .
Moreover , ' aid for trade ' must not be allowed to play a part in undermining the stabilisation of local markets , which must be at the heart of any development strategy .
That is the Commission 's task in putting into practice the wide-ranging concept of ' aid for trade ' and I appeal to you , Commissioner , to pay particular attention to these aspects .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , allow me to pose the following question .
Why should there be Aid for Trade ?
The answer is because trade has an important role to play .
I should now like to make a few observations .
For centuries , sound trade has brought people together without detriment to their identity , values or social and political life .
Europe needs to find equal partners amongst the major players on this stage and most especially amongst the lesser ones .
Trade must be governed by clear rules that allow both sides to benefit .
' Free and Fair Trade ' is a slogan worth adopting .
Fair trade cannot take place without the relevant infrastructure , and without agreements such as those reached in the framework of the WTO for example .
Relevant guidelines applicable to the entire producer-consumer chain must be developed .
It must be borne in mind that aiding trade also involves supporting our own threatened sectors such as sugar and soft fruit .
In addition , support should be provided for cross-border exchanges between the Union and its neighbours , for example Ukraine .
At the global level , the situation concerning exchanges is so diverse that standardisation is required .
All citizens must be informed about these standards too .
An aid programme should therefore be developed drawing on Europe 's historical experience and the wealth of Europe 's supply of goods , services and know-how .
Funding for this programme should also be made available .
Funding need not be on a large scale , but it is essential .
By way of analogy I should like to point out that sound trade can do more than simply raise the standard of living , especially in poor countries , which is the focus of this .
Sound trade can also lead to more peaceful solutions to global conflicts .
As I conclude , I would like to mention an anecdotal assessment , namely that Ryanair does more towards bringing about a common Europe than certain European institutions , because it brings people closer together .
Similarly , ' Fair and Free Trade ' does more towards bringing about integration and well being for the people of this Earth than dubious political decisions , especially in poor countries .
Trade is what makes the world go round .
Europe should promote the kind of trade described , and it is the Commissioner 's duty to ensure that it does so .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it will not have escaped anyone in this Chamber and in the economic and productive world of the European Union that an increase in Aid for Trade may help develop the market in a freer and at the same time fairer and better controlled way .
If the EU wishes to remain the world 's top economic power and the area of greatest freedom and least social inequality , while also benefiting from the boost it has always received and continues to receive from Parliament , it must not only help to develop the ability of developing countries to promote foreign trade despite their unfortunately considerable loss of competitiveness on world markets , but it must also increase Aid for Trade in the knowledge that liberalisation and aid are not mutually exclusive initiatives .
In this context , the not insignificant sum of EUR 2 billion is still not enough .
We have to clarify the Aid for Trade concept itself by taking on board the conclusions of the WTO Aid for Trade Task Force on fundable projects and by integrating development policies and actual trade policies as much as possible , as envisaged in the integrated framework , not least with a view to reducing poverty .
( PL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , much has been said within the European Union about a balanced multilateral system of trade and about enabling developing countries to become involved in trade and benefit as a result .
This concern has not , however , been accompanied by an improvement in the situation of the least developed countries .
The opposite is the case .
Over the last 40 years the participation of these countries in world trade has almost halved , falling from 1.9 % to 1 % .
It is also the case that powerful large chain stores have caused the demise of small traders and that income has been transferred away from less developed countries .
That much is abundantly obvious .
These facts indicate clearly that globalisation and liberalisation of trade serves to concentrate capital in stronger countries and to increase poverty in less developed ones .
We have noted a new approach to trade by the European Union in recent years .
This approach is characterised by a desire to export industrial products at the expense of agricultural ones .
It is gradually leading to a loss of food security for the Union in general and for the new Member States in particular .
It is therefore essential for the European Union to adopt a new approach to international trade and for work on the implementation of national strategies for trade development to be undertaken .
( EL ) Mr President , no one doubts that aid for trade is a particularly important initiative .
It helps to bring about the more complete and effective integration of developing countries , especially the less developed countries , into the multilateral trade system .
As we have heard , trade is not a panacea for development .
However , it can strengthen the economic and general development of recipient states .
The special and differentiated treatment of developing countries within the framework of the WTO is necessary to a degree , especially as regards the less developed countries .
It should , nonetheless , be pointed out that their assumption of multilateral commitments and their compliance with WTO rules are an incentive for reform which will turn out to be to the benefit of the developing countries themselves .
The gradual opening up of their markets and an outward-looking economic and trade policy help to strengthen their competitiveness , allowing the transfer of technology and know-how .
The developing countries do , however , appear to be extremely reticent at multilateral negotiations to heed calls for them to open up their markets .
For this reason , aid for trade is of decisive importance in encouraging these countries to respond to new obligations and to apply multilateral trade rules , to mitigate the cost of their adapting to reforms and to integrate trade into their development policies more effectively .
It goes without saying that aid for trade must be accompanied by appropriate internal policies in developing countries , so that they maximise the result .
The European Union is being called upon to play a leading role in this endeavour , in order to formulate an effective , cohesive and targeted aid for trade agenda .
To close , I should like to congratulate Commissioner Mandelson for supporting this initiative and for linking the external aspects of competitiveness with internal initiatives for the benefit of the competitiveness of the European economy , which was the subject of our previous debate .
( LT ) First I would like to congratulate the Member States and the Commission for making a commitment to increase the funds allocated for assistance to business to two billion euros by the year 2010 .
This is a serious commitment , and in implementing it a great deal of coordination will be required .
In order to achieve this goal , a common European Union strategy is essential , which will have to set out the ways in which the stated goal is going to be achieved .
I also congratulate the Committee on International Trade for its timely report in which the committee presented Parliament 's views regarding the complex issue of assistance to business .
I support the proposal that the Commission present reports to Parliament twice every year .
These reports should assess progress in the EU 's granting of assistance to business .
Although the commitments I mentioned were made by various countries according to the traditional definition of assistance to business handed down by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development , in future there is a need to look more closely at the WTO 's conclusions and the suggested widening of this definition to include ' business infrastructure ' and ' creative productivity possibilities ' ; in other words , to do everything possible to ensure that assistance to business is all-encompassing , more flexible and more effective .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union is today displaying ambitious commitments where development is concerned .
I welcome this because there is an urgent need to help developing countries to reduce poverty , to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to benefit from sustainable economic growth .
Let us therefore hope and pray that these objectives are translated into concrete and effective action .
In this connection , we can only welcome the commitments made to increase aid for trade .
I should like to highlight some points that justify the essential nature of this instrument .
This instrument meets , firstly , the requirement for consistency , which must guide the EU 's external actions : by interlinking the various areas of its external action , the European Union corresponds to two principles , those of producing better legislation and of increasing the effectiveness of its aid .
This instrument also deals with the reality of the multilateral trade system by helping developing countries and the least advanced countries to benefit from the advantages resulting from market access .
Finally , this instrument helps implement trade agreements .
One might mention at this point the WTO agreements or the economic partnership agreements .
Aid for trade thus helps to make international trade an instrument for reducing poverty through economic development .
Finally , if it is to be effective , aid for trade must meet several urgent needs : it must be accompanied by practical commitments , not least those promoting technical assistance ; its implementation must be controlled and monitored and it must strengthen local ownership and results-focused management .
This is crucial if aid for trade is to enable developing countries to benefit from the advantages resulting from the multilateral trade system and to provide themselves with the means actually to increase their capacities in the trade arena .
Let us therefore call on all the parties involved not to relax their efforts , so that aid for trade is able to keep its promises .
Mr President , I would like to welcome and commend all those who have spoken on this subject this morning .
I do not find myself in disagreement with anyone who has contributed .
I agree , for example , with Mr Papastamkos , who said it is very important that , when we are pursuing trade and reform policies of our own , we are able to put in place flanking measures properly supported with adequate funds which enable developing countries to adjust to those reforms too .
I agree with Mrs Safi that this has to be a results-driven process , which is why I attach importance to proper reporting as part of an effective aid-for-trade monitoring and reporting pillar , both in respect of what we do in the EU and in relation to the WTO .
If I might , though , just make two responses : first of all , to those who have questioned whether there is any question of double counting , recycling of money , robbing Peter to pay Paul or robbing Paul to pay Peter ( which might be preferable ! ) - in fact neither is happening .
Aid for trade , in our view , should never imply less aid for other sectors .
The increases in aid for trade for both the Commission and the Member States are less than the overall ODA budget increases .
Therefore , there is no need to reallocate resources from other sectors to meet the aid-for-trade pledges .
Secondly , one or two Members raised the issue of fair trade .
In my view , our strategy should confirm full support for any activity which involves the private sector - especially SMEs - and civil society to ensure that aid for trade facilitates the creation and growth of enterprises to compete in international markets , for example , voluntary initiatives such as fair trade , eco-labels and comparable corporate scheme standards .
The strategy should also address related issues of labour market and social adjustment and the ILO 's core labour standards .
Last of all , I think that Max van den Berg 's point about rules of origin , their improvement and simplification is very important .
It is something on which I have focused and not made , along with my colleagues in the Commission , as much progress to date as I would like to have done , and we need to add speed .
Lastly , I think Mr Schmidt made some important points about aid for trade and its possible impact on local markets , and I shall certainly reflect on those .
But I would like to thank David Martin once again for what has been an excellent and welcome report .
Commissioner Mandelson 's speech ends the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
The economic partnership agreements ( debate )
The next item is the report by Robert Sturdy , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on Economic Partnership Agreements .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this is a particularly important report .
The Commission , including the Commissioner himself , and I have worked very closely on it .
This report highlights the complexity of establishing a forward programme for trade relations between the EU and the ACP , two very different and largely unequal groups which share a common goal to strengthen trade as a means of real development .
Idealistic as this may sound , I have received a great deal of support from both the Commission and the representatives of the ACP regions and , despite the many concerns expressed by NGOs and political groups , they and I , and I am sure the Commission , remain optimistic .
EPAs have moved very slowly because of the conflicting ideas on a number of issues including regional integration , identification of sensitive products and preparing concrete and detailed proposals for EPA-related support .
The ACP has been asked to do a great deal and too often the institutional infrastructure and lack of capacity has raised questions as to whether these proposals will contribute to their development in a manner that they want .
The January 2008 deadline is obviously what makes this year so crucial for EPAs .
Time is running out .
Negotiators must press on to reach a mutually beneficial settlement on EPAs that will help ACP countries develop and support international trade relations .
In the event that some regions need more time , I believe it is incumbent on both parties to seek to ensure that ACP exports to the EU should not be harmed .
This should be the objective , not discussing the feasibility of another WTO waiver , although I appreciate that the Commission is continuing to focus on reaching the deadlines .
However , I am anxious to know what provisions have been outlined for these regions which find themselves without an agreement .
My report makes a number of recommendations : simplified , liberalised and more flexible rules of origin , full duty-free , quota-free market access for the ACP , workable safeguards , dispute settlement and monitoring mechanisms with transparent provisions and a real power to act in the event of changes caused by EPAs having a harmful effect on sectors of ACP economies .
These are the positive aspects and need to be correctly framed in negotiations .
We need to know how these mechanisms will work and to build trust and ensure that Europe will be as keen to help implement these mechanisms as the ACP countries .
We have recognised that , if EPAs are to be successfully concluded , there must be more ACP engagement than has been demonstrated throughout these negotiations .
Only a true partnership will ensure these agreements are beneficial to all parties .
The official EPA review due to be completed last December failed to provide a full and comprehensive report of the status of negotiations .
This is far from encouraging and I am curious as to what precedence this sets in the actual signing of the agreements .
It is clear that additional resources will be needed to cope with the effects of change ushered in by EPAs .
The scaling-up of trade facilitation , technical assistance and support to help ACP producers meet EU standards must be sufficiently extensive to offset losses from tariff revenues and help ACP countries take advantage of market access .
In the first instance this requires greater efforts to ensure that funds already promised are spent in a timely and effective manner .
The EU must be accountable for all of its development assistance and , together with the ACP , must set clear goals that boost ACP competitiveness and growth .
EPAs have an essential role to play as instruments for development and , appropriately designed , they represent an opportunity to revitalise ACP-EU trading relations , promote economic diversification and regional integration , and reduce poverty in ACP countries .
I mentioned in my speech that the EU must be accountable .
This is taxpayers ' money , and democratic accountability is of concern to all of us and is essential .
We have failed in many respects to help ACP countries ; now I believe we have a real chance to do something that will really make a mark , provided we have the goodwill of all of them .
Unfortunately I have to leave now to go back for personal reasons .
I have worked very closely with the Commission and the Commissioner .
I think we have had a very good understanding and I would like to take this opportunity to thank them .
I hope that we can continue to work in that manner .
Mr President , I regard this report as very constructive , very realistic and very welcome .
As I said earlier this year in the Committee on International Trade , Mr Sturdy 's is a contribution which helps us look afresh at the challenges we face in these difficult , time-pressured talks .
Yes , the EPA negotiations have moved slowly - more slowly , frankly , than anyone could possibly justify .
But at the same time we have to recognise that these agreements are new , innovative and ambitious .
When change is involved , people inevitably are uncertain and , therefore , want to tread carefully .
We need to balance our need to complete these negotiations on time with our need to respect others ' uncertainties .
I fully agree with the starting point of the report , that appropriately designed EPAs are an opportunity to revitalise ACP-EU trading relations .
In fact , I would say that they are our only real opportunity to stop the further slide of ACP trade into the commodity dependence and decreasing diversification that have typified ACP trade over the last quarter of a century .
We looked for alternatives , and there is no shortage of suggestions and ideas .
None provides the legally secure trade regime or links to development that EPAs do .
None tackles the divisions between ACP countries in trade regimes that prevent regional markets emerging and lock countries into a North / South dependency .
So I am pleased that the report recognises the good faith and ambitious approach that we have taken .
At the same time it recognises that trade is not the panacea for development .
Only domestically driven policy reform built on firm foundations of good governance and an enabling environment for business and investment can secure the economic growth and development which the ACP countries seek .
But I also agree that trade is critical to support and build on this reform and , in so doing , deliver inclusive growth and jobs .
That is why I am determined that we will take the opportunity that EPAs present to us .
The development dimension of EPAs is in using market access , not merely granting it .
It is investment finance , not merely development aid .
This needs new rules fit for a globalised world , and this is why I am so keen that EPAs address issues such as competition policy , public procurement and trade facilitation .
But we know our partners ' limits and will work with them to phase in change and to identify regionally specific needs and solutions .
No one is talking about immediate overnight change or imposing rules .
But we will keep talking .
To turn away in the face of challenge would be to neglect our duty to give the ACP the economic future they deserve .
We want to secure sustainable development , not unsustainable poverty .
The Sturdy report calls for full duty-free , quota-free market access into Europe , and this is what we propose .
The Commission 's market access offer was made in April and proposes full access for all products with transitions for sugar and rice to protect the managed markets that the ACP rely on .
This delivers on our promises to take the greatest commitments on market access and hand the full flexibility of WTO rules on exclusions and implementation over to the ACP themselves .
Everyone will be aware of the importance the ACP rightly attach to additional development support in this negotiation .
This is a point on which Robert Sturdy sets out some very useful proposals .
Funding is important .
We must help the ACP grasp the new trading opportunities that EPAs will provide .
The EPAs will not fail for lack of financial assistance - that I can guarantee .
As part of this , we have suggested that EPA regional funds be established by each of the negotiating regions in order to build a tailor-made instrument , in line with international standards but owned and run by the ACP with ease of use .
These funds , which would also be available to channel the support of other donors , could include institutional support to ensure that the capacity to implement the EPAs is there : private sector competitiveness - from access to finance to industrial retooling , to improving SPS standards ; and helping out financially in those countries which face a fiscal challenge with the lowering of tariff barriers as revenues are shifted from governments to consumers .
So our ambition is clear : to build , through EPAs , a trade and development instrument which galvanises investment flows , internal demand , private sector activity and job creation and , in so doing , builds a sustainable fiscal base for ACP governments to operate , to provide basic services and to determine their own economic future free of WTO waivers , concessions and constraints .
Let me finish on a broader political point .
There has been criticism , including from Members of this Parliament , of these negotiations , and concerns , particularly from our ACP partners , about the content , in some respects , of the negotiations .
But we are now making headway in these negotiations .
There is a positive dynamic to the negotiations .
We have the real prospect of cementing a deep partnership for development between the EU and the ACP .
The consequences of failure would be highly damaging to the EU and to the goal of balanced , dynamic growth in the ACP .
That is why I welcome this report and Parliament 's support in delivering these agreements .
I would like to express again my appreciation for the argument and the proposals and recommendations contained in it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a preliminary point , I should like to excuse my fellow Member , Mrs Sudre , who has been held up by a meeting with our new Prime Minister of France , Mr Fillon .
She would have liked to have spoken on the subject of the particular circumstances of the Union 's outermost regions , which are particularly dear to her heart .
I should also like to congratulate my friend , Mr Sturdy , on the scope and quality of his work in this excellent own-initiative report .
Our Union must conclude economic partnership agreements , or EPAs , with the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , or the ACP countries .
These agreements are designed to strengthen economic growth , regional integration and the fight against poverty in six of the world 's major disadvantaged areas .
In line with the spirit of Cotonou , we need constantly to point out that the EPAs must not amount to mere free trade agreements , under the World Trade Organisation , but must represent a genuine partnership , making it possible to develop a new intervention framework that is conducive to the development of the ACP countries ' economies and , therefore , to consolidate peace , not least on the African continent , with a regional integration dynamic .
Due to their geographical location , near many ACP countries , the overseas communities , whether they belong to the EU or not , must be at the heart of these preferential and reciprocal agreements .
It is imperative that the particular circumstances of the outermost regions and overseas countries and territories be taken into account as part of these negotiations , on the basis of Article 299 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
The outermost regions and overseas countries and territories must be involved as far upstream as possible in the negotiations so that market access differentiations can be considered and their respective support arrangements coordinated , for the purposes of integrating them more into their regional environments .
It is in this connection , ladies and gentlemen , that I encourage you to support the amendments co-signed by Mrs Sudre and Mr Sturdy , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and designed to strike an intelligent balance between the regional integration of these outermost territories and the historical and geopolitical links uniting them with Europe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am grateful to Mr Sturdy .
Everyone agrees that trade can help fight poverty .
Unfortunately , the trade benefits for ACP countries , for which the Cotonou Agreement provides , have little effect in practice ; nor , in fact , does the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative .
This is all attributable to the deficient trade situation in the developing regions in question , the high , standardised European import requirements and the rules of origin that have , to this day , not been reviewed or tailored to practical situations .
It is because of these problems that the ACP countries are not operating within the world economy ; if anything , they are moving away from it .
For this reason , the debate on the economic partnership agreements should not , in the first instance , be about acquiring free-trade agreements , but rather about concluding development contracts .
What should be central in these development contracts is trade development within the own region , including the institutional framework and personal means that are difficult to establish , along with the Millennium Goals .
Not until much later can we consider opening the markets for the EU .
This is , as we see it , where the problem lies .
Everything seems to be geared towards 1 January 2008 , which is , of course , logical , because the deadline expires on 1 January , but meanwhile , the flexibility now on offer in the negotiations is , in actual fact , insufficiently tied to development indicators and much more to vague time indications .
The idea of 25 years has been floated , although this has not been mentioned explicitly anywhere .
Is the Commission prepared to link EU access to the markets in question to a development benchmark , so that we are certain that the local markets over there are ready for this ?
With regard to the regions that ultimately decide against a European Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) - and we would like to reiterate the negotiations on this subject enjoy our unqualified support - but if it is decided not to conclude an EPA , is the Commission also prepared to make a point of accepting the alternative of a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP + ) ?
We are familiar with the technical discussion , but as we see it , disregarding bananas and sugar - as these have been taken out of the equation in practice , not least by us - this is very much a real alternative to the current trade conditions .
If the EU is prepared to commit to a rapid reform of the rules of origin - and this is something which the Commissioner confirmed in a different debate a moment ago - then this could well mean that we can make some headway in this respect .
Turning to the Singapore themes , I think it is wonderful , of course , if regions would like to do something with these at any time .
There is nothing wrong with that , although we should not impose anything .
It is of the utmost importance to meet the deadline of the EPA negotiations , as I pointed out before .
This is why we actually want to focus on development contract thinking , in which respect the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has advised that we should give ourselves room during the negotiations and time , content and money , and conclude a negotiation contract in the true sense of the word .
If the EPA were to turn out this way , this would be fantastic ; if not , it is simply not a good offer .
I would also urge you to bring the GSP + to the negotiating table as a real alternative , and talk about it openly in the debates .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the approach he has taken .
Mr Sturdy 's approach in taking the Barbados resolution of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly as a starting point ensured that this report moved forward from a place of compromise .
As a whole , my group was satisfied with the tone and balance of the point , which is why we have not tabled any amendments .
However , we remain concerned about a key contradiction within the report and within the conduct of the negotiations themselves : on the one hand , we urge negotiators to intensify efforts to complete the negotiations before the end of this year ; yet , on the other hand , we call on the Commission not to exert undue pressure on the ACP countries .
Both are accurate statements , but surely there can be nothing more pressing than a ticking clock with no acceptable deal on the table and no apparently suitable alternatives coming forward .
The Commissioner is familiar with the difficulties that deadlines present .
We are not only dealing with the EPAs negotiations , but in the background we have timetables for regional integration and , of course , the troubled Doha Round .
The fact that we do not have a WTO agreement has made these negotiations even harder , as the ACP cannot yet predict what they will get - if anything - out of Doha .
Through all this , however , runs the thread of development .
To make increased liberalisation a driver of poverty reduction and economic growth , the European Union must integrate its trade and development policies , and nowhere is that more important than with the ACP and EPAs .
The EU is being accused of putting the year deadline before development .
To counter such accusations I urge the Commissioner to demonstrate the Commission 's flexibility and commitment to the ACP 's concerns by undertaking a genuine exploration of development-oriented alternatives to the EPAs and , at the very least , if we do not have a workable agreement by the deadline , according to Cotonou we must provide at least equivalent market access to the ACP on 1 January 2008 .
The European Union has the resources to undertake such an exercise .
Meanwhile the ACP is struggling on a financial and technical basis .
We have already spent a great deal of time discussing the EU 's aid for trade this morning and the two rapporteurs worked closely to ensure that these two reports went hand in hand .
The EU 's aid for trade programme is crucial to enabling the least-developed countries in the ACP to maximise on the benefits of increased liberalisation , and the Council has already confirmed that a substantial share of the increased trade-related assistance will be devoted to the ACP countries .
The ACP will continue to require substantial development assistance to address their supply-side constraints to trade beyond the next EDF .
I would like to see the Commission and the Member States work towards significantly increasing the amount of aid for trade available as demand from ACP States increases through implementation of the EPAs .
We must , however , acknowledge the moral difficulties of a major donor sitting across the negotiating table from a key recipient of aid for trade .
The Commission must not manipulate the prospect of aid by linking future development assistance to concessions made by the ACP in EPAs .
Aid , by its very definition , can be used as a carrot , but it must under no circumstances be used as a stick if the EPAs are not concluded before the end of the 2007 deadline .
Aid for trade works best when it is delivering a common set of objectives between donor and recipient .
With the Committee on International Trade and Parliament 's delegation to the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , the Commissioner has a breadth and depth of parliamentarians with the expertise and willingness to engage with him on EPAs .
As the clock keeps ticking , I urge the Commissioner to work with them to find a development-oriented solution to EPAs which ultimately fits in with the needs of the ACP .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Sturdy 's report on Economic Partnership Agreements provides an accurate account of the current state of affairs .
Despite strong European Union commitment , the present situation is not good .
Cooperation based on agreements that fail to take account of the global market and of the principles laid down by the WTO does not bode well for partnership agreements within the ACP framework .
European Union aid to these countries should aim first and foremost to stimulate production that will not represent competition for EU producers .
It must not , therefore , create a conflict of interests .
The products concerned may be sold on the European Union 's market on the basis of multi-annual agreements .
I could mention mining products and biofuels by way of an example .
In addition to humanitarian aid , the main priority for these countries is assistance in job creation .
Partnership agreements with ACP countries should be in line with the European Union 's economic strategy .
New agreements should be based on principles laid down by the European Commission , the European Parliament and the ACP .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , negotiations are now entering upon a crucial stage , and they must not be allowed to fail , but it is also clear from what we are constantly told that the great pressure of time is proving too much for the weaker ones among our partner countries .

That is why we need a consciously more flexible way of planning trade beyond the first day of January 2008 .
We should learn from the errors of the Doha round , when there was a date set in stone that was then overshot .
Given the intermediate results that have been achieved , it will not be difficult to explain that to the World Trade Organisation .
There has been talk here of alternatives such as the extension and further development of GSP + , and that might be one possible way ahead , one for which we have to prepare ourselves , for it must not come as a surprise .
We should stop overburdening the negotiations with the rules for investments in the services sector , which makes them all the more difficult and , far from helping us to conclude them speedily , prevents us from concentrating on the essentials .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic partnership agreement negotiations as conducted by the Commission with the backing of the Council are threatening the economic and food sovereignty of the ACP countries and jeopardising any remaining possibility for these countries to consolidate their own productive sectors by increasing the added value of their own production ; they are thus leaving them open to the risk of further deindustrialisation .
The social and environmental impacts of indiscriminately opening up local markets to international investment , which is mainly directed towards natural resources and the produce of the land itself , would exacerbate the lack of any effective economic return for the people of those countries .
The only ones to benefit would be the large European multinationals .
On chapters such as the so-called Singapore issues , the trade in services and intellectual property rights , we will , moreover , have even stricter rules than those set by the WTO itself .
A WTO Plus agreement will push the people of Africa even further into the abyss of poverty .
The stability of entire rural communities is at risk in Africa , as are thousands of manufacturing jobs .
Without work , there is nothing left for people to do but migrate , trying their luck on those dilapidated boats that have again invaded Europe 's Mediterranean shores in recent days .
As the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , we are calling for the EPA negotiations as they have been set up to be closed and for a new start to be made on different bases , focusing on social justice , solidarity and the self-development of peoples .
In our view it is inconceivable and illogical that , while the Doha Round talks are stuck , the Commission should not want the EPA negotiations to allow for any departure from the negotiating deadline .
The whole European Union should instead do all it can within the WTO to gain recognition for a transitional regime , under which a trade preference system benefiting the ACP countries will be maintained until such time as a new agreement is finalised .
For all these reasons , and for others that I have no time to mention here , my group has decided to vote against the Sturdy report .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
I take the floor also in my capacity as a member of the permanent delegation of the European Union to the ACP countries .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his statement , and I endorse its main points .
Special thanks are due to the rapporteur , Mr Sturdy .
This is a very good and extensive report , but it contains 53 detailed points .
It almost amounts to negotiating instructions .
I would like to highlight the professionalism of the work undertaken , but I am concerned about a certain political aspect that ought to emerge from a European Parliament report .
I should like to refer to what I believe to be the five most important points regarding the effect we , the European Parliament , can have on the negotiations .
Firstly , it is essential to clarify the sustainable development aspect of Economic Partnership Agreements .
It is not currently all that clear to the countries we are negotiating with .
Secondly , it must be understood that opening the market in the framework of the Economic Partnership Agreements , simply opening up the market , does not by itself improve competitiveness .
It is very important for our partners in the ACP countries to understand this too .
Thirdly , we should find ways to encourage reforms in those countries , by way of preferences , incentives , and also through scientific and educational aid and personal exchanges .
This is all about general civilisational development , which is sometimes even more important than opening the market to products .
Fourthly , we should protect certain specific and sensitive sectors such as agriculture in those countries .
We must provide protection for particular social groups .
Some of these , for example women , may also be threatened in the framework of individual provisions .
Special preferences must be arranged for medicines and health care related issues .
My fifth and last point is that integration and regional cooperation out there , on the ground , is fundamental .
Our European Union also developed primarily on the basis of mutual cooperation and we must emphasise that .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the negotiation of the economic partnership agreements between the Commission and the ACP countries is giving rise to the deepest concerns among these countries and is taking place in a climate that is incompatible with the historical partnership relationship that unites us .
Europe is perceived as seeking to impose at any price free trade areas on countries that are among the poorest in the world , and under its conditions .
The relationship of trust with the ACP countries is now at stake .
We must re-open the negotiations on new foundations so as to address the concerns raised in the ACP countries concerning the impact of the EPAs on the future of their economies , many sectors of which could not withstand the lowering of customs protections or a situation in which they face uncontrolled competition with the European economy .
The Commission must revert to the principles laid down in the Cotonou Agreement .
The aim is development , not reciprocity when it comes to opening up markets .
Such a principle would be at odds with the aim set , given the inequalities in development that will not disappear in 20 years ' time .
Thus , these countries must have the opportunity to choose between an EPA and another form of preferential agreement .
We must offer those who have not signed an EPA by the end of 2007 market access that is at least equal to the preferences from which they benefit now , with none of them having to find themselves back in a more unfavourable situation at the end of the agreements .
Furthermore , services and the Singapore issues should not be included in the negotiations .
The only obligation in terms of compliance with the WTO rules concerns the preferences granted for trade in goods .
These issues were taken out of the negotiations within the WTO , at the request of the developing countries .
They should not be re-introduced suddenly for the ACP countries .
These issues are first and foremost the responsibility of the regional groupings of the ACP countries , whose sovereignty should be respected in this matter .
The Commission must therefore withdraw them from the negotiations .
Furthermore , the parliaments of the ACP countries and the European Parliament , together with civil society , must have access to all the elements of the negotiations and must be consulted and involved as they take place .
Finally , if longer deadlines are needed in order to do a proper job of negotiating good economic partnership agreements , then the Commission must demonstrate flexibility and defend the principle of this before the members of the WTO .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Sturdy has written a balanced report which also accommodates the fair criticism voiced by the ACP partners to the effect that , during the negotiations , the EU does not listen enough to their complaints and is instead far too ready to impose things unilaterally .
I should like to touch upon an aspect that is often overlooked , namely the regional aspect of the Economic Partnership Agreement ( EPA ) : reinforcing south-south trade .
The development goals can only be achieved if the objective of EPAs is to encourage good economic management , promote the regional integration of the ACP economies and attract and hold onto more investments .
Timely and effective aid for trade is a conditio sine qua non if the trade potential of the ACP regions is to be increased .
In this connection , I would remind the Commission of its President , Mr Barroso 's , pledge to grant the developing countries EUR 1 billion in trade support .
The fact that the Council agreement on the forthcoming financial perspectives has made insufficient provision for the proposed EUR 190 million needed annually for countries from the sugar protocol is not a good sign .
After all , keeping one 's promise is a matter of elementary credibility , and it could well determine whether the negotiations succeed or fail .
( SV ) There are three key concepts that the Commission needs to bear in mind in the negotiations : to listen , not to compel and not to become stressed .
We must listen to the ACP countries ' demands .
These negotiations are not conducted on an equal footing .
You , Mr Mandelson , have hundreds of experts at your disposal .
The ACP countries , for their part , have just a few .
We have huge economic power .
They have only the beginnings of trade and industry .
We can buy up the whole of their trade and industry .
They are scarcely able to buy food for the day .
When conditions differ so greatly , it is important for us to listen to their demands and to try to meet them .
Economic Partnership Agreements must exist to promote their development , not to increase our profits .
We must not , therefore , engage in compulsion .
If they do not wish to open up a market , we must do as is stated in paragraph 17 of the resolution and not force them to do so .
All trade experts educated in neo-liberal thinking believe that reduced tariffs are always a good thing and that free trade is always better than fair trade , but the reality shows that that is not the case .
Moreover , it is reality that our negotiating partners inhabit .
Mistaken liberalisation can lead to people 's deaths .
You can explain what you believe , but allow them to take the decisions .
If they are wrong , the mistake is theirs .
It is easier to live with deficiencies for which one is oneself responsible and which one can change than to live in extreme poverty imposed by others .
Reciprocity is unnecessary .
Allow them to decide about it for themselves .
We can live with or without reciprocity , but they can die because of it .
Finally , we must not become stressed .
I therefore hope that the House will delete recital F and approve Amendment 4 .
Allow the negotiations to take the time required and , in the meantime , allow the General System of Preferences to remain in place .
They can then safely continue to sell to us without having a sword of Damocles hanging over them .
Together with the ACP countries , we 27 EU countries constitute a dominant group within the World Trade Organisation .
If we wish , we can together say that we need to extend the period of the negotiations or else devise alternatives to economic partnership agreements .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , when the WTO ruled that the customs advantages conferred by the countries of the EU on their former colonies amounted to putting other developing countries at a disadvantage , it was not calling for a new world order .
I believe , Commissioner , that you are overestimating by far your authority 's competence in matters of planning .
The EPA drafts that you have now slapped down on the table in front of the negotiating parties constitute a manifest over-reaching of your negotiating mandate .
Treating our own experience in Europe with complete disregard , you seem to want to force through a global patchwork rug of alliances between states founded solely on economic considerations , and so , by not giving your partners even the first chance to find common social and political ground , you are putting European businesses at a massive competitive advantage .
I , for one , repudiate the idea of forcing our partner countries to accept conditions of the kind that the radical free-market elements have not managed to get accepted even within the EU .
No pretence is made that your regulations for public contracts are anything other than means towards the wedging open of the market ; you may be putting two boxers in a ring , but one of them weighs 100 kg more than the other .
I call on you , then , to suspend all negotiations on matters over and above customs tariffs and use your power to get the WTO reordered so as to take more account of the demands of development .
Mr President , I would like to join with those who have congratulated Robert Sturdy on what I think is a good report .
The report correctly stresses that these are negotiations that are being conducted between unequal partners and it has been a theme of many of the other contributors this morning .
I think the fact that the Commission and the ACP countries perceive the negotiations from a different standpoint is at the heart of many of the problems .
If we look at the end of the year deadline , the perception of the Commission is that the deadline is an essential tool for meeting its WTO obligations .
From the viewpoint of many of the ACP countries on the other hand , the deadline is being used to rush them into agreeing unsuitable agreements , and the Commission , I think , has to do much more to reassure the ACP countries that the deadline is not and will not be used to browbeat the ACP countries into agreements that they cannot otherwise live with .
On the situation with aid , the Commission says , and Commissioner Mandelson repeated this morning , that the negotiations will not fail for lack of money .
But it is unfair to expect ACP countries to make long-term decisions on liberalisation and regional integration without having a long-term view of the amount of assistance that would be available to help them put together the regional regulatory frameworks to instigate new methods of collecting government revenues to make up for the loss of the tariff income or to construct a type of infrastructure which we know from our own experience in the EU is so important to developing our regional economy .
When we move on to the issue of market access , I have heard the Commissioner say in this Chamber that the European Union has no offensive trade objectives with ACP countries .
But again , when we hear from negotiators , their perception is that the Commission is pushing them very hard to open up our services markets and to make other market-opening offers .
I say all this in a genuine spirit of belief that the Commission wants a pro-development package with the six regions .
The Commission believes it is acting in the interests of the ACP countries , but it must understand that negotiations between unequal partners create suspicion in the weaker partner .
When we talk about deadlines , they see threats , when we are vague on the aid package , they see linkage between the amount of market-opening they are prepared to offer and the size of their aid package .
If we are to overcome these concerns , then we must bring more openness and transparency to the talks themselves and we must promise that once we conclude the talks , that there will be parliamentary oversight to the finally concluded agreements so that they can be reassured that parliamentarians will be involved in this process from their implementation .
Mr President , following the progress of the EPA negotiations has been like living in two parallel universes .
On the one hand , there have been many statements from the ACP side that the process lacks the development focus it is supposed to have .
The ACP countries insist that they are being put under pressure to negotiate on the Commission 's terms and they are particularly concerned that the Commission has failed to give time for proper impact assessments and has dismissed any assessments that were not in line with its own position .
On the other hand , strangely , the Commission has maintained throughout that no one is complaining or asking for alternatives to EPAs .
However , the January 2007 review of EPAs by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa was clear .
This external and independent review concluded that there was a failure of the negotiations to have a development focus and an excessive focus on trade liberalisation alone .
Given this external UN assessment , I do not see how the Commission can keep on maintaining that the EPA negotiations have a positive dynamic and that everything is rosy .
Mr President , I trust that the Commission will take note of the concerns that many- indeed , the vast majority of - Members of Parliament have raised this morning .
The EPA negotiations are clearly at a very critical stage , and this week European Union and ACP ministers meet in Brussels to review progress , at a time when , as others have said , they are under intense pressure to conclude by the end of 2007 .
The reality is , of course , that even where technically they are well prepared , ACP countries still face serious political issues which remain between ACP member states , within governments in the ACP , between governments and private sector , civil society and regional integration organisations .
David Martin raised some very important points about the level of suspicion and anxiety that exists in ACP countries .
In the last few weeks I have been in both west and east Africa and , from the Prime Minister of Senegal , to the President of Ghana , to the Tanzanian Minister of Trade , the message was exactly the same : there are too many unresolved issues .
On aid for trade : is it new money ?
Is it predictable ?
When is it going to be on the table ?
On levels of regional integration , in Tanzania I learnt of the enormous problems there and of the new east Africa configuration which they are planning for and have , I think , written to the Commissioner about .
Then there are the Singapore issues , which others have mentioned and which are currently causing enormous difficulties in the SADC negotiations .
Most ACP member states have welcomed duty-free , quota-free access .
However , it remains the case - and I am not sure that anyone has mentioned this - that a dozen or more EU Member States are expressing concern and objections to the proposal , and some ACP states are concerned about the impact on sugar , bananas and rice .
Only yesterday , Barbados was saying that the region could benefit only if the EU ensured that they build the technical , productive and infrastructural capacity so that they can maximise the opportunities , particularly for sugar , between 2009 and 2015 .
There is this doomsday scenario that people talk about .
That is why , if they cannot sign up by the end of this year , the ACP should be provided with a high level of market access using GSP + .
The assertion I hear that alternatives do not exist is simply not the case and neither is the claim that no ACP region or country has asked for them .
Recent research by the ODI , the UN and others points to an enhanced GSP as a viable alternative to EPAs and would provide that essential breathing space for negotiations to continue .
GSP + would provide more generous access than GSP , which is clearly not an option .
Most ACP countries could well meet the eligibility criteria and would be provided with a level of market access almost equivalent to Cotonou for current exports , with very few exceptions .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to express my satisfaction with the way in which this debate has been conducted today in this House .
I wish to do so , among other things , because I believe that it blatantly gives the lie to the allegations that we have been hearing regularly over the last few months , to the effect that only a few madmen from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and a civil society defying the European Commission in principle or out of habit are worried about the staging and the outcome of the economic partnership agreement negotiations .
That is certainly not the case , as we have heard this morning .
To put it simply , there is in fact just one question to be asked today within the context of these negotiations , and that question is as follows : is the Commission able to guarantee the ACP countries that , once signed , the agreements will provide them with development conditions that are more favourable than the ones from which they benefit today ?
If it is , then I personally no longer have many problems with these economic partnership agreements .
If it is not , which I fear , then we have to reject them as they are presented to us at the moment , and for as long as they unduly favour an approach to human relations that is overly concerned with trade , to the exclusion of everything else and to the detriment of the general interest of the peoples of the ACP countries .
Improving the living conditions of as many of our contemporaries and future generations as possible , in the North and in the South , is a priority objective that we are entitled to demand on the part of the Commission .
Accordingly , the Commission has a duty to proceed with the negotiations on these agreements , willingly and with all due transparency .
In this regard , I refer to the very practical , very correct , remarks made by my colleague , Mr Arif .
However , the Commission has a duty also to give itself , and to give our partners , the necessary timescales , as several speakers who have taken the floor before me have said .
It is high time for this demand , which is made by millions of European citizens whom we represent in this House , to be considered with a far more serious and respectful approach than is the case today .
Commissioner , we are hearing Members talk extensively and insistently this morning - and we regularly hear such talk in this House - about the economy , the opening up of markets and competitiveness .
These words , let us not forget , are words that we must take for what they are , that is to say , concepts and , at best , instruments , whose only value is their possible contribution to satisfying the general interest , the interest of as many people as possible , not a number - even a growing number - of privileged persons , which can take advantage , both in the North and South , of any old agreement concluded with any old party , but a growing number of men , women and children who , together , represent the great majority of the outcasts of our world and who expect a great deal from a relationship with their European partners which , if not generous , is at least balanced .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , in its latest proposals , the European Union is considering extending the ' everything but arms ' concept to all the ACP countries .
True , this is an advance that will make it possible to ensure that none of these countries loses out after 2007 , but it is not a miracle solution that makes the EPAs development agreements .


For them to become development agreements , we need to go much further : we need to provide for a transitional period that is much longer than the 10 or 12 years that are currently being proposed ; we need to put an end to agricultural dumping and respect the principle of food sovereignty ; we need to offer genuinely special and individual treatment and enable the ACP countries to protect some of their sectors ; we need to put a stop to the pressure on the Singapore issues , in order to uphold the right of all States freely to manage their public services ; and , finally , we need to involve civil societies and parliaments more .

I believe that that is the price to be paid if the EPAs are to serve as a matter of priority the development of Africa , and not just that of Europe .

Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to respond to this debate on behalf of the Commission because of the importance of this subject : nothing less than future development , alleviation of poverty and opportunities to use the advantages of the international trade system are at stake for the ACP , some of the most poverty-struck countries in the world to whom we owe an absolute obligation .
The Economic Partnership Agreements are about using trade as a lever for development .
We have no intention of forcing ACP countries to make commitments against their will .
We are operating with one constraint , however : EPAs need to be WTO-compliant , thus including trade-opening on both sides for trade in goods and trade in services .
This of course , and I say this emphatically , does not mean symmetrical trade-opening between the EU and the ACP .
Obviously , in market-opening towards its partners , the EU will go much beyond what ACP partners will do for the EU .
In addition , in many areas , we are ready to give serious consideration to transition periods and in some cases very long transition periods - up to 25 years - together with substantial financial aid to help these countries implement their commitments so that EPAs genuinely act as a catalyst for policy reforms in ACP countries .
Concerning market access , recently the General Affairs Council of our Member States reaffirmed the principle of duty-free , quota-free , access to the ACP but with transition periods for a few sensitive products , notably rice and sugar .
The same principle applies on bananas but we agreed on additional evaluation , notably to take into account the EU 's outermost regions , and that will happen .
Specifically , in response to what Mr van den Berg said , we are jointly building with ACP regions asymmetric market access schedules which allow continued protection for ACP-sensitive sectors .
Our duty-free , quota-free offer gives great scope to protect the ACP and to open their markets in a deeply asymmetric manner .
In addition , flexible safeguards will be in place so that we can take action quickly if problems arise .
However , a conditional market access schedule would once again put our trading arrangements in a vulnerable position in the WTO , creating further uncertainty for ACP traders and investors .
Introducing such a conditional approach would therefore not be wise from the point of view of the interests of the ACP countries themselves .
Some Members have talked about alternatives to EPAs .
I can say without any hesitation or qualification whatsoever : there are no better development-friendly or superior development instruments available to us that would exceed the ambition and the potential that Economic Partnership Agreements offer .
To offer GSP as some have suggested , when instead we could negotiate good Economic Partnership Agreements , would indeed be nonsense .
ACP countries that are not LDCs would end up with worse market access to the European Union than almost any other developing countries in the world .
Yes , some then go on to propose GSP + as an alternative , by relaxing entry criteria to GSP + and expanding its coverage .
This again is completely unacceptable .
GSP + continues the divisions in trade regime between LDCs and non-LDCs that EPAs are seeking to remove and does not promote the use of market access in the way that EPAs do .
The GSP is open to all countries and many would simply take advantage of relaxed GSP + criteria , exposing the ACP to direct competition while fundamentally undermining the purpose of GSP + , which is using trade preferences to promote signature of accords on human rights and good working practices .
So I hope that people will not pursue or entertain the idea of GSP or GSP + being an acceptable and / or superior alternative to EPAs .
The best development option by far is to sign EPAs on time .
Any alternative falls short of this .
We cannot simply flout WTO rules on the goods trade section of EPAs .
If it becomes clear that for any region we are really not going to make it , LDCs get Everything but Arms ; for non-LDCs that export bananas in particular , the waiver route is probably not politically viable at all .
For others , things depend on progress in negotiations .
I would like to conclude by saying that , in contrast to some of those who have spoken here in Parliament this morning , I find the approach of the ACP countries shows considerable realism and understanding of what it is in the ACP 's interests to do .
The ACP countries have voluntarily agreed the route map that we are following in negotiating these agreements .
It is certainly not in the interests of the ACP for those who present themselves as friends of the ACP to peddle a doomsday scenario , to generate fears and insecurity which can only hold the ACP back from engaging in the negotiations which it is so much in their interest to conclude by the end of the year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( DE ) I should like to thank the rapporteur most warmly for highlighting the great need for action on the part of the European Union in the negotiation of economic partnership agreements .
We ought to start by bearing in mind that we have to work at the efficient inclusion of the ACP states in world trade and at equal success in all regional groups , which can happen , inter alia , through trade concessions and technical aid for the producers , so that the losses they sustain through tariff revenues can be compensated for , yet that alone does not give them what they need .
What they also need in order to actually benefit from easier access to the market is expert instruction and guidance .
I also believe it is likely to be essential that the underlying administrative procedures be simplified if they are to be able to use the resources available to them in a more efficient way .
We , being Members of this House , ought , I think , to be aware of the fact that trade with states such as these is also in Europe 's interests , and , moreover , we , being citizens of developed states , owe it to the citizens of the ACP countries to do everything in our power to enable them to put down roots in world trade .
1 .
EC-Russia fisheries and conservation Agreement ( vote )
- Report : Morillon
2 .
Financial Instrument for the Environment ( LIFE + ) ( vote )
- Report : Isler Bguin
4 .
Cooperation between committees ( amendment of Rule 47 ) ( vote )
- Report : Corbett
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , the issue here is the adoption without a vote of an amendment from the committee asked for an opinion .
It is generally understood to be clear that the adoption of an amendment from a committee whose opinion is sought can be automatic only when that amendment falls under the exclusive competence of that committee .
The word ' exclusive ' is missing in this instance .
For the sake of greater precision , I have agreed with the rapporteur that the term ' exclusive competences ' be added to this sentence .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as rapporteur I can accept the oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
5 .
Environmental quality standards in the field of water policy ( vote )
- Report : Laperrouze
6 .
Organic production and labelling of organic products ( vote )
- Report : Aubert
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my report on organic production and labelling of organic products is finally going to be put to the vote today , firstly after referral back to committee , and then after an urgent request to the Council , which , I might add , was unanimously rejected by our Parliament last month .
Unfortunately , the new discussions held over the last two months with the Council have not enabled us to progress further on important points .
In particular , neither the Commission nor the Council agreed to the dual legal basis that we were demanding .
The Council did not go back on its decision to permit , by special derogation , additives and veterinary treatments made from GMOs .
Furthermore , certain chemical substances could also be permitted by derogation .
With no codecision , we are forced to acknowledge this state of affairs .
We do , however , deplore the uncommunicative and offhand attitude of the Council over the last few weeks , in spite of the good will of some Member States .
I just as deeply regret the fact that the majority of the groups refused yesterday to postpone the vote until June , given that the Council itself had postponed its meeting on organic farming .
I regret that the majority of the groups did not wish to exhaust the means that we have to apply pressure .
That being said , the Council did nevertheless take up a number of our amendments in its compromise , and regular consultation of all the actors concerned is part of the overall agreement .
I therefore call on you now to adopt this report .
You can count on my determination , and on that of my fellow Members from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , closely to monitor this matter over the next few months .
( Applause )
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , you have asked to take the floor .
I would ask you in what capacity and on the basis of which Rule of Procedure do you wish to do so ?
( DE ) Mr President , perhaps I might be permitted , as rapporteur of the appended report on organic agriculture , to say something about external relations .
The report we are voting on today is a good one , making it perfectly clear that the ...
( Uproar )
I am truly sorry , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , but you have heard the reaction of our fellow Members .
I think that everyone has understood that you believe the report to be a good report , but I cannot give the floor to all the rapporteurs and former rapporteurs , as you will clearly understand .
7 .
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Denmark and Greenland ( vote )
- Report : Post
8 .
Delegation to EUROLAT ( vote )
- Decision :
9 .
Joint Declaration on practical arrangements for the codecision procedure ( vote )
- Report : Leinen
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the codecision procedure is the most important instrument available to this House , and the new agreement with the Council and the Commission makes it considerably more transparent and a good deal more efficient .
On some points of detail , we and the Council of Ministers see eye to eye .

I want to take this opportunity to extend warm thanks to Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca and Mr Trakatellis , who spent over a year negotiating with the Council and the Commission , and also to Mr Daul , who watched over the whole business .
This new agreement , then , brings us a good way forward where the codecision procedure is concerned .
10 .
Halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 ( vote )
- Report : Adamou
11 .
Global Europe - External aspects of competitiveness ( vote )
- Report : Caspary
- Before the vote on Amendment 51 :
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to table an oral amendment , the aim of which is to add ' the poorest countries ' in place of ' the developing countries ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 52 :
( FR ) I shall try again .
This time I fully identify with the spirit of the amendment .
It consists in asking the Commission to take account of what is in the amendment .
That is the spirit of the amendment .
This means that , where it says :
... ' should not seek to include ' , we should say that the EU ' should deal carefully with these issues ' .
( FR ) I would advise my fellow Members from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to think carefully before opposing this , otherwise we risk voting against the amendment as a whole .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is Voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
We shall now proceed to the explanations of vote .
We voted for this final agreement because Parliament secured a EUR 40 million increase above the amount provided for in the Council Common Position .
The budget for LIFE + now stands at around EUR 1 894 million .
Part of the LIFE + budget is earmarked for ' nature and biodiversity ' projects .
Parliament has ensured that at least 50 % of budget resources of LIFE + will be dedicated to project action grants to support the conservation of nature and biodiversity .
In its common position , the Council had proposed earmarking 40 % of the whole budget to such projects .
Lastly , as mentioned in the final report , Mr Dimas read out a statement during the Conciliation Committee meeting saying that before the review of the Financial Framework , the Commission would carry out a review of committed and planned spending at national and EU level on the management of the Natura 2000 networks .
This overview will be used with a view to adapting Community instruments , in particular LIFE + , and to ensuring a high level of cofinancing .
To conclude , the outcome is far more satisfactory than any agreement that could have been concluded at an earlier stage of the legislative procedure .
I warmly welcome the outcome of this conciliation procedure , with its accent on a centralised approach in which the Commission continues to manage the programme , thereby ensuring value added for Europe as a whole , equal criteria and excellence , and reducing extra spending on setting up national level management bodies .
I should like to highlight other positive elements such as the EUR 40 million increase in the general budget and the award of 15 % in funds for transnational projects .
I shall therefore be voting in favour of the common project adopted by the Conciliation Committee on LIFE + .

( DE ) Mr President , we have been equipped with yet another instrument fit for combating the trafficking in human beings and their sexual exploitation , in the shape of the Daphne III programme , but the fact of the matter is that , since over 100 000 women in the European Union are victims of people-trafficking and of violence , this sort of programme needs to be properly endowed .

I am very glad to see that the budget has been topped up by 50 million , bringing it to over EUR 114 million , which will enable us to mount information campaigns in the countries from which those women and children originate who are enticed into the European Union , there to become the victims of sexual violence .
Such information campaigns enable us to prevent this by informing women and offering them protection from exploitation .
If that is combined with aid provided under programmes for improving the position of women at risk , then we are , by means of Daphne III , taking a quite vital step in combating violence , people-trafficking and sexual exploitation .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Grner report on the grounds that it has certainly succeeded in achieving progress in the fight against the violence suffered by women , and there is no doubt about the role that the Daphne programme has played in that .
It has to be said , though , that violence against women is more widespread in cultures in which patriarchal power still has deep roots and in which hardly anyone regards it as a problem .
Violations of women 's human rights such as genital mutilation and forced marriages are happening among us , too , as a consequence of the waves of immigration over recent years , and I believe we need to do more , in order to address this , than to raise awareness of the problem or make forced marriages punishable in the EU .
There must also be no acceptance of exceptional court rulings justified by reference to cultural considerations ; when criminals are punished , be they from the host community or from Western cultural backgrounds , the same law must apply to Muslim immigrants .
This is where Justice must be neither blind nor dumb .
I am voting for the adoption of Mrs Grner 's report on the Council 's common position with a view to the adoption of a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing for the period 2007-2013 a specific programme to prevent and combat violence against children , young people and women , and to protect victims and groups at risk ( Daphne III programme ) as part of the General Programme ' Fundamental Rights and Justice ' .
The Daphne programme was set up in 1997 .
It has served to fund over 350 projects providing support for non-governmental organisations and institutions and associations involved in protecting children , young people and women against violence .
I offer my strong support to the third stage of this project , to which Mrs Grner 's report refers .
The main aims of Daphne III are supporting the development of the Community 's policy relating to public health protection , gender equality , combating domestic violence , protecting children 's rights , combating gender violence in situations of conflict and combating human trafficking and sexual exploitation .
These ambitious aims for 2007-2013 will be supported by a budget of EUR 116 850 000 .
A comparison with the Daphne I budget - EUR 20 000 000 and with the Daphne II budget - EUR 50 000 000 is testament to recognition of the programme 's importance and achievements .
The report also rightly highlights the need to open up the programme for cooperation with non-governmental organisations by ensuring greater transparency , reducing bureaucracy and providing assistance for applicants seeking funding .
I supported these Amendments to Daphne III , the EU 's specific programme to prevent and combat violence against children , young people and women .
I am pleased that the third phase of Daphne ( 2007-2013 ) has an increased budget of EUR 116.85 million .
In addition , I am pleased that the bureaucracy will be reduced so that NGOs have easier access to the programme .
I fully support the work of the rapporteur in combating violence against women .
The DAPHNE programme helps in tackling this issue across the EU and those who fail to support this report today should be condemned .
in writing . - ( FR ) The extension of the Daphne programme for 2007-2013 demonstrates the European Parliament 's desire to ensure that this plan , which was implemented in 2000 , continues .
Violence against children , adolescents and women is a tragic social phenomenon .
Some groups that are particularly vulnerable to violence must be better protected , but we must not forget about domestic violence and female genital mutilation .
In Runion , for example , the number of offences against women has doubled in 20 years , and more than a fifth of women have suffered at least one form of violence in a public space during the last 12 months .
I would therefore like it if the European Commission devoted a European year to this type of violence .
I welcome the commitment made by the Commission , which has increased the budget to almost EUR 117 million , even though this amount is lower than the one requested by the European Parliament .
The twofold increase in the resources testifies , however , to a real ambition in the objectives .
This effort must still be accompanied by transparency in the programme and must make the programme more accessible to civil society , which lacks technical assistance when it comes to preparing draft proposals , particularly in the outermost regions .
I hope that , in future , assessments are conducted by a committee of experts .
Instead of some of the more far-reaching proposals suggested to us , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a modest revision of Rule 47 ( which would be renamed ' Procedure with associated committees ' ) .
This more modest change would require the chairmen and rapporteurs of the committees concerned to meet and jointly identify areas of the text falling within their executive or joint competences .
The chair of the committee responsible would have to take account of any such agreement when ruling on the final responsibility for different parts of the text .
The rule would also allow the parties to agree , if they so wish , on more precise arrangements for their cooperation , which opens the door to possibilities such as a joint working group .
The rule change also would guarantee that associated committees are represented in any Parliament delegation in a conciliation procedure .

We abstained from voting on the reports by Mr Corbett and Mr Leinen on enhanced cooperation between committees and practical arrangements for the codecision procedure .
Admittedly , from a practical point of view , these reports aim at simplifying the work done by this Parliament in its institutional and legal framework .
However , they are symptomatic of a parliamentary practice where , ultimately , everything is more or less decided in advance , in small committees , by means of the interinstitutional or intergroup compromise , and in the name of effectiveness and rationality .
They are also symptomatic of a parliament in which the ' large ' groups - at least those that are recognised as such - call the shots and in which the individual rights of Members are reduced to their most basic expression , and are even non-existent when it comes to producing legislation .
By imposing order on its procedures , this Parliament , which already suffers from a lack of national and political representativeness and from a lack of proximity to Europeans , is going to lose once and for all the characteristic that ought to define it : that of being a parliament that is elected by the people , for the people .
( DE ) Mr President , I also voted in favour of the Laperrouze report on the grounds that it is of course better , where water is concerned , to sort things out in advance than to have to spend a great deal of money on repairs later on .
Being an Austrian , and thus a citizen of a country with very considerable water reserves , I do believe that a sustainable and environmentally conscious water policy means that we must no longer give financial support to intensive agriculture , which brings in its train such problems as over-fertilisation .
Instead , support should go to those farmers who use traditional methods of cultivation .
In forestry , too , we can play a part in determining which and how many pollutants get into the groundwater and at what rate , while also helping to protect against flooding .
I voted in favour of the Laperrouze report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy and amending Directive 2000 / 60 / EC . I feel that the EU should continue to play a fundamental role in protecting the environment .
Furthermore , the purpose of this proposal is to protect and promote environmental quality in accordance with the principle of sustainable development .
These are much needed measures that follow up the proposal contained in the Water Framework Directive and will help to end the chemical pollution of water , which disturbs aquatic ecosystems , causes biodiversity to be lost and makes human beings increasingly exposed to pollutants .
This fresh proposal for a directive on environmental quality standards in the area of water policy follows on from the Water Framework Directive , adopted in 2000 . The proposal sets out environmental quality targets for surface water to be achieved by 2015 , albeit without any formal appraisal of the various existing laws or an integrated approach to water policy .
This is therefore a series of separate measures with some positive aspects .
I welcome , for example , reference to the need to take account of the scientific and technical data available , the different environmental conditions in the different regions , balanced economic and social development and the polluter pays principle .
Yet this is presented in a framework of fostering neoliberalism , with the proposed measures playing second fiddle to ' maintaining uniform competitive conditions in the internal market ' .
It also introduces vague concepts such as ' best available techniques ' , which may be used to make it compulsory to use patented technology and equipment . This will engender dependence , and may serve to deprive workers of production resources given the price of hi-tech equipment .
Although Parliament has made some improvements on the Commission 's text , it rejected most of the proposals tabled by our group , which is why we abstained from the final vote .
in writing . - ( EL ) The title about environmental quality standards in the field of water policy does not really correspond to its content , in that it focuses on harmful substances in surface waters and on sediments which come solely from pesticides .
Other contaminants , such as industrial waste water , urban waste water , landfill leachate , thermal pollution from corresponding sources , the pollution of lakes with air pollutants from incineration units which are brought down with the weather etc . , are left out of account .
However , the chemical pollution of surface waters may cause disruptions to water ecosystems , destroying biodiversity , or contaminants may accumulate in the food chain from poisoned fish .
Moreover , it is clear that the Commission 's intention is to target and blame agriculture as being the sole factor responsible for the chemical contamination of surface waters .
Moreover , the ' polluter pays ' principle does not stop pollution , but it does legalise the inconsiderate actions of industry and other monopolies .
No specific measures are proposed for controlling the sources of the disposal of ' priority substances ' , both dangerous and harmless , the concentration limits of which are dealt with in the proposal for a directive .
Nonetheless , the report does expand the limited content of the directive in order to achieve more effective protection of waters .
Ultimately , however , both the content and the orientation are a long way from contemporary needs for protection of the social right to high-quality water , which must be complete and not partial and fragmented .
Water quality is essential to our environment and I am pleased to see that through European action we have witnessed improvements .
I believe that the proposal of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to look at the effectiveness of all Community legislative acts with a direct or indirect impact on water quality is a step in the right direction .
( DE ) Mr President , although the rapporteur , Mrs Marie-Hlne Aubert , has worked very hard at producing a good report , the delegation of the Austrian People 's Party in the European Parliament has today voted against it , on the grounds that we still find many things in it that we find highly problematic .
We still believe that the limit value for GMOs in organic agriculture must be 0.0 % , and that imports from third states must meet the same criteria as products from EU Member States and must therefore be subjected to controls .
Likewise , the labels that we have in the EU must not be used for products from elsewhere , so that consumers may not be misled and that their traceability may be assured .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the motion that the Aubert report on organic production and labelling of organic products be referred back to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
As far as I am concerned , it is necessary that the threshold for accidental contamination by GMOs should not be the same as in conventional agriculture , that is to say around 0.9 % , for one would thereby be making the de facto admission that contamination can no longer be prevented and that it cannot be guaranteed that a product is GMO-free even if certified ' organic ' .
I supported the proposal in this regard from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , according to which the presence of GMOs in organic products would have to be limited solely to unforeseeable and technically unavoidable amounts to a maximum of 0.1 % and that the term ' organic ' was not to be used to describe products contaminated accidentally by GMOs in excess of a detectable threshold of 0.1 % .
Finally , I endorse the motion that a different legal basis be found for this matter relating to organic farming .
Having hitherto been a consultant , the European Parliament intends to become a codecider where problems such as this are concerned , and that will constitute progress .
We abstained from the final vote in view of what has happened throughout the process .
On the one hand , we object to the Commission 's position . It proposed a regulation authorising the presence of up to 0.9 % of GMOs in organic products , among other points with which we disagree .
We still feel that this is unacceptable , particularly as regards organic farming .
To tolerate the 0.9 % of GMO contamination proposed by the report would mean accepting GMO contamination of organic products .
This will undeniably have an impact on consumers , and constitutes a serious , unacceptable threat to the survival of the organic food industry .
Consumers choose to buy organic products because they are produced more sustainably and without pesticides and are completely GMO-free .
To accept the introduction of GMOs , even in very small quantities , is tantamount to hoodwinking consumers and will have serious consequences for the environment and for people 's health in general .
On the other hand , given that it has been possible to improve the Commission 's proposal in plenary - even though the Council has not yet given a positive response and has not accepted the amendment to the legal basis - we abstained from the final vote in the hope that it will be possible for further concessions to be made on the proposals that improve on the initial position .
I will be voting in favour of Mrs Aubert 's report on organic production and labelling of organic products .
I believe that consumers have the right to clear identification of products they intend to purchase .
Nevertheless , regulations on labelling have to reflect day-to-day realities .
We cannot specify requirements that lie beyond our ability to operate in a meaningful way reflecting the best practical means available at the time .
To do otherwise is to collude in limiting the availability of products many consumers might choose to purchase .
in writing . - ( FR ) Organic farming now represents 1.4 % of the agricultural production of the 25 Member States and 3.6 % of the utilised agricultural area ( 1.8 % of the agricultural land in Brittany ) .
Consumer demand continues to increase , and the arrival on the market of these products , which have all manner of labels and which are produced even outside the EU , presents new problems where control , certification and labelling are concerned .
Furthermore , the subsidies and standards in this area are very disparate from one country to the next , and this creates distortions of competition for those organic producers who receive the least assistance .
I therefore welcome the adoption in plenary of the opinion of the European Parliament addressed to the Council calling on it swiftly to adopt the regulation on organic farming .
This new regulation must make it possible to clarify the Community framework relating to organic food production , which dates back to 1991 .
Parliament requests that the national inspection systems be strengthened so that products can be traced at every stage of production .
If it is compulsory to use the European logo ( for foodstuffs containing 95 % organic ingredients ) and the ' EU-organic ' indication , then it must remain possible to add other private logos .
Finally , the use of GMOs must be prohibited in organic farming .
The much-vaunted upgrading of agricultural production and improvements to agricultural products through organic farming risk turning into a colossal scam at the expense of producers and consumers .
The few multinationals trying to control the global food chain through modified organisms for the sake of their profits have won through and all the political groups of the EU , including PASOK and New Democracy , are to blame .
The admissible presence of GMOs and the addition of supplements ( vitamins etc . ) from GMOs to organic foods are the back door for using modified organisms in countries and areas resisting their use , which they recognise as dangerous .
Setting a limit for admissible levels of modified organisms in organic products , however low it may be today , means it can be increased without control , given that even the European Parliament was not allowed the right of codecision .
This limit will now be set by the multinationals in line with the natural contamination which will be caused by the permitted coexistence of conventional , genetically modified and organic crops , however many protective measures are taken .
Thus organic farmers will see their products downgraded , while consumers buying ' organic ' products with GMOs will be deceived .
Unfortunately , our proposals to ban modified organisms in organic food were not accepted ; but the fight continues with the workers for healthy crops and healthy food .
I supported the resolution on organic food products which builds on the report in March to introduce stricter rules governing organic food products .
I believe that this can increase consumer protection .
in writing .
( SV ) I am voting in favour of the report because , unlike the Commission 's proposal , it retains the option of national labelling . I regret , however , that , in spite of everything , it recommends that EU labelling should be the dominant form of labelling .
I voted for the report on organic labelling because it still allows for national labelling .
This means that , although the proposed EU label recognises a diluted version of organic foods , particularly in terms of GMO content , national labelling can still signal the absence of GMOs in organic products in an EU Member State 's own market .
Mr President , I am delighted today to support my group colleague in her report 's assertion that organic production and labelling represent a crucial area of EU production in need of protection .
As the market for organic food grows it is vital that consumers feel safe in the definition of what is and what is not organic .
We in Scotland have a thriving organic sector and I want to see that flourish .
A stable labelling and definitions framework will assist that .
The European Community and Greenland have had fishing relations for a long time , but the 1985 framework agreement expired on 31 December 2006 .
The new protocol in place as of 1 January 2007 for a period of six years lays down the fishing opportunities for Community vessels , the financial contribution , the categories of Community vessels that can operate in the Greenland exclusive economic zone and the conditions under which they can operate there .
The main objective of the new agreement is to retain and strengthen fishing ties between the Community and Greenland Home Rule following the establishment of a partnership and dialogue framework aimed at improving sustainable fishing policy and at the sensible exploitation of fishing resources in Greenland fishing areas in the interests of both parties .
Portugal has a particular interest in the fishing sector and is therefore in favour of the conclusion of this new agreement .
In spite of our vote in favour of the report before us - which approves the proposal for a regulation in question - we are concerned about Article 3 ( 2 ) of the regulation , which allows the Commission to consider license applications from any Member State when Member States covered by this agreement have not exhausted the fishing opportunities to which they are entitled .
We feel that in the event of the under-use of fishing opportunities granted to a Member State as part of quotas and licences , the Commission should consult the Member States in question with a view to ensuring the optimum use of fishing opportunities , including the possibility of transferring unused fishing opportunities to other Member States .
We believe , however , that this possibility should not undermine the principle of relative stability ; it should not , in other words , have any influence on the future award of fishing opportunities to Member States in the context of these partnerships .
As such , we support the amendment clarifying this point .
As Amendment 7 was not carried , the EPLP was left with no option but to vote against the report .
This report could jeopardise the historical fishing rights of the Scottish fleet and sets a dangerous precedent for future fishing agreements .
I am voting for the adoption of the report on practical arrangements for the codecision procedure .
I should like to begin by thanking Mr Leinen , the rapporteur , for a very well prepared report .
Every effort should be made to ensure that the European Union functions as efficiently as possible and to simplify the system of interinstitutional cooperation .
Our aim must be to make decision taking and the development of European legislation by the three Union institutions , namely the European Commission , the Council and the European Parliament , as transparent as possible for the citizens of Europe .
The codecision procedure is an important element of the European Union 's legislative system .
It ensures that new EU legislation is adopted in a more democratic manner .
The proposals for improving this procedure contained in the report are apt and should help to simplify the functioning of this decision-making system .
Halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 is something that should be supported as a matter of principle .
Appropriate measures are therefore required .
Species and ecosystems need space to develop and recover . Accordingly , the maintenance of ecosystems should become a fundamental goal of all EU horizontal and sectoral policies .
Healthy ecosystems play a vital role in prosperity and well-being in the EU and worldwide . If urban and rural development goes on overlooking nature , our landscape will be dominated by cement and pollution .
Given that biodiversity is a cornerstone of sustainable development , biodiversity concerns need to be integrated into all areas of policy-making .
Although there are contradictions in Community policy , the Member States must take up all available opportunities under the CAP , the CFP , cohesion and structural funds , LIFE + and the Seventh Framework Programme to support biodiversity targets .
Furthermore , it is imperative that greater consideration be given to financial needs in the 2008-09 Community budget review , during which there should be an assessment of the sufficiency ( or otherwise ) and availability of EU financing for biodiversity , especially for Natura 2000 .
I voted in favour of the Adamou report because I feel that the loss of biodiversity will have a serious impact on the future of the EU . Furthermore , the Action Plan before us will prove to be a vital tool for implementing the measures needed to halt the problem by 2010 , although I do feel that this deadline will be decidedly difficult to meet .
I agree that the consequences of climate change will be such that ecosystem services and the specific roles played by the CAP and the CFP should be taken into account , given their importance in meeting targets and in ensuring the long-term existence of biodiversity .
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU 's interest in halting the loss of biodiversity is superficial and hypocritical , because it does not take substantial measures or provide the necessary funding .
At the same time that it appears to be fighting for biodiversity , its basic priority is to promote GMOs .
The report quite rightly refers to the dangers from genetically modified fish .
It does not refer to the huge threat from resistant , genetically-modified plants which shrink plant biodiversity and harbour dangers to public health .
There is already a plethora of data about the mass disappearance of species ; the rates of loss are 100-1000 times higher than natural levels , with tragic consequences for the genetic flow between populations of flora and fauna .
The main causes of the loss of biodiversity cited are climate change , environmental pollution , intensive farming methods and inappropriate management of forests and water resources .
These , however , are the result of the plundering exploitation of nature by the monopolies for the sake of their profits .
Even the ' polluter pays ' principle acquits the polluter , legalising the downgrading of the environment and making it the subject of haggling , for the benefit of the profits of capital .
Basically , the responsibility of governments and of the EU is being passed to the citizens , by strengthening education and raising awareness .
The people must acknowledge that the anti-environmental policy of the EU and of the governments of the Member States is to blame and must condemn and overturn it .
Mr President , I am pleased that this important report gained the majority it did , because the gradual loss of biodiversity should concern us all .
The implications of the moves to biofuels should in particular be kept to the forefront of our attention .
While nobody would deny that we need to move away from fossil fuels , the knock-on effects of major shifts in production to monocultivation of ( often GM ) biofuels could have long-term effects that are even more detrimental , and this report does well to keep this issue on our agenda .
The fact that 52 % of freshwater fish species are threatened with extinction whilst cod and other fish stocks are at worryingly low levels should be a wake-up call for action .
I agree with the rapporteur that biodiversity loss is as important as climate change and that Member States must show greater political will to prevent the loss of biodiversity .
I am also pleased to see that the amendment condemning deep-sea bottom-trawling and other unsustainable fishing practices was carried .
( PL ) Mr President , the creation of a single market within our community , a very extensive market and one that has gradually enlarged , has brought benefits to all its participants .
The aforementioned enlargement was preceded by the creation of a single market , the introduction of new legislation and by a whole process of adjustments .
In short , conditions were approximated , thus ensuring genuine competition .
Opening the market is a condition of globalisation .
For this to be beneficial to everyone , however , a process that involves not only negotiation but also adjustment , including educational and information activities for interested social groups must precede opening .
The creation of a global market must be founded on similar principles to the ones we adopted when creating the European market .
The experience was a good one .
Setting standards and conditions to be met by the interested parties is particularly important . These include environmental standards , conditions relating to work and pay , and the principles of innovation .
A so-called road map should be drawn up for this process , laying down the various stages and allowing for development .
Full monitoring by the interested parties should also be arranged .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report commits the European Union and its trade partners to the path towards triumphant liberalism , liberalism that goes against the tenets of European trade policy .
I regret that the MEPs are renouncing what they have defended until now : a trade policy that consisted in subordinating the trade agreements to social and environmental requirements by respecting the sovereignty of developing countries when it came to the management of a number of sectors vital to their development ( public services , investment , public contracts and competition rules ) .
This vote has replaced this policy with a strategy aimed at the wide-ranging liberalisation of services and of investment in developing countries , one that will meet the expectations of European manufacturers , to the detriment of economic development needs .
The principle of free trade must be a tool used to promote development , not an objective in its own right .
I deplore the fact that the Singapore issues , which had been excluded from the Doha multilateral negotiations , have been re-introduced by the MEPs in this report as priorities for future bilateral negotiations .
I voted in favour of the Caspary report because , although it is not perfect , I feel that most of the socialists ' objectives were met , which were as follows : preference for multilateralism and the conclusion of the Doha Round , special treatment for countries with development problems , mutual recognition of standards , compliance with social and environmental minimum standards , the fight against current dumping , protection of intellectual property , the adoption of codes of conduct and best practice by European firms and increased involvement for Parliament .
I warmly welcome an active and constructive role for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament in bilateral negotiations with emerging economies such as Korea , India , China and Russia , in which wide-ranging , well-balanced reciprocity is required .
At the same time , support for the least developed countries must , as a matter of urgency , be stepped up and the conditions created for enabling them to play an active role in world trade .
The final text , in my view , dealt adequately with these issues and offered much-needed opposition to the unilateral review of trade defence instruments .
in writing .
( PT ) I voted in favour of the Caspary report because , although it is not perfect , I feel that most of the socialists ' objectives were met , which were as follows : preference for multilateralism and the conclusion of the Doha Round , special treatment for countries with development problems , mutual recognition of standards , compliance with social and environmental minimum standards , the fight against current dumping , protection of intellectual property , the adoption of codes of conduct and best practice by European firms and increased involvement for Parliament .
As shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I warmly welcome an active and constructive role for our group in bilateral negotiations with emerging economies such as Korea , India , China and Russia , in which wide-ranging and well-balanced reciprocity is required .
At the same time , support for the least developed countries must , as a matter of urgency , be stepped up and the conditions created for enabling them to play an active role in world trade .
The final text , in my view , dealt adequately with these issues , and offered much-needed opposition to the unilateral review of trade defence instruments . I should also like to highlight the fact that the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs enjoyed a willingness to compromise .
On reading the new report by this House on the benefits of globalisation - ' benefits ' despite the growing number of unfair practices damaging European businesses , the relocations and unemployment - I thought of the new President of the French Republic .
In his electoral speech on Europe , he spoke of necessary ' protection ' .
He even dared to use the term ' Community preference ' !
I do not know what Mr Sarkozy has been doing over the last five years , but he has certainly not been reading the reports by this Parliament , or the records of the Council or the speeches by Mr Mandelson and his predecessor .
They never mention ' preference ' , except when it comes to encouraging an even greater liberalisation of our markets .
They never mention protection , even though the EU 's trade defence instruments are manifestly inadequate and randomly used .
They mention only the pursuit of globalisation and risk management .
Yet , the European Union manages absolutely nothing , and especially not the millions of unemployed , the devastated industrial sectors and the near-devastated agricultural sector .
In Mr Sarkozy 's eyes , these losses are included among the acceptable risks .
I ask the question : is Mr Sarkozy deceiving his public on these issues , or is he himself being deceived ?
Free trade and global liberalisation are presented here as panaceas , alongside the sacred cows of price stability , increased competition and tax cuts that facilitate the exploitation of workers .
I should also like to highlight the fact that the report states that ' bilateral and regional FTAs ' are a ' sub-optimal ' solution and as such should be launched only when necessary ' to improve the competitive position of EU exporters on crucial foreign markets ' .
They ' should be WTO-compatible , comprehensive , ambitious ' and should ensure far-reaching liberalisation of services and investment , going beyond both existing multilateral commitments and those expected to result from a successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda ' .
In other words , with the WTO negotiations deadlocked , the order has come to press ahead whenever and wherever possible with the liberalisation of trade , to the delight and the profit of the large economic and financial groups in the EU .
What the report fails to mention are the disastrous consequences of capitalist liberalisation - with its ' structural reforms ' , the end of customs duties and the imposition of so-called ' intellectual property rights ' - such as the glaring increase in inequality across the world , rising unemployment , unstable work , poverty and the appalling impact on the environment and biodiversity .
We therefore voted against the report .
While this report had some negative elements , such as its call for a delay of the Trade Defence Instrument Review and the unprecise nature of the language on liberalisation ( which has opened up the possibility that certain aspects of liberalisation may be negotiated upon which were controversial at the WTO level ) , I felt on balance it was a report to be supported .
The introduction at Committee stage of paragraphs on the need for Core Labour and Environmental Standards to be integrated into the EU 's trade deals , and of additional references to development considerations , made the report more rounded .
While it could have gone further in its considerations of development issues , it is my view that during the current generation of bilateral trade deals the targeted countries ( South Korea , India and ASEAN - given that in ASEAN there will be special and differential treatment to take account of developing countries ) will be well placed to defend their interests during negotiations .
In a globalised world , the concerns raised in this report are extremely important .
Although I do not agree with some of the points made , I can see in this list of problems and potential solutions an approach that is , in essence , a realistic one . To my mind , this is one of the most important aspects .
The debate on the external competitiveness of the EU , or on the EU and the global economy , must be based on realism .
It is an extremely dangerous mistake to foster the illusion that it is possible to seal the borders , to impose rules identical to our own throughout the world and to ignore the social impact of competition .
I feel therefore that the right strategy is to derive maximum benefit from this new reality , whilst keeping to a minimum its detrimental effects . That means investing in both the cutting edge and the traditional and in what is specific and non-transferable as opposed to what is attracted by the living standards in the European area .
The fashionable idea that the Eurocentric world ( or simply a world in which Europe is economically and strategically important ) died with the advent of the global economy is not a cast-iron truth , it is an opinion that may be contradicted by the facts ; and facts are shaped by political will .
I support this report and the idea of adapting the EU 's trade policy to future challenges .
Europe 's leading position in the world market enables us to prepare for change in such a way that we can respond to globalisation without abandoning our interests or the social model .
The increased liberalisation of trade must be accompanied by better use of defence instruments to combat unfair trade practices .
Without wishing to call for protectionism , which would not reduce the effects of globalisation , it is vital for Europe to adopt a strong stance on scrupulous compliance with its international trade agreements .
We cannot allow our competitors to use state aid policies for exports , to implement artificial currency devaluation and to violate basic environmental rules .
It is also unacceptable for these countries to use child labour and forced labour and not to honour workers ' rights .
The opening up of international trade and market access must be global and reciprocal .
Furthermore , the inclusion of minimum social and environmental standards in our trade agreements must be safeguarded .
The European project must always be based on solidarity , on respect for human rights and on sustainable development .
I support the call to reject this proposal , thus making the review unnecessary .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Debate on the future of Europe with the participation of the Prime Minister of Italy , Member of the European Council ( debate )
It is with great pleasure that I welcome the Prime Minister of the Italian Republic , Romano Prodi , to the European Parliament today to discuss with us the future of Europe .
Italy , one of the founding Member States , has always been in the forefront in guiding the process of European integration , and Italy is also playing a decisive role at this moment , when we are seeking a solution to the stalemate reached in the process of European integration - a solution that everyone can accept .
In particular , I should like to thank the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , for the fruitful collaboration that we have established in order to make a success of revising the Treaties .
The President of Parliament knows that when he speaks he has not only the support of Parliament , but also that of Italy , and that gives him greater strength .

( DE ) Prime Minister , my dear Mr Prodi , in Rome , your country 's capital city , there took place in March of this year a series of celebrations in honour of the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaties of Rome , when we were able to rejoice in looking back on 50 years of stability , prosperity and progress that our citizens have enjoyed .
Now , though , is also the time to look forward into the future together .
Today , the European Union faces great challenges and must , in order to master them , summon up the will to take the necessary steps and implement reforms that will guide us along the way to a secure future .
You , Mr Prodi , in your time as President of the Commission , played a part in shaping the history of the European Union at an important juncture in time .
The Commission under your chairmanship , represented in the Convention by Commissioners Vittorino and Barnier , played an active part in the work on the future of the European Union and watched over the birth of the constitutional treaty right up to the Intergovernmental Conference .
The German Presidency of the Council is currently working hard to find a solution satisfactory not only to all those countries that rejected the Treaty , but also to the eighteen Member States , constituting the majority by population of the European Union , that have already ratified it .
As this process moves forward , the European Parliament unreservedly endorses the substance of the constitutional treaty , not least because it represents a compromise achieved after lengthy negotiations .
We realise , though , that finding a solution will call for hard work on the part of all of us , and so we strongly support the efforts on the part of the German Presidency of the Council , especially those undertaken by the Federal Chancellor , Angela Merkel , towards a renewed consensus among all 27 Member States .
Were our response , however , to end up making the European Union less democratic , to limit its ability to take decisions , and to make it less transparent , that would be to misinterpret what those citizens who , in the referendums in France and the Netherlands , expressed their misgivings , actually wanted , and so this House will not be satisfied with a result that is not in the interests of the European Union and of its citizens .
I am persuaded , Prime Minister , that , with goodwill , it is possible not only to draw closer to one another , but also to achieve a result .
( IT ) Prime Minister , the floor is yours .
Prime Minister of Italy . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we stand at a crossroads for the future of Europe and of European integration , and it is in that knowledge , and not without emotion , that I address you today .
I am most grateful to the President , Hans Gert Poettering , for this opportunity .
Between now and the 2009 elections , Europe will be playing for its own future .
In a month 's time , the European Council will decide on launching an Intergovernmental Conference , at the end of which we must be able to say that we are equal to the commitments that we all adopted together in Berlin on 25 March this year .
It is a question of deciding what Europe needs - what we all need - in order to address the challenges that the world imposes on us .
This sounds like an abstract issue , but in fact it is highly concrete .
We ought to have realised by now that the ability of us Europeans to interpret the globalised world and to take the opportunities it offers depends on how we are able to make our joint institutions operate .
I must say straight away that , quite frankly , I do not agree with those who continue to contrast the need to produce results with the need to strengthen Europe 's institutions .
It is precisely in order to get more results that I have always hoped and fought for stronger and more effective joint institutions .
This time we are not starting from scratch .
In other words , we do not have to reinvent the wheel .
In October 2004 , all the European countries signed a treaty and 18 countries have actually ratified it .
Over these last two years , it has been the arguments of those who are hesitant that have been heard most of all .
The time has now come to listen to those who have ratified the 2004 treaty , those who have worked hard , including with their own citizens , to stay on that path .
They had embarked on that path a few years previously at Laeken , where it had unfolded from a fundamental and irrefutable starting point : that Europe could not achieve ambitious results without equally ambitious reforms .
Well , I am convinced that that remains a valid point .
We must therefore start again from October 2004 , putting aside the struggles and pauses for reflection of these last two years and thinking seriously and responsibly about our future and that of our children .
It is not simply a matter of agreeing on the new rules that we need .
There are other equally urgent requirements , without which Europe will be unable to function .
These include a budget worthy of the name , and genuine policies for tackling the major challenges that modern life is throwing at us : energy , climate change , the North-South divide , and so on .
However , let us start today with the most urgent issue , which is to find a way out of the constitutional stalemate and to reform the institutions .
To be successful in this , we have to hold faith with a principle that lies at the basis of our existence as the European Union , a principle so fundamental that it defines the very ethics of our being together .
It is the principle whereby , in furthering European integration , it is essential always to make an effort to understand the arguments of the other side and in some way to take them on board .
We have always made this effort , and we shall continue to do so .
However , we also expect the other side to be just as understanding .
We expect them equally to take on board our aspirations , which in this case , as you all know very well , are to work towards ever closer union .
Bearing this principle in mind , we shall make every effort to help the German and Portuguese Presidencies to preserve as much as possible of our ambition for union , while also taking the other side 's arguments into account as much as possible .
Having established that , I must now say what in my view we cannot allow the June European Council and the subsequent Intergovernmental Conference to do .
First of all , we must remember that , this time , keeping to the timetable is directly associated with a question of democracy .
In 2009 , Europe 's voters will need to know what kind of Europe they are being asked to vote on .
What role will the European Parliament have ?
What will its duties be ?
Will there be a stable Council Presidency , and a European Foreign Minister ?
How will the Commission be formed ?
And so forth .
The Intergovernmental Conference therefore needs to be given a precise and selective mandate , with a clear indication of the few significant sticking points for negotiation and , above all , how to resolve them .
Only by doing that will we succeed in honouring our promise to formulate the new rules by 2009 .
If it were given an open mandate , the Conference would be unlikely to reach a conclusion by the end of 2007 , and the time needed to process the new agreement at national level would mean that the process could not be completed by early 2009 .
In short , it would automatically result in an impasse .
Allow me to make an observation at this point .
This is something that suddenly occurred to me the other day after rereading the 2004 Constitutional Treaty - I would ask you all to have another look at it , now that some time has passed and it is possible to be more objective .
Well , the document produced in 2004 is good , really good , and it has a broad , Europe-wide reach .
Above all , its first part puts across in a clear and intelligible manner the meaning and the vision of the great common enterprise on which we have embarked .
We should therefore think twice before we shelve it and set off down the path of plugging new elements into the existing treaties , whether wholly or in part .
We would also be throwing out all its existing simplicity and legibility , at the cost of the people 's understanding and , hence , of their support for the European project .
Most of all , however , we would be throwing out a text that provides a consistent view of Europe , a text that is able to combine the ideals held by many of us with the practical need , which everyone recognises , to endow our Union with more solid rules and sufficient resources to meet its new challenges .
The way the negotiations have gone so far makes me think that , unfortunately , we shall have to meddle with the 2004 text again .
Yet I would like to put it on record in front of you all here today that I am convinced that in doing so we will be depriving ourselves of something very important .
For those of us who believe in the European project , that would be an enormous sacrifice , and a very high price to pay for all those who have ratified it and made a democratic investment in doing so .
We need to remember that .
That is why we cannot accept any disfigurement of the existing institutional package .
Strengthening our common foreign and security policy by appointing a foreign minister , having a stable Council Presidency , extending qualified majority voting , overturning the three-pillar structure , and providing the Union with a legal personality are all , for us , essential points that need to be safeguarded .
I should like here to warn against certain appeals for ' realism ' , which are typical on the eve of a major European Council and unfailingly seek to achieve a watered-down compromise .
I would point out , however , that if the major global challenges can only be addressed at a European level , then the people who want a Europe that is equal to such challenges are the ones who are being genuinely realistic , and not the people who do not want that .
Internally , I would mention upholding the European social model and creating a genuine area of freedom , security and justice .
How can anyone fail to see that this is a vital complement for a European citizenship that identifies with more than just the economic dimension ?
Externally , I would mention wars , the fight against international terrorism , and the global challenges of energy and climate change ( hydrogen ) .
How can anyone deny that the only way to make our choices and our values prevail on the international stage is by being able to express a foreign policy worthy of the name and communicating it to the world with one voice ?
As regards the structure of the European Union , you must not believe that it is merely a theoretical issue .
The complexity of the Union is one of the main reasons for the gap between it and the people .
How can anyone not see the advantages , then , of overturning the pillar structure , especially in terms of clarity and understanding on the part of the people ?
The 2004 Constitutional Treaty provides convincing solutions for these points .
Do we really want to sacrifice them for the sake of a watered-down approach that resorts to the lowest common denominator ?
Do we really want to risk making the system even more complex by refusing to make in-depth changes and confining ourselves to merely touching it up here and there ?
Do we really want to continue proceeding ' with our face masked ' , to use Jacques Delors ' expression , for fear of revealing the real Europe to our citizens ?
Therefore , my dear Members of this Parliament , representatives of Europe 's citizens , let us try not to lend support to the negative rhetoric on Europe .
Let us not go on concealing it from our fellow citizens .
Let us show them this Europe , instead , and show it proudly .
Let everyone see what it has done for us in terms of peace and prosperity ; let us explain how vital it is for our lives .
Let us tell our fellow citizens once and for all that in a world that is now a system of continents it makes no sense for a country and its citizens to live outside a political and economic aggregation that is internally strong and externally respected .
Italy will therefore make every effort in these negotiations to secure a worthy compromise .
I am convinced that we can succeed and that , all together , we must succeed .
Of course , if it proves impossible for all 27 countries to agree , then there will be the problem of how to proceed .
That dilemma can only be resolved if we go back to that fundamental principle that I mentioned at the beginning of my address : the very ethics of the Union require that nobody should block other people 's aspirations too much or for too long .
That is why Italy , a country that has always believed deeply in Europe , realises that it now has a further duty : it must imagine - or start imagining - how to enable countries that are willing to do so to make real progress in furthering European unity .
I do not think that all countries necessarily have to proceed together at the same speed .
I hope they will , and I shall try to make that happen .
I realise , however , that it is not always possible .
Even now , though , some of Europe 's most significant political decisions , such as the euro and the creation of the Schengen area , have been put into practice by just some of the Member States .
They have not been aimed against any State ; they have not excluded the others ; instead , the door has been left open .
Furthermore , these decisions have been respected by those that at the time did not feel ready to move in a certain direction right away .
I therefore hope that this same constructive approach will also hold good in future and that it will prevail over any attempt to use a veto .
Italy , as you well know , has always thought that being pro-European is the best way to be far-sighted .
Today , however , being far-sighted does not only mean drawing up ambitious plans for the future of European integration .
It also means addressing the issue of allowing those peoples who want to do so to realise their ambitions of union at the pace and in the manner that are best suited to them .
If nobody ever takes the trouble to consider such an eventuality , we run the risk that the European project will run aground and that the ideals of all those who over the years have believed passionately in it will be frustrated .
Even countries like mine , which have invested unreservedly in the integration of Europe for 50 years , might eventually run out of enthusiasm .
I therefore want to conclude with a two-fold message .
Italy will give the German and , later , the Portuguese Presidency the utmost support to ensure that the European Council of 21 and 22 June and the subsequent Intergovernmental Conference are a success with which all the Member States can identify .
At the same time , Italy is well aware that a compromise is not an end in itself , and that therefore , if we are not convinced by such a compromise , we will not subscribe to it .
A fast-track group of countries might then prove to be the best way to advance along the road to an ever closer Union , on condition that the door is always left open to any country that might want to join them at a later date .
Allow me finally to make a strong appeal to the members of our parliaments , the direct representatives of the citizens . Above all , I address the Members of this Parliament , who represent the people of Europe .
You have an irreplaceable role in making the citizens understand what is at stake .
We will only be able to create the conditions for successful constitutional talks if the work of our governments is supported by your work .
We have to realise that we must not fail , or the result will be decline : the decline of an advanced idea of Europe , of a Europe that is able to be a leading player in the world thanks to its underlying values .
In short , we would risk once again becoming a little western appendage of Asia , a fate to which we would be consigned not only by geography , but also by future history . Thank you .
Mr Prodi , we thank you warmly for this persuasive European intervention , which I hope everyone has been able to hear .


Mr President , Mr Gloser , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , we are witnessing a speeding-up of the process of European integration , whether in terms of the relaunch of the institutions , of the new dynamic inspired by Mrs Merkel on climate change and energy or of the implementation of a common immigration policy .
Europe is making progress .
Europe is demonstrating that it represents a level of decision making that is not just necessary and effective , but also legitimate .
Mr Prodi , you have shared with us your vision , your notion of European affairs .
Through you , I should like to pay tribute to the historic , and more prevailing than ever , commitment of the Italian people towards European integration .
After a long period of uncertainty , the relaunch of the institutions is taking shape .
The German Presidency is right to make this one of its priorities .
If Europe is in a position to make effective and democratic decisions , we will be able usefully to decide on common policies .
To move quickly and to enable Europe to make progress were the commitments made by the UMP candidate , Nicolas Sarkozy , and such is the mandate given to the new President of the French Republic by the people of France .
This dynamic , which is driven by a Member State that rejected the draft Treaty , already has the support of several other EU Member States and must be turned to good account if progress is to be made .
The time for asking questions has passed .
What we need now is action and flexibility .
We are only four weeks away from the crucial European Council of 21 and 22 June , which must result in a new Treaty being drafted by the end of the year .
The ratification of the Treaty by the 27 will be able to take place before the 2009 European elections .
Action goes hand in hand with flexibility because , as you have said , bridges must be built between the 18 countries that said ' Yes ' , the two that said ' No ' and those that have not yet given their opinion .
Each country will have to make an effort to form links with the others and to educate its public .
Success will only come if we stop relying on semantic issues and concentrate on what is truly important : double majority voting , the extension of qualified majority voting , the principle of subsidiarity and the sharing out of powers between the Union and the Member States , a stable presidency , common representation on the international stage and also the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
As far as the MEPs from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are concerned , what Europe needs is to form a political force and to become an autonomous actor on the international stage .
Europe needs an economic and commercial identity so as to ensure that our partners comply with the same rules as us , in the fiscal , environmental and social spheres .
Europe must ensure that , even within Europe itself , there is no unfair competition among the Member States , particularly in the area of taxation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are on the right track ; what must prevail is the idea of responsibility and of the general interest on the part of political leaders and of public opinion .
While we remain firm in terms of our ideals and principles , they will be well served only if pragmatism prevails over dogmatism and if the good faith is stronger than the bad faith and the lax attitudes .
Mr President , I should like briefly to mention the recent EU-Russia Summit in Samara .
Many commentators regarded the Summit as a failure for Europe .
As far as my group is concerned , the opposite is true , and Europe emerged the winner of this Summit .
It was the winner , not against Russia - which is a partner whom we respect - but in terms of affirming our convictions and ideals .
We are satisfied because , on the Kosovo Status process , on energy and also on the issue of Estonia 's sovereignty , our leaders hoisted the European flag and expressed themselves strongly and intelligibly .
Mr Prodi , I shall conclude by saying how essential the Euro-Mediterranean dimension is to our parliamentary group .
It is in the Mediterranean that our European adventure will succeed or fail .
Nothing is so strategic to us , as Europeans , as investing in our relations with the Mediterranean basin , focusing on the development of a region that is endowed with such considerable human resources , and working towards the establishment of peace and stability in the Middle East .
Thank you , Mr Daul , not least for keeping to your speaking time so excessively strictly .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much , Prime Minister Prodi , for that encouraging speech , to which I , as chairman of my group , have nothing further to add , for you have expressed what my group thinks , and we thank you for speaking in such plain terms .

We have no fear of you bringing the same clarity to the negotiations .
The reason why we do not fear that prospect is that there will then be at least one strong head of government at the Intergovernmental Conference , one who is not prepared to agree to a compromise at any price , for a compromise that would surrender the substance of what we put into the Constitution would be no compromise at all , but rather a setback for the work of European integration , and so thank you for your clear affirmation .

( Applause )

My colleague Mr Nyrup Rasmussen had the opportunity to sit at the table in Nice , at which he helped negotiate the Treaty of Nice , and I have had frequent occasion to discuss this with him .
When the fifteen Heads of Government who were at Nice left the chamber , they all described the result as inadequate , on the grounds that it was one of those minimal compromises that get reached in order to prevent even more Heads of Government nodding off .
That was why the Convention was summoned ; it was summoned because those who had sat at the table in Nice said that this was not enough for the purpose of the enlargement that would come about , but it is coming , and , if we want to make a success of it , a new basis will be needed .
So it was that they , reluctantly , agreed to our demand for a convention , knowing as they did that what the 15 had hammered out would not be enough for 27 .
At the Convention , a constitution was adopted , with people saying that the text was OK , and so they would vote for it .
It was a good constitution , but it then got thrown out and we were thrown back on the Treaty of Nice .
I would ask , though , whether what was true in the year 2000 - namely that Nice would not be enough for enlargement - has become false in 2007 .
Nice is indeed not enough for the purposes of enlargement , but enlargement has already happened , and on the basis of an inadequate treaty .
It is those who seek its destruction who want to leave the European Union in this state , those who want , whatever the cost , to prevent a new Treaty , and there must be no quarter given to them .

( Applause )
There are those who say that , while Nice may not be enough , it is still too much for them .
Today I have heard a Head of Government say that there can be no compromise with people such as they .
Those who want to go back to the days before Nice would be best advised to stay away from the Intergovernmental Conference .
Now is the time for some straight talking .
Eighteen of the Member States of the European Union have already ratified this constitutional treaty , two of them - Spain and Luxembourg - by means of a referendum .
Why , in fact , do we put up with a state of affairs in which the only ones that get talked about are France and the Netherlands ?
Why is it not being said that this Treaty has received the support of two peoples , with , it might be added , more Europeans having cast a ' yes ' vote for the Constitution than cast a ' no ' vote against it ?
That is another truth about European democracy that should be spoken out loud now .
The European Union exemplifies peace at home , social stability , the combination of economic growth and social stability and of the export of values as a basis for policy in the international sphere .
There is much in the existing foundational treaties that needs to be changed if this model of success is to survive .
In his novel , ' The Leopard ' the Italian author Tomasi di Lampedusa has Tancredi , the nephew of the Prince of Salina , tell his uncle , in splendid words , that ' everything must change if everything is to stay as it is ' .
If Europe wants to remain as successful as it is , it must change the treaties that underpin it , and if you fight like a leopard , then you will find us fighting alongside you .
( Applause )

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to welcome Mr Prodi back to Parliament .
Prime Minister , 50 years after the Treaty of Rome was signed , you have returned Italy to its rightful place at the heart of Europe , and at the heart of the European project .
With President Napolitano you have turned the osservato speciale into a partner speciale .
Your cabinet , with names like Bonino , Amato and Padoa-Schioppa , fills my colleagues and me with confidence .
We hear some criticisms of your first year in government , but we recall the faint hearts who made similarly dismissive remarks about your first year at the Commission .
They were proven wrong .
Enlargement , the euro : these are the jewels in Europe 's crown , so we will judge a government on its results , not on first appearances .
It was Italy which , while others hesitated , led the European Union force into Lebanon , and Italy which pressed for a worldwide moratorium on the death penalty .
You showed the world that Europe can have the vision and the capacity to act in unison for the good of all .
We must seize that vision , for Europe 's future strength lies not in insulating itself against injustices , but in confronting the forces of pain and misery and destruction in the world beyond our borders .
On our own continent we have healed the hurts of nations .
Our interest now , indeed perhaps our survival , depends on exporting in the next 50 years the domestic achievements of the last .
Global challenges like climate change , population growth and nuclear proliferation highlight what you have called ' the inadequacy of unilateralism ' .
The world needs global mechanisms to create consensus on these matters .
And the model ?
None is better than our Community method , tried and tested over 50 years .
And yet , even as Europe comes of age on the international stage , some are seeking to divide us from within .
What should we say to the eurosceptics who say that the European Union is no longer fit for service , or that the European dream is menaced by globalisation , or that integration threatens national identity ?
They listen , but they do not hear .
Mr Prodi , you wisely followed the advice of Cavour , who told us that he had discovered how to deceive diplomats .
He said , ' I tell them the truth , and they never believe me ' .
As you told us in Berlin , marking Europe 's 50th birthday :
( IT ) ' To create we need common sense , patience , faith , and also a grain of folly . '
A grain of folly , of self-belief , as well as grit and determination are indeed needed to face the future .
For now is not the time for apathy or egocentrism .
Our leaders must be bold : more Europe , not less , is the key to competitiveness ; more Europe , not less , is the key to security ; more Europe , not less Europe , is the key to a just world .
That is why it is vital to reach an institutional settlement at next month 's intergovernmental conference .
Only stronger institutions can build a stronger Europe .
Mr Prodi , it was Leonardo da Vinci , your compatriot , who taught us :
( IT ) ' He who is fixed to a star does not change his mind ' .
Thank you for holding true to your vision .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we urgently need to adopt the new treaty .
This urgency goes hand in hand with the need to simplify the Union and make it easier for its citizens to understand .
To belittle the difficulties that exist and which are the cause of the doubts which have until now prevented us from reaching agreement , however , is certainly not the way forward .
The Italian Prime Minister , formerly the President of the Commission , must be aware that vague and imprecise proposals lead to vague and inconclusive answers , which is precisely the opposite of what citizens want .
This is the philosophy of the possible , that starts out along a thousand paths but does not complete any of them , especially when the paths are the same ones that for over ten years we have seen put forward and then abandoned .
The crisis is clear and is not a trivial matter , and we therefore need appropriate solutions ever more quickly .
The German Chancellor 's efforts and the statements made by President Sarkozy have therefore given us Europhiles hope once more .
We seek to achieve what is feasible , not what is impossible !
We believe that compromise , when it is lofty and honourable , forms the foundation of politics .
When people say ' no compromises ' it is because compromises have already been made that are of little importance and little moral value .
If there is a clear crisis , then projects that cannot be achieved rapidly should be abandoned and , instead , what can be immediately agreed upon should be consolidated : greater practicality from our institutions ; more use made of subsidiarity ; a common policy for our borders ; terrorism ; giving a boost to the economy and competitiveness through completing the infrastructure needed without further indecision , particularly with regard to mobility ; a common energy policy ; defence of the social contract ; clear rules that prevent unfair competition with a stronger position adopted by the Union within the WTO ; and harmonisation of criminal legislation on violent crimes against children .
Citizens cannot have faith in heads of government who in Strasbourg describe Europe in simple terms and in their own countries do not carry out the projects that Europe has adopted .
Strasbourg is calling for a common foreign policy , instead of us all acting solo , as happened in Afghanistan .
A lack of security at the borders due to a confused and contradictory policy on immigration lessens the trust of citizens .
The first ones to feel the effects of this are legal immigrants .
High-speed rail links , which have been approved in all the Community bodies , have been blocked by differences within the Italian Government and likewise growth is at a standstill .
Mr President , I believe that when people say to us ' the important role of the MEPs ' we should also try to remember in all countries , including our own , that up until now the members of the European Convention , the Italian members , have never been asked to have an exchange of ideas and to make their contributions .
This is also significant .
Fewer words and more action !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would like to welcome you , Prime Minister Prodi , to this Chamber , partly because , recently , there have unfortunately not been so many speeches of resolute commitment to a top-level solution to the constitutional crisis .
We fear , for example , that tomorrow the Dutch Prime Minister will be here singing from a completely different song-book .
Understanding the arguments of others is all well and good , but experience teaches us that it is nearly always the arguments of the opposition that win .
We know that in the end even the most pro-European governments such as yours gradually yield to the arguments of those who see the true shape of a European Government in the intergovernmental aspect and in the power relations between states .
This is what happened in Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice .
You said that your government would not accept lowest common denominator compromises , and we hope this is true , because very often past examples have not been very edifying .
The Greens do not like blackmail , conflict or splits .
We would be delighted with a harmonious , innovative and truly sustainable and united Europe , and the 27-member Europe is a major achievement .
Let us be clear , however : the blackmail so far has come solely from those wishing to stand in the way of a solution to the constitutional crisis , and this is a fact that we cannot let pass unremarked .
Even the majority within this Parliament has in recent months and years refrained from making any proposals of a slightly daring nature , preferring to wait for an initiative from the governments .
We believe that there are two or three conditions that could permit us , Mr Prodi , to escape from this stalemate and we truly hope that the Italian Government will resolutely agree with us on this issue .
There needs to be a strong alliance among the 18 countries that have ratified the Constitution , as well as this Parliament , the Commission and some national parliaments , to resist the trend to dismantle the Constitutional Treaty .
You made a list of some issues and I would like to add at least two more : firstly , the issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and secondly , the issue of recasting the revision clause .
We can no longer go forward like this , with a treaty that has been adopted unanimously and leaving the European Parliament out .
The second condition is that you governments must have the courage to speak to the general public about the choices that must be made and the divisions that exist among you on the future of Europe , and to seek their support .
Do not hide yourselves in mysterious secret negotiations .
Do not exclude this Parliament from the reform of the European Constitution during the intergovernmental conference that is currently being prepared , not least because experience shows that the winners in secret intergovernmental negotiations are the others .
We , and I am finishing now , Mr President , are not afraid of debate on the central issue , even if we do not like it .
Indeed , we think that it is only if we face certain governments and certain peoples with a choice of staying in or leaving that they will in the end decide to stand with us .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to make three brief comments .
The first does not concern Mr Prodi directly , but rather the famous twelve questions put by the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to the Heads of State or Government .
One of them is worded as follows , and I quote : ' What do you think of the proposal ( ... ) to change the terminology without changing the legal substance , for example , regarding the name of the Treaty ? '
How do you expect any citizen , upon reading that , not to say to himself that the European leaders are taking him for a complete fool , to put it mildly ?
More fundamentally , Mr Prodi emphasised just now that European electors have to know what the role of the European Parliament will be , if there will or will not be a stable Presidency of the European Council and a European foreign minister , and how the Commission will be constituted .
All of these issues are indeed important .
But do you not hear other , much stronger and more significant questions being asked around you , questions to which none of you ever reply ?
For example , even neo-liberal economists are asking where , in the current world context , a policy of unbridled free trade associated with free movement of capital and total freedom to relocate production facilities as well as total freedom of movement for foreign investors , including the most predatory ones , is in danger of leading us to .
What changes do you propose to the Community acquis in this regard ?
Other voices , and not the least important ones , are being raised against the tax wars that the Member States are waging , or in favour of a change to the statutes of the European Central Bank or yet again in favour of a controlled industrial policy in key sectors of the modern economy , outside the rules of free competition .
What kind of break with the status quo do you consider desirable or acceptable from this point of view ?
Does Europe have to be about the marketplace or about politics in relation to the market ?
To what extent does democracy end where the reign of the open market economy or free competition begins ?
These questions are on the table .
What do you think about them ?
One last word to Mr Barroso , who is not here today , but who expressed his delight at what he considers the victory of the ' yes ' vote during the French elections .
This is a delusion .
There is no doubt that the new French President supports the ' yes ' vote .
That is why he , like you , feared a new referendum .
But the commitments he had to make on Europe in order to make acceptable his refusal to re-consult the citizens say a lot about the persisting depth of anti-liberal ambitions in that country .
We will be able to remind him in particular of the keynote speech he made on this issue on 21 February right here in Strasbourg , entitled ' I want Europe to change ' .
The real question is this : other than institutional innovations , what changes are you ready for ?
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , once again back in this Chamber and in his usual rousing style , Mr Prodi has confirmed his belief in a United States of Europe and the fact that we should speak with one voice on the world stage .
Mr Prodi , whilst I may disagree with those views , I have at least to compliment your honesty in saying things in the way that you do .
I am surprised you had to time to come , given that in Italy you have had 38 Prime Ministers in the last 60 years and it looks as though you may well be on the verge of the 39th .
We are indeed very privileged that you have come along today .
When you tell us that security is so important - this ' drive towards closer cooperation ' as you call it - particularly on the day when the British police announced that charges are to be laid in the case of the former KGB agent Alexander Litvinenko , who was recently murdered in London , I wonder whether we really want your style of justice , given that Mario Scaramella , who tried to warn Mr Litvinenko of what was going to happen to him , has now languished in an Italian jail for six months .
The charges against him keep changing and he has not actually faced a court .
If you are suggesting we give up common law and habeas corpus for that sort of European system , my answer to you is no , thank you very much indeed .
Let us have a real debate , Mr President .
Mr Schulz : 16 countries have approved the European Constitution , not 18 , so please can we have some truth , some honesty and some openness and please can we not push on and totally ignore the French and Dutch referendum results .
Mr Prodi did not even refer to that in his speech .
People have said no .
Tens of millions of Europeans are saying ' Give us , the people , a say in our future ' .
Stop behaving like a bulldozer , stop sweeping aside public opinion .
By all means have your Treaty , but let the people decide on their future .
Do not impose it upon them .


on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Prime Minister , the Eurocrats of the Commission and of the Council must have breathed a huge sigh of relief on the evening of 22 April : for them , either Royal or Sarkozy , the UMP or the Socialist Party , were a guarantee that the European Constitution , which had been rejected en masse by two countries in 2005 , was going to be put back on track , flying in the face of democracy .
Both of them were ideal candidates , and potential Presidents .
So was Mr Bayrou .
Sarkozy and Royal both gave the impression of believing , like yourselves , that the French only rejected the policies of Brussels , when they also rejected the institutional elements , which are now intended to be reintroduced via the backdoor , namely the single Foreign Minister - the single minister who , had he existed , would have taken us all into the Iraq war - the pseudo-elected President , the Commission reduced to civil servants from certain countries , and the communitisation of all policies , which denies the States any right to veto - in short , the bureaucratic and omnipotent European Superstate .
For you , it was better that Sarkozy should have been elected , rather than Royal , since the former wants the Constitution to be ratified by Parliament , while the latter intended to take some account of the popular will .
Following the appointment of a socialist Minister and a socialist Secretary of State for European affairs , and before there had hardly been time to transfer power from the old to the new President of the Republic , Mr Sarkozy rushed to Berlin to confirm that ratification would be by Parliament , that he was committed to a European Superstate and that he wished to be nothing more than the governor of a European province .
The German Chancellor may rest assured : thanks to Mr Sarkozy , her Presidency of Europe will be a success !
In June she will be able to present a roadmap relaunching the constitutional process and signing the death warrant for the nations and the sovereignty of the peoples .
Elected as he was by 53 % of the French people , Mr Sarkozy is already betraying the aspirations of many of them , namely the 55 % of citizens , from the right and from the left , who voted ' no ' in May 2005 .


( Having been interrupted , the speaker addressed Mr Schulz , ' What is the matter , Mr Schulz , are you ill ? ' , then corrected himself , ' Ah yes , it is you , Mr Cohn-Bendit , go ahead and teach the little children ! ' )
Mr Le Pen , the thing about votes is that sometimes they go one way and sometimes they go the other , as you , of course , are best qualified to relate .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the European Constitution was supposed to strengthen the Union as a player on the world stage , but what has actually happened ?
What appeared was an incomprehensible document , the adoption of which was not an issue for the social engineers who created it .
The citizens of two countries have given a resounding ' no ' .
The document is also iniquitous , and has for a number of years been diverting the attention of politicians from more pressing problems .
It introduces unnecessary conflict within the Union and confirms the suspicion that the Union is a petty concern ; not geographically speaking , but in terms of the outlook of its leaders , who are incapable of accepting the failure of this project and of proposing a different one to the public .
Heads of State prefer to tiptoe around the subject rather than to admit openly that in Rome three years ago they signed a document which public opinion has since rejected .
This is a blind alley and we must find a different way forward .
It is not the future of Europe as a global player that will be put in jeopardy by the failure to adopt the Constitution .
What does jeopardise it is the remoteness of politicians from real life and the pointless discussions over a dead text .
The citizens of the Member States understand less and less the language of the European institutions and their representatives .
Our global partners , moreover , will seek to exploit the EU 's lack of unity and the vanity of its leaders .
I firmly believe that the EU needs to reform its institutions and that it needs a new unifying document that would clearly demarcate the scope of authority of the Union and the Member States .
We need a Treaty that is concise , comprehensible and fair , and thus acceptable to our citizens , as well as being , most importantly , a Treaty that is something other that just an amended or trimmed down version of the rejected Constitution .
I believe that policies on pensions , tax , health , social matters , culture , justice and nuclear energy should remain in the hands of the Member States .
Other policy areas must be subject to discussion .
Some of us , in both political and normal life , have experienced failure , and this has now happened to the champions of the European Constitution .
They should overcome their stubbornness and admit defeat .
They should also begin negotiations over a new Treaty at the earliest opportunity .
I expect a realistic approach of this kind from the June summit and from the German and Portuguese Presidencies .
Only this way will we increase trust in the European project , both among EU citizens and on the wider global economic and political stage .
Prime Minister of Italy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you very much for this debate , which like all debates in this Parliament has been concise , constructive and frank .
It has highlighted a huge range of positions regarding the future of the European Union .
If we listen to some of the final speakers , some positions are irreconcilable .
This problem certainly needs to be tackled , debated and taken forward in an open and democratic way , as always happens and always has happened within this Parliament .
It is precisely this fact that prompted me to make my initial speech ; it is precisely in order to regulate this great diversity and breadth of opinions that we have to have rules that allow us to run the European Union , as we have all had .
We are forgetting the long road travelled in organising the Constitutional Treaty ; we are forgetting the 18 months of the Convention , the debates , the involvement of the national parliaments and of the European Parliament .
We are forgetting that it was not a closed debate .
We arrived , however , at a result ; I quote the words of Cristiana Muscardini : ' but we need to pay attention to the fact that in politics it is necessary to reach a compromise , a lofty compromise ' .
Well , the draft Constitution was already a compromise !
As President of the European Commission , I regretted the fact that some great advances were missing from that treaty .
We wanted that compromise , because we realised , with the pragmatism of politics , that one cannot have everything !
We realised that our idea of Europe was even stronger , but that , at that time , this was what was permitted by historical circumstances .
It was signed by all the countries in the Union , including the UK , on the responsibility of the governments of the Union .
Now people are saying that the treaty was created in a small room far from the wishes of the people .
It was created by the representatives of the people !
It was signed by the governments elected by the people !
That is what happened !
Clearly we can still search for compromise , because throughout our lives we have always sought compromise , but we cannot allow compromise to frustrate and nullify the European project .
That is the ultimate limit that we gave ourselves and it is for that reason that I made a speech in which I sketched out the fundamental points which we cannot abandon : they are the will of the people , the issue of the pillars and the issue of the Minister of Foreign Affairs .
How can it be that we are ashamed of calling the person who represents us the Minister of Foreign Affairs ?
Call this person the Secretary of State , if you wish , using the English terminology .
What are we afraid of ?
Do we not realise how much not having a Minister of Foreign Affairs has cost us over the years ?
Do we not realise what we have been unable to do in the Middle East and all the neighbouring areas , and how we have let the political situation deteriorate , through our own divisions ?
Is this the sort of irresponsibility with which we are going to face history ?
Look , what is going to be at stake in the next few days is this final aspect of our political unity , the ultimate aspect of our ability to represent Europe in the world .
If we cannot understand that now , when will we be able to ?
It is only a couple of years or so ago since I left that seat in the Commission !
So , in view of the power relations in the world - China , India , Asia - the problem has been that Europe has not been able to speak to these great peoples and has not been able to speak as an equal to the United States , or to convince it !
Is that not enough of a burden on our future ?
Do we want to continue to count for nothing for another whole generation ?
That is the question that I put to you ahead of the Intergovernmental Conference and the European Council .
I ask no other questions .
I put forward Europe 's sense of responsibility to history , to our lives and to those of our children .

Thank you very much , Mr Prodi ; the mind of this House is expressed in its applause .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after months of difficulty the initiative by Chancellor Merkel and the election of Nicolas Sarkozy to the presidency of the French Republic have offered Europe new hope .
Despite further resistance , there is now a real possibility of coming up with a new treaty that enshrines the rules of an institution as totally unique as the European Union .
It is clear , unfortunately , that the text resulting from the work that was so well directed by the Italian Presidency under Silvio Berlusconi and which was signed in Rome , can no longer enter into force .
If , however , we want Europe to carry out the role it deserves on the international stage , we must save the substance of the treaty .
I am thinking of the principle of decisions taken by a majority on certain important issues , of a single voice on foreign policy , and of the duration of the Presidency .
Adopting a reduced text would only be a first step forwards .
Certainly , in striving for perfection we may lose the opportunity to achieve something that is within our grasp , but it is important to continue along the road we have embarked on and to make a decision before the European elections in 2009 .
I hope , thinking about tomorrow , that in its new term this Parliament may also have a constitutional role , as suggested by many , among them Mr Gargani , chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , and Mr Brunetta .

The 27-member Europe , however , does not only need institutional rules in order to function better .
It needs to identify with the values which make up its true basis , the foundation on which to construct a Union that in the future will not dissolve when faced with difficulties .
It would be a mistake not to ensure that freedom , solidarity , subsidiarity and the central role of the individual are the cornerstones of the Community institutions .
It would be a serious error to renounce our identity , our Judaeo-Christian roots and a social model based on a family composed of father , mother and children .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Tajani is putting forward arguments that have nothing to do with today 's discussion , while we have on the other hand heard clear , strong and determined words from Prime Minister Prodi , which put Italy at the head of European integration and give more strength to the European Parliament , which is always in the forefront of the battle for constitutional reform of the Union .
These words were very clear on a crucial point : we must start again from the draft Constitution ratified by the 18 countries , and not from Nice .
We need to give a fixed mandate , not an open-ended one , to the Intergovernmental Conference .
We cannot dismiss a draft Constitution that has been accepted by the vast majority of citizens and that gives precise answers , not vagueness , Mrs Muscardini !
Mr Prodi listed these precise answers in his introduction and in his reply .
Without a Constitution , my dear Mr Wurtz , the European Union is weaker and the risk of it deteriorating into a mere free trade area is greater .
That is why sometimes I do not understand certain very radical positions taken by the left !
The speech given by Prime Minister Prodi has given Parliament and all of us more courage and strength , and we will go through the next stage with greater determination and tenacity .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
I should like to begin by saying how delighted I am that Prime Minister Prodi is someone who is not tired of Europe .
A philosopher once said that tiredness was the most serious threat to Europe .
I should like to recall that when Mr Prodi was President of the European Commission he undertook the difficult task of enlarging the European Union .
He saw enlargement through despite the negative views expressed frequently by the media and public opinion or at least by certain sectors of the latter .
Mr Prodi succeeded because he believed in the future of Europe .
I would like this same conviction to underpin current reflection on the future of Europe .
There are many in this Chamber who share my view that the European Union is now in need of wise institutional reform .
The question arises , however , as to the extent to which the Community method , referred to by Mr Prodi as the mechanism driving Europe forward , is invoked in the activities of the European Council .
That is to say , what role does it play in the activities of the government representatives ?
Mr Prodi was wearing a certain hat at the European Commission , but he has donned a very different one at the European Council .
To the outside observer it sometimes appears that national egotism is the one and only criterion used by the Council , not reflection on the basis of categories of common interest .
I believe this is a particularly important matter .
Parliament understands what it means to be a community , and that spirit is also present in the European Commission .
What can be done to ensure that the European Council will also be guided by it ?
( IT ) Mr Prodi , I am making my speech on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group which , I would like to remind Mr Prodi , represents the fourth-largest political group in the European Parliament .
I would like to re-emphasise something : Europe is very close to our hearts !
Mr Fini , the chairman of the party that I represent , was one of those in the Convention who contributed enthusiastically to the current draft Constitution .
More generally , we Italians have a long and uninterrupted European tradition , and therefore cannot but support the appeal made a few months ago in this very Chamber by Mr Napolitano , President of the Italian Republic , who called for the Constitution to be adopted as soon as possible .
One of the reasons why this Constitution is necessary is so that we can have a common foreign policy .
Mr Prodi , you were right in pointing to the common foreign policy that we so sorely miss , especially at this time of international crisis .
I would like to take the opportunity , on this point , to thank all those throughout the world who are working on peace-keeping missions , particularly in Afghanistan , Lebanon and Palestine , starting with the approximately 8 000 Italians .
These are important missions , strongly supported by all the Italian political parties , even though , to be truthful , Mr Prodi , there are some embarrassing exceptions in your governing majority .
I would like to go back to the Constitution , to express a regret and a wish .
The regret is that it has not been possible to mention Europe 's Christian roots in the text ; the wish is that the goal of swift adoption of the Constitution will be achieved .
I am convinced that Italy , as usual , will play its part well .
( DE ) Mr President , how often , over recent months , have I asked myself , ' where is Romano Prodi ?
Where are the governments who will defend the Constitution ? '
Today , Prime Minister , I have found you once more ; I have found Romano Prodi on the barricades .
I may have found him late in the day , but I have found him all the same .
I found him speaking up for consensus , stepping out from the ranks of the governments who , day in and day out , exchange their historic responsibility for Europe for petty cash .
Since you , Prime Minister , said that we have to respect the arguments of others , I would like to ask you which others you mean .
If you mean the members of the public , including those who voted ' no ' , then I am unperturbed .
We know what they want ; they want more democracy , more transparency , more social responsibility , a better Europe , a more convincing constitution .
Or do you , by ' others ' , mean the governments who misuse the crisis around the ratification process to abuse us with their old demands , their old claims to power , with all the things we , in the Convention , extracted from those who deliberately deflect public dissatisfaction onto Europe in order to retain their power over a Europe without European democracy , without a social dimension , and without a shared role in the world - those whose interest is in the struggles of reactionaries for power , pitting the Europe of the corridors of power against the Europe of citizens ?
You spoke of our need for compromises , and that , too , throws up a very pertinent question .
The compromise that shines out of the twelve questions is compromise as a historic lie about Europe , for what also needs to be done , Prime Minister - and I am particularly grateful to you for making it visible - is to retain not only the substance , but also the spirit of the Constitution .
If we decide that laws are no longer to be called laws , but rather regulations , we are denying people the historic legitimacy to which they have a claim , for these things remain , as far as their substance is concerned , laws .
Denial of the primacy of European law is false , for it continues to have a subterranean existence and the foreign minister is still what we wanted him to be .
No , indeed , the compromise can be neither a bluff nor a lie .
It is for the spirit of the Constitution , too , that we have to fight .
( Applause )

( IT ) My dear Mr Prodi , precisely because I have the same passion as you for Europe , I am convinced that in order to relaunch the constitutional process we need a new impulse of energy based on democracy and rights .
I am increasingly convinced that the intergovernmental approach is not the solution to the problems , but is a part of them and is liable to lead us into a mini-Treaty or even a two-speed Europe .
It is the citizens and MEPs that must now take the lead , with a new constitutional mandate entrusted to a European Parliament that has these functions , with the aims of a new text and a European referendum ; we need to change the text and the context .
We need to have , at the centre , clear enforceable rights that define European citizenship .
These are the right to work and rights at work that confirm that , for Europe , stable , high-quality jobs are the norm , and not the highly precarious jobs that are being developed with ' flexicurity ' !
We need a guaranteed right to the environment , which requires innovative policies , based on cooperation , and multi-faceted visions such as those that should lead to ratification of a post-Kyoto agreement , instead of merely the philosophy of commercial competition .
We need a right to peace , born of the rejection of war , and an EU policy actively based on these values and practices , as its own foreign policy .
We need a new Europe , the only one possible , which is becoming increasingly necessary .
We can build it based on the people , together with the MEPs .
( FR ) Mr President , almost two years ago to the day , the French ' no ' vote sentenced the European Constitution to death .
This was then confirmed by the Netherlands , and by the United Kingdom , and then by the Czech Republic and Poland .
There was also the scant enthusiasm of the only two countries to have said ' yes ' by referendum , Luxembourg and Spain .
In Spain , just 32 % of the registered voters supported the text .
In short , the constitutional process broke down and then came to a standstill , and we owe that breakdown mainly to France .
From that point on , everything became clear to us , the French sovereigntists , on behalf of whom I am speaking in this House : it was France that needed to be circumvented , it was the French who needed to be tricked !
And that was done by means of an immense ruse .
When it came to the presidential elections , two candidates were pre-selected at the outset , so that , when one of them was elected and newly legitimised , they would say yes where the French wanted to say no .
That explains Mr Sarkozy 's outrageous gesture of rushing to see Mrs Merkel on the very day of his inauguration .
There must be no doubt about the illegitimacy of this ' yes ' dragged out of France by means of this presidential manoeuvring .
I am well aware that everyone in the silent , bustling little aquarium of the Brussels oligarchies will get together in order to concoct a new text , and that it will certainly not be called a constitution , but an institutional reform , which amounts to the same thing .
The ' no ' supporters are not dead , however .
Mr Barroso should be under no illusions , and nor should you , Mr Prodi : sooner or later , France will speak out again , because France , despite all opposition , is attached to its freedoms .
And those freedoms - national freedoms - will triumph in the end , despite all your feeble machinations .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Prodi , you more than anyone are familiar with how the European institutions work .
As a former President of the Commission , you are therefore well placed to fathom why the European citizens are increasingly turning their backs on present-day Europe .
Bureaucracy , overregulation , no ounce of respect for the principle of subsidiarity , political correctness , no respect for Europe 's Christian heritage , and the obsessive desire to admit Islamic Turkey to the EU have meant that these days , most Europeans equate the European ideal of the founding fathers with an intrusive super state that no longer listens to what the people want .
In recent years , we have seen some striking examples of the deliberate deafness of official Europe .
In France and the Netherlands , in democratic referendums , the people said ' no ' to the European super state .
Despite this , the German Presidency simply carries on down the path already chosen .
For Angela Merkel , and I am afraid for you as a Member of the European Council , the will of the people does not count .
All opinion polls show that whilst the Europeans want to be on friendly terms with the Turks , they do not want a non-European and Islamic country to join our Union .
Again , the pre-determined path is simply followed .
Do not harbour any illusions , though .
This refusal to listen to the needs and complaints of Europeans will backfire at the next opportunity , and official Europe should not come and complain to us if the citizens again vote ' incorrectly ' at some stage in the future .
I should like to finish off by saying to Mr Prodi that the government of my country brought itself into disrepute last week by refusing , for commercial reasons , to allow the Dalai Lama to visit Belgium .
Nobody wants to offend China .
It is very unfortunate that the rule in these situations seems to be that of Erst das Fressen und dann die Moral .
I therefore hope that , within the European Council , you will speak up to focus on the attitude of your government which , although it likes to wax lyrical about human rights , when the chips are down , lets its own economic interests prevail , and also to denounce Belgium in this matter .
If Europe is serious about defending human rights , it should also have the courage to denounce the hypocrisy of some Member States .
Since you have referred to me personally , Mr Dillen , I would remind you that I stated my position to the plenary yesterday .
I will not allow anyone to prevent talks between the Dalai Lama and the President of the European Parliament .
A letter has been sent ; I expect it to be answered and will have more to say on the subject at an appropriate moment .
( SK ) Prime Minister Prodi , allow me to welcome you here .
You are a politician with a wealth of experience when it comes to both running a country and running the European Commission , where you served as president .
I would like to emphasise that for the European Union to succeed in the future , it is essential to adopt a Constitutional Treaty .
Recently , we celebrated the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaties of Rome .
This anniversary reminds us that much has changed in the intervening years and that there are treaties still in force that need to be amended .
The European Community at that time consisted of six countries , and it was primarily an economic grouping .
Today , the European Union is made up of 27 Member States , of which 12 are post-communist countries .
The shape of the present-day European Union is substantially different from the one it had in 1957 .
The Treaties , dating back 50 years , are non-transparent , written in complicated language and could even be described as obsolete .
It appears essential to adopt a new Constitutional Treaty and new clear rules of the game .
It is necessary to realise that the reforms proposed in the Constitutional Treaty , such as legal personality , fundamental human rights embodied in binding provisions , the office of General Prosecutor , reforms of institutions and the legislative process represent changes which can move the European Union forward .
It is high time to end the reflection period and inaugurate a period of action .
Prime Minister Prodi , I would like to thank you for the trust you placed in Slovakia at a time when she was embarking on what you described as a long journey .
Slovakia is a young new Member State of the European Union , and she trusts you in the same manner as she trusts Italy and the EU to amend the rules of game .
Mr President , Prime Minister , today we are once again debating constitutions and institutions when the citizens of Europe are really more interested in jobs , prosperity , the environment and global poverty .
It is a myth that the European Union is in a crisis or paralysed and incapable of taking decisions , and this is the pretext that some governments are using to demand that the Constitution should be back on the table .
I know that you , Prime Minister , believe this as well .
It is not a constitutional crisis .
Even the British Government has said that the EU is able to take decisions based on current treaties , and the period of reflection following the French and Dutch ' no ' votes should , in my view , have been used to take a long , hard look at the reasons for the rejection of the constitution .
Instead , the discussions now seem solely focused on what parts of it can be kept at all costs .
As someone who believes in my nation 's membership of the European Union and the potential for good that Europe possesses , I am saddened by this debate .
I have always believed there was a need to simplify and make more transparent the decision-making processes and institutions of Europe , as the Laeken Declaration envisaged .
The enlargement of the EU may indeed require some amendments to existing treaties or new treaties from time to time , but I cannot accept that this Constitution is required , nor is it desirable at this moment .
There is no doubt that the British people will demand a referendum on any new treaty that might propose additional powers for the EU , and my party would support that .
We will watch with great interest the actions of the British Government in the weeks to come .
Mr Blair will attend the Brussels Summit on the very eve of his retirement and he must not commit his successor in his absence .
Gordon Brown should insist that he attend the summit alongside Tony Blair and take full responsibility for whatever his Government signs up to .
I hope that this kind of realism will guide Mr Brown 's actions in the difficult times that lie immediately ahead .
Thank you , Mr Kirkhope .
My information is that the British Prime Minister has close contact with Gordon Brown !
( DE ) Mr President , it is very good to see you , Prime Minister Prodi , in this House , not only , of course , because of your Prime Ministerial position , but also because you are someone who has done a great deal for Europe .
Mr Prodi , you spoke about foreign policy , and I am very grateful to you for that .
There are many in this House who are currently saying that we need to present a united front in our dealings with Russia .
There are others - and there are many of them - who say that we must not be dominated by America . We need a strong Europe .
We all agree that India , China and Brazil are getting stronger and stronger , and wonder whether we can secure our interests there .
There is the Middle East problem , which we are about to debate , and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner is already in her seat .
How , then , is there to be European input in all these areas when we do not have a common foreign and security policy , and how are we supposed to have one of those if there is not , in future , one person who can , beyond all doubt , deal with all these foreign issues and be responsible for them ?
It is on this issue in particular , Prime Minister , that I urge you to stand firm .
I agree with you entirely that not every treaty is a good one .
What we need is one that goes beyond the minimum required and really moves Europe forward .
Prime Minister , I wish you all the best .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there was a slogan in 1968 : ' Be realistic .
Demand the impossible . '
Today we would have to say , ' Be realistic .
Demand what is necessary in order not to sink this European project of which you are all the temporary custodians . '
If in 2009 the European Parliament were to present itself for re-election without a convincing institutional reply , Europe as a whole would be faced with an irreparable crisis of legitimacy , while , in fact , citizens ought to be able today to choose on the basis of a clear model such as you have set out .
Parliament has given its views on this issue on many occasions and it is now the Council 's turn to speak .
Prime Minister Prodi knows that today he represents not only his own country but all those Europhiles who have not given up on greater integration .
In conclusion , I would like to remind you of one thing : those who do not agree today should withdraw ; the others can go forward freely .
Let us remember that Europe was created by a leading group of countries but it is not necessarily true that tomorrow it can be relaunched using the same method .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister Prodi comes before us as a former President of the European Commission with an entirely negative balance sheet : enlargement , the euro , China , reform ; it looks like the balance sheet of the Industrial Reconstruction Institute !
Today , for instance , seeing that you are so enthusiastic about the super-federalist European Constitution , you did not have the courage to talk about the institutional changes in our country .
When is there going to be a decision to allow the federalism that the North has been asking for for so long ?
This is a question of freedom , and also of political consistency !
Mr Schulz compared you to the Leopard .
That sounds like a gaffe but actually his aim was perfect .
Only a great Leopard like you could govern with political parties that have the symbol of the hammer and sickle when you have presided over enlargement involving countries which have freed themselves from communism , and you actually manage to govern while representing only a third of our country .
Look : from up above , Luigi Sturzo and Alcide De Gasperi are watching us and perhaps feeling ashamed of those representatives in our country who have forgotten the founding fathers ' commitment to a Europe of the people and of the regions , not of lobby groups .
Your spiritual horizons , Mr Prodi , are those of Goldman Sachs , not of bell towers and cathedrals , as ours are .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Prodi , our ambition is to continue with European integration .
True , we have misfired .
By voting ' no ' to the Constitutional Treaty , many French people believed that they were resisting a liberal Europe and thus hoped that that would help us to move towards a social and ecological Europe .
Well , now we know that quite the opposite has happened .
The ' no 's have condemned our institutions to deadlock , and I share Prime Minister Prodi 's view that we must not throw the baby out with the bath water .
Europe needs a constitution , and the compromise achieved by the Convention must be adopted and improved .
So if , by a mini-treaty , as presented by the new French President , we mean the constitutional compromise and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , it will be a yes , a yes to a Foreign Minister .
What weight will that Minister carry , however , Mr Prodi , without a genuine European foreign policy ?
Yes , Mr Prodi , the treaty still needs to be improved .
If it had to be a third-rate treaty that is ratified on the sly , that would be unacceptable .
The future of Europe is a matter for the people of Europe .
I therefore say ' yes ' to a European referendum being held simultaneously in the 27 countries , and why not during the next European elections ?
I say ' yes ' , so that Europe can tackle the present-day challenges - I am thinking in particular of climate change - that will radically transform our lives .
I am convinced that our fellow citizens understand these challenges and will be able to move this tremendous European project forward .
( IT ) Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , the process of adopting the European Constitution cannot be reduced to a set of amendments to the existing treaties but must contain important social aspects that are at the moment not present .
Europe must be able to meet the great challenges which pose a threat to the rights of citizens , the quality of life , health and the very future of its people .
Faced with phenomena such as relocations , the scarcity of water resources , the world 's hunger for energy and climate change , individual states are helpless and unable to formulate winning strategies .
It is only through action agreed at continental level , or better still at planetary level , that we can hope for success where we cannot afford failure .
It is important for Europe to be at the forefront in the world , both from the political point of view , as a benchmark for socially inclusive policies and a policy of acceptance that can be a model for other parts of the world , and in terms of technological choices and future planning , particularly in the sustainable energy sector .
Five members of the main political groups present in the European Parliament have signed a written statement on the need for Europe to take a new approach to the economy , based on hydrogen : a real industrial , technological and social revolution that can be sustainable in the long term .
You referred to this and I believe that this is one of the examples where Europe can and must play the principal role on the world stage .
To conclude , there is no need for a compromise at all costs , but we need to tackle the real problems affecting millions of citizens .
Only in this way will the dream of a united Europe be able to speak to the hearts of Europeans .
( EL ) Mr President , it is high time we stopped writing obituaries for the European Constitution ; it is dead and buried .
We need to get out into society and see what Europe needs :
one hundred million Europeans are living below the poverty line ;
crime is rife in all the capitals of Europe ;
illegal immigration is the order of the day .
Of course , human rights are being seriously tried with visible and hidden cameras .
Mr Prodi , you were President of the Commission for five years .
Tell me , where are the eastern borders of Europe ?
Just yesterday , two fully armed submarines were west of the island of Samos close to Mykonos .
What will happen tomorrow morning ?
The spark of war from Turkey is clearly visible .
You must therefore take initiatives for the future of Europe , because otherwise the same fate will befall this unified Europe as befell the Holy Alliance two centuries ago .
We do not want to set up a super state .
What we want to do is to be able to safeguard democracy and to safeguard the prosperity of the people , with which capital and the Central Bank play fast and loose .
This must be Europe 's objective : the citizen , not capital must increase its power .
( HU ) The critics of the European Union very often charge the European Union with being too strong and with intervening in too many things .
It is my conviction that exactly the opposite is true .
We , who recently joined the European Union , see that a stronger , more effective Europe is needed , a Europe which has at its disposal the tools for fulfilling its tasks .
For this purpose we need a common energy policy , a common migration policy , a common struggle against terrorism and harmonisation of environmental protection .
We need all this in order to defend the four fundamental freedoms of the European Union as well as to gain citizens ' support for all of these goals .
Many look upon this constitution as if it were the end in itself .
In reality we need to sort things out , and the Constitutional Treaty is in fact nothing but an instrument for realising these objectives .
We will be able to regain the support of the citizens of Europe for the constitutional project if Europe is able to achieve these common goals .
In order to do so , of course , it is also very important for us openly to recognise Europe 's common roots based on Christianity , and for this to be mentioned in the European constitution .
It is important for us to acknowledge Europe 's common values in terms of rights and freedoms , in terms of the defence of minority rights .
We need to gain the support of Europe 's citizens for this constitutional treaty , albeit not as a final goal but as an instrument with which we , together , can reach the goals set out fifty years ago .
Mr President , Prime Minister , anyone who heard the American President saying at the press conference after the summit with the European Union that ' we have had a nice meeting with these people from the European Union ' would wonder whether he was thinking about Mr Barroso , Chancellor Angela Merkel , or who ?
Anyone who saw or heard the American President could be in no doubt that we need one voice for the European Union , and that is why we thank you for your clarity in your speech today .
Anyone who has been to the Middle East is also in no doubt that we need one voice for the European Union .
That is why , Prime Minister Prodi , it is one thing to speak in the European Parliament - we all know that , as this is not the most difficult place to argue for a better treaty - but it is another to speak in the IGC , when the hard stuff comes and it is face to face .
I know you are a strong and firm Prime Minister .
We respect you .
Stand firm , Prime Minister , and we will stand firm with you , on behalf of the European Socialists and progressives all around Europe .
I think you will have a strong majority behind you standing firm together with you for the benefit of European people in the future .
And that was the experience of a former prime minister who is now an MEP .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the future of Europe is in its roots , and for us radicals these are represented by the Ventotene manifesto , which set out the need to achieve peace , democracy and prosperity by going beyond the dimensions of the nation state .
Reforming Europe today means offering this project also to the peoples on the opposite shores of the Mediterranean , and affirming , for them too , the individual right to democracy through the accession of democratic states , starting with Turkey , but also with the prospect of Israel , Morocco and others .
You spoke of being in the forefront , but for us only a refusal to close the doors of Europe will constitute being in the forefront .
To make another point : we propose that whatever reform is to be made be subject to a referendum of the people of Europe as such .
I am not speaking of national referendums , but a single referendum placed before the citizens of the European motherland , as against the neo-Gaullist Europe of national motherlands .
To conclude , let us welcome an example of how we can , as a Union , be strong when we have faith in ourselves : the tabling of the resolution on the moratorium on capital punishment before the General Assembly taking place at the United Nations .
Mr President , beware of the sabotage that some people are still attempting to wreak now .
For example , look at the official communication by the General Affairs and External Relations Council , and the Council 's departments .
After the last General Affairs and External Relations Council this means that sabotage is being attempted , Mr President , and we should try to prevent it .
( PL ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , we clearly do need an efficient and well-ordered European Union that is democratic and close to its citizens .
The Union must also be imbued with a spirit of solidarity and based on a Constitutional Treaty .
It should be the kind of Union Mr Prodi has described to us today , and I am grateful to him for that .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the solidarity the European Union recently displayed towards my country , Poland , through the implementation of its Eastern policy .
The people of Poland are aware of this and value it .
The people of Poland understand that they must of course reciprocate , and display the same solidarity over issues of importance to Europe as a whole .
This is because 68 % of my fellow-countrymen are pleased with membership of the Union and want more Europe .
Over 60 % of Poles are in favour of a Constitutional Treaty .
I therefore call on you , Mr Prodi , to ensure that the European Council also listens to the views of European Union citizens at the forthcoming summit .
After all , this splendid edifice known as the European Union is being created for those very citizens , not for the governments .
Our thanks go to the Prime Minister of Italy , whose convictions , it is evident , are shared by the great majority in this House .
Over the coming weeks , we will need to put those convictions into practice , and we wish you , Prime Minister , much success , especially at the summit meeting in Brussels on 21 and 22 June , a month to the day from now .
The debate is closed .
( Applause )
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - As elected politicians , we must listen to the people - all the people .
Some , such as Mr Farage , want to listen only to some of the people , those who voted ' No ' in France and the Netherlands .
Others want to listen only to those who said ' Yes ' in the 18 countries which have ratified the Constitutional Treaty .
Fortunately , a majority in this House and of the governments of the Member States want to listen to all , to bridge the divergence of views and find a solution capable of being ratified by all 27 Member States .
Of course , the European Parliament , which approved the constitutional treaty by a large majority , wants to salvage as many as possible of the reforms contained in the constitutional treaty .
It is perfectly natural that Parliament should want to sacrifice as little of the treaty as possible , but it must also be as much as is necessary to secure agreement by every country .
in writing . - ( HU ) What does Europe mean to us ?
A community without borders , which rests upon peace , freedom and democracy , strives to promote the prosperity of its citizens and brings about solidarity among the Member States .
We are facing great challenges !
We must delineate an appropriate plan of action for Europe that will determine the framework and policy in which it will operate , and will shape the Europe in which we would like to live and thrive in the future .
It is important for us to preserve and pass on to future generations the unity which we have succeeded through sustained effort in achieving over the decades .
I consider it important to preserve the uniqueness and diverse heritage of all 27 members of the European Union , but I must emphasise that there are countless goals which we cannot achieve individually , but only together .
In light of this , it is our duty to set aside our historical injuries and to place our Union on a renewed foundation .
Our interest is in a strong European Union , which takes effective action in face of the many challenges which we must meet today , such as terrorism , organised crime , illegal immigration , climate change and energy policy .
For this reason , it is indispensable to have an institutional system that works effectively .
To this end we must reach a consensus , so that we can advance the pursuit of our common cause , since in the absence of a new fundamental treaty ( Constitution ) , the EU can be no more than a declining western extension of the Asian continent .
We have the opportunity for a solution , and I hope that we will be able to take advantage of it .
We cannot stop the constitutional process , because this might lead to serious crisis in the European Union , to the devaluation of European values and to Europe falling behind in a global perspective .
The person of Romano Prodi and the recent past we have spent together stand as guarantees that the preservation of these values , and cooperation in an enlarged , 27-member Europe are indeed possible .
For the moment , the new Member States in Central and Eastern Europe find it impossible to imagine a European future in which national identity might dissolve into a common European statehood .
These countries have only just regained their national identities , through historic steps , from the Soviet Union 's great red melting pot , and thus their citizens want to be Europeans in a way that does not endanger their national identity or their newly created democratic institutions .
Moreover , for this very reason the Central and Eastern European countries need a strong Europe , since they consider that their further development and the protection of their national interests are most likely to be guaranteed if they are together , within a flexible Europe .
This is why we cannot accept the Constitutional Treaty becoming a political and legal zombie .
At the same time , in order to move forward , we are perfectly open to making the necessary modifications .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Palestine ( debate )
The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( Parliament approved the minutes )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Palestine .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , recent days have seen a disturbing increase in violence in the Middle East , where conflict between Palestinian factions in the Gaza Strip has cost over 50 people their lives .
It is also from the Gaza Strip that over 150 Kassam missiles have been fired at Israeli towns over the past week , killing one Israeli woman yesterday evening .
Israeli military action has already cost the lives of over 30 Palestinians , and the situation threatens to escalate still further .
The cease fire in the Gaza Strip , agreed by the Palestinians and the Israelis in November is becoming visibly more fragile , and the inter-Palestinian reconciliation achieved in Mecca with Saudi help is at risk .
The Mecca agreement had its part to play in bringing rule by Hamas alone to an end .
Since 18 March , Palestine has been ruled by a new government of national unity , enjoying the support and confidence of 83 out of 86 members of parliament - an overwhelming majority including all those belonging to Hamas and Fatah .
There is still , however , broad consensus in the international community to the effect that the Palestinian Government has not yet quite passed its decisive test , in that it , too , does not completely meet the Quartet 's three criteria .
Despite this , the European Union has maintained its humanitarian aid for the Palestinians .
I want to press home the point that the EUR 300 million given by the European Union amounts to more than that given in all previous years .
The Quartet 's criteria do however , remain the basis on which a decision on any complete normalisation of our relations with the Palestinians will be taken : they require recognition of the State of Israel 's right to exist and of the existing agreements between Israel and the PLO , as well as a general renunciation of violence , which , in particular , has to date been significantly lacking .
Particularly at the present time , we expect the Palestinian Government to take effective action to end the bombardment and to release the captive Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit .
The European Union has also seized the opportunity presented by the end of sole Hamas rule to make a fresh start in Middle East policy , and the foreign ministers have resumed contact with the Cabinet members who accept the Quartet criteria .
It follows that President Abbas deserves our full support .
The EU is in close contact with Mr Fayyad , the minister of finance , and is helping him establish transparent institutions and machinery in the financial sphere , for we all want to see the country 's financial and economic position improve , and the release by Israel of the customs and tax repayments it has retained - which the European Union has called for on repeated occasions - would help to achieve that .
For some months now , the Presidency has been pushing for the revival of the Middle East Quartet and for greater involvement of the Arab partners who take a constructive line .
Having enjoyed initial successes , our particular concern is now that the momentum achieved be maintained , and what this means for us is that we have to apply ourselves with still greater dedication to helping to get all interested parties to make a determined contribution to the Middle Eastern peace process .
The bilateral meetings between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert have as yet yielded no tangible successes , and something must be done about this .
There must be marked improvements in access and mobility for the Palestinians , and the Israelis must at last get round to doing what they have undertaken to do .
I note a failure on the part of the Palestinians to actually make the renunciation of violence happen , and also a lack of commitment to the release of the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit .
The Arab League has reinforced the peace initiative of March 2002 , and this has been due primarily to the commitment by the Saudis .

The last Council meeting on 14 May saw an initial , and successful , meeting of the Arab League with the European Union , which occurred at our invitation ; the League has also had further talks with the Quartet and with Israel as well , and , while this involvement cannot be a substitute for bilateral negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis , the peace initiative can create a favourable environment for them , although this will require further support by the European Union in particular , and our Presidency is working to bring about another meeting of the Quartet within the next few days .
However sceptical we may be , we must not , despite the slowness of the progress made , sink into a state of resignation .
Over recent months , the European Union has become more aware of the role into which it has grown .
We are willing to do justice to the greater responsibility which consequently devolves upon us .
Madam President , unfortunately this debate today comes at a very tense moment when the situation in the whole region is deteriorating both in Lebanon and in the Occupied Palestinian Territory , as well as in Israel .
The events of the last three days in Lebanon , with significant loss of life in such a short time - almost 100 dead - are a startling reminder of the need to work on a regional solution to this conflict .
As you know , Javier Solana is in Beirut today at this very difficult moment and we hope that a better situation can be brought about .
I urge our friends in Lebanon , from all the parties and political factions , to act as they have done so far , to call for calm and to refrain from actions which could provoke a major internal conflict .
Once again national unity is also at stake .
The Commission noted that all the factions , the majority and the opposition as well as Palestinian organisations , condemned Fatah al-Islam and I hope that all political leaders will continue to give proof of their maturity , that ability to envisage a better future , and will prevent the conflict from again evolving into an intra-Lebanese fight .
What is most important now is to find a solution to de-escalate the situation in Tripoli and to avoid the eruption of other hot spots in the rest of the country .
The population in the camps also has to be helped .
Ambulances and humanitarian convoys must gain access to the camps .
In the end we all know that there has to be a regional solution .
In the context of this whole situation we can only call on all sides - in Lebanon and in the Palestinian Territory - to refrain from violence and prevent further escalation .
I turn now in particular to the Occupied Palestinian Territory .
Like the President-in-Office , I too am deeply concerned about last week 's interfactional clashes in Gaza which resulted in 55 dead and 280 injured .
Regrettably it seems that Gaza is at risk of sliding into civil war .
Factions should stop hostilities immediately and reconcile their differences within the national unity government .
I also deplore the resumption of the Qassam rocket attacks from Gaza on the Israeli city of Sderot , which yesterday caused the death of an Israeli woman .
Israeli-led air strikes in retaliation then caused the death of 35 Palestinians , so this vicious cycle has started again .
Therefore it is important that the ceasefire between Israel and the Palestinians be restored and extended to the West Bank .
During my recent meeting with the Palestinian Foreign Affairs Minister , Ziad Abu Amr , we discussed the fragile situation of the national unity government , especially as concerns security , but also the budget .
The first decisions taken by the government seem to point in the right direction .
Mr Abu Amr mentioned that his government considers itself the cabinet of President Abbas .
This government has a different programme from its predecessor and I felt encouraged after this meeting .
I think that it deserves our clear support .
President Abbas has requested all our backing , as his political survival may depend on its success .
I hope that this very difficult violent situation can be contained .
In the meantime , Finance Minister Salam Fayad , whom I met after the formation of the government , faces the incredible challenge of repairing the Palestinian public finances after one year of institutional decay and a sharp decrease in revenues .
Against all odds he has made considerable progress and the technical conditions for receiving direct funding have almost been put in place .
As you know , the Palestinian Authority has three main sources of funding : internal taxes , taxes and customs revenues on imported products , and foreign aid .
Internal taxes have dwindled as a result of the economic slowdown .
Since last year 's election , Israel has also withheld the taxes and customs revenues on imported products .
This is the major cause of the Palestinian Authority 's financial difficulties .
Furthermore , foreign aid cannot flow easily as a result of the US-imposed restrictions on financial transactions with the Palestinian Authority Government
We are helping to solve these financial problems in three ways .
First , our Temporary International Mechanism has become a core source for funding for allowances , fuel costs and core supplies .
Since the formation of the national unity government we manage this TIM in close cooperation with Salam Fayad 's Ministry of Finance .
Since the establishment of the TIM last June , we have already transferred over EUR 300 million through this mechanism .
I would like to thank Parliament for its support in making more budgetary resources available so that the TIM can continue to deliver .
A second way in which we are helping is to work with our US partners to facilitate the transfer of foreign aid to the Palestinians , in particular the Arab funds pledged in Riyadh at the recent Arab summit .
Last but not least , we have urged Israel on multiple occasions to resume the transfer of Palestinian tax and customs revenues .
We are using all the instruments we have , whether economic or political , but the survival of this government does not depend only on us .
Only the resumption of all financial flows to the Palestinian Authority can deliver a durable solution to their financial crisis .
And the Palestinians have to play their role and decide once and for all to end their fighting and focus on peace .
We still think that , despite the distress we are witnessing in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and in Lebanon , we should profit from an important window of opportunity in the peace process in case it shuts down again , so it is very important that the German initiative is successful .
It is crucial that the Arab League relaunches its Peace Initiative .
As you know , there has been a determined diplomatic follow-up at the highest level in the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
I myself have had several meetings with the Follow-Up Committee in Sharm el Sheikh , in Riyadh , and also more recently at the GAERC meeting in Brussels .
Secretary-General Amr Moussa and others have underlined the urgency which is more evident than ever today and he has asked for our help in bringing the parties to the table .
On the Israeli side , I am encouraged that Foreign Minister Livni has been to Cairo and is now expecting a follow-up visit by her Jordanian and Egyptian counterparts in the coming weeks .
She has also shown willingness to engage more than in the past and she will also be invited by the German Presidency to the next GAERC meeting .
At the same time I also endorse the efforts of Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice to bring the parties together and start discussing the political horizon for the Palestinians .
I hope that will be possible even though events are not going well at this moment .
The energy and efforts invested by Jordan , Egypt , Saudi Arabia and others must also be recognised .
Next week the Quartet will meet .
I hope that this meeting will respond to the efforts of the Arab League , which could relaunch the progress on all tracks of the peace process , but I am also realistic and I understand what the German Presidency has said , that we should at least uphold the situation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , we are facing an extremely difficult situation .
As the representative of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner have stressed , this is a serious political crisis , with internal confrontations and battles between the two factions making up the Government of National Unity , in which so many hopes had been placed ; an extremely serious economic , social and humanitarian crisis , and the figures are devastating : more than 66 % of the Palestinian population below the poverty line ; more than 50 % with no food safety ; more than one million people unable to receive a stable income for the last year ; a hundred dead over the last three days in Lebanon ; huge numbers of dead in the Gaza Strip .
I believe that , faced with this situation , the European Union must emerge from its lethargy and take a step in the right direction .
If one thing is being done right , then credit for that must be given to the European Commission , which , amidst countless difficulties , is making its contribution to the humanitarian and social disaster befalling the region , but I believe we must go further .
The Commissioner has reminded us that the High Representative , Javier Solana , is currently in the region .
We must have the courage and strength to try to move beyond fine words , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and the European Union must try to bring a little common sense to this barbaric situation in the region .
There is a vicious circle of violence ; Kassam missiles are fired , there are Israeli reprisals and suicide attacks are announced ...
We are facing a totally suicidal spiral of violence .
We must try to impose a little order , we must put faith in the efforts of the High Representative , mobilise the European Union 's diplomatic forces as much as possible , and the Commission must back all of the economic and humanitarian assistance that is being provided .
I would like to draw the attention of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to an issue that I believe to be crucial ; that in order to restore direct aid to the Palestinian National Authority , the Quartet stated that not only was the composition of the government decisive , but also the actions that the government was carrying out .
Could the Presidency-in-Office of the Council explain its views in this regard and tell us how we can escape from this vicious circle of hate , violence and destruction ?

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Mr Gloser , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , death and violence have returned to Gaza , Lebanon and Israel .
As the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we stress the urgent need for a substantive change in the European Union 's policy in the Middle East , with full restoration of financial aid to the Palestinian institutions and people .
The conflicts of recent days are the product of exasperation and the stalemate in the political situation , as well as demonstrating and confirming the fact that Israel will not build its own security on the death of Palestine and Palestinians .
European democracy 's double standards towards the government of national unity must cease , as the political continuity of that government is the only hope for regaining control of the situation .
The decision , however , to suspend financial aid to the institutions seems even more absurd since the formation of the government of national unity .
The fact that the Council and the Commission have decided not to meet ministerial representatives of Hamas and the independents does nothing for the stability of that executive body , which is currently the only form of political expression open to the Palestinian people .
The Mecca agreement , even if it is not an uncritical repetition of the Quartet 's four points , is obviously a step in the right direction , in the sense of mutual recognition and the cessation of violence .
On this basis we must work to ensure that the situation develops in a positive direction .
Another reason is , as the Commissioner pointed out , that Abu Amr , the Foreign Affairs Minister , who last week was here with us in Brussels , gave us an enormous amount of reassurance on this aspect .
We join with the grief and condemnation over the launch of missiles on Sderot and also the fact that people were killed and injured there , but at the same time we wish to call upon the Palestinian and Israeli authorities to cease disproportionate , excessive and illegal retaliation against Palestinian political and civilian figures .
A perverse dynamic has been set back in motion and we Europeans must try to help stop it .
I would like to remind you that the 78 people who died within a few days in Lebanon speak volumes about another poisoned fruit of the unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict , and that is the fact that in Lebanon open conflict may break out again with the 400 000 Palestinian refugees present in that country .
We have already experienced that nightmare , so let us seek to prevent it , just as last July we put a stop to the war and Israel 's aggression towards Lebanon .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the President-in-Office said that the new unity government in Palestine had not quite passed the litmus test .
Well , the Israelis have not quite stopped building their security wall , stealing Palestinian land and water .
The Israelis have not quite released the 10 000 prisoners , many of them held without charge or trial .
The Israelis have not quite stopped holding checkpoints - 589 according to the Commission 's latest figures - which impose an economic embargo upon the Palestinians .
The Israelis have not quite paid back the money - which may amount to about one thousand million euros now - that they have withheld from the Palestinians ' own revenue over the past year .
They have not quite stopped the partition and separation by way of identity cards , which my own party leader , Paddy Ashdown - our former representative in Bosnia-Herzegovina - described just last Saturday as racism dressed up as administration .
I say these things to the President-in-Office because we are seen as a European Union that practises double standards : we are seen to ignore every Israeli illegality , but to expect Palestinians to behave like saints .
When the Commissioner says that we are using all the instruments at our disposal to get the Israelis to observe international agreements and obey the law , I do not think that can possibly be the case .
There are many tools at our disposal that we are not even trying to exercise .
Therefore , what does the Palestinian unity government have to do now ?
Just two weeks ago our delegation heard Prime Minister Haniyeh not only convince us in a way that satisfied us all that the unity government was determined to meet the Quartet 's three principles , and believed it was doing so , but also that it would meet with members of the Quartet without reservation or precondition at any time to try to sort out these differences .
I urge the President-in-Office to take up that offer .
Note also the comments just yesterday of the Norwegian Foreign Minister when he asked what would happen if we do not support this government .
There would be only chaos and crisis if we do not give it our support .
Therefore , President-in-Office , the good news in your speech is that you are seeking an urgent meeting to review the situation yet again .
That is a positive step forward .
All I can say is that we have often accused the Palestinians of missing opportunities ; we have often accused the Israelis of missing opportunities .
This is an opportunity that we ourselves must not miss .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Middle East poses a significant and ongoing challenge not only for the countries of the region , but also for the wider world .
We warn against a partisan emotional approach to this decades-old conflict .
Despite all the simplification and the temptation to make facile assessments on the basis of television news clips , this is not a black or white situation .
It may be fashionable in certain circles to label Israel as the aggressor and the oppressor , but this belief is untrue and unsound .
The spread of radical attitudes and the votes cast for radical Hamas-style groups indicate the almost non-existent possibilities for dialogue in this area .
Another major difficulty that is not often mentioned is the deep divisions and bitter infighting leading to armed conflict within the Palestinian political class and Palestinian society .
Certain experts have drawn attention to the Palestinian Authority 's education system .
As stated by those who attended the conference organised last week by Mr Van Orden at the European Parliament , the system reinforces negative and antagonistic stereotypes relating the Jihad Holy War and structural opposition to Israel and actual hatred of that country .
In the interests of objectivity , it has to be said also that since Hamas ' victory in the elections held in the Palestinian Authority , Israel has been implementing a rather controversial plan whereby it is refusing to transfer Palestinian tax revenue to the Authority .
This must have a serious impact on relations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
The European Union should react in a realistic and rational fashion .
It must not behave like a short sighted benevolent uncle handing out large amounts of pocket money but failing to ascertain the use to which it is being put .
The Union must not become a hostage to any of the parties to the conflict either .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I have to say I am still in a bit of a state of shock over the words of the representative of the Council .
I do not understand how he can say that the new unity government does not fulfil the criteria of the Quartet .
Our delegation has just come back from the region and all of us unanimously agreed that they had .
Yes , there are still some Qassam rockets which of course are to be condemned .
But do you really think that , by refusing to fully engage with the government , the EU is helping bring that back under control ?
Do you really think it has got nothing to do with the economic and political stranglehold in which Israel holds Gaza ?
You mention the detention of soldier Shalit - and of course he should be released - but you did not even mention the 41 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council who are still detained by Israel ; you did not even mention the detention of 10 000 Palestinian political prisoners held by Israel , many without trial .
So , let us have some balance in this debate .
By refusing to fully recognise the new unity government and by channelling aid via a temporary international mechanism rather than through the Palestinian Authority , the EU is actively undermining the authority and the apparatus of Palestine 's democratic institutions .
And , even worse than that , our position is actually encouraging those elements both inside and outside Palestine which want this government to fail .
Every day that goes by when we refuse to engage fully with this government is another day for the extremists to say , ' Look : democracy is not working .
We did everything the international community demanded - democratic elections , a new unity government , fulfilling the Quartet demands , and still we face a political and economic boycott .
So , why on earth are we helping to bring about a democratically-elected government which is doing its best to keep the peace ? '
Is that really what we want ?
Do not imagine that the alternative will be a slightly different government whose colours we like slightly better .
The alternative will be chaos and violence on an unimaginable scale , the whole region will become destabilised and there will be even more rapid growth of extremism across the Middle East .
Because , while the Council adopts a wait-and-see policy to review how the new government performs , each day it waits it puts the very outcome it wants to see in ever greater jeopardy .
There is a very real danger that in a few years ' time we will look back at this moment and think , ' Why on earth did we not support democracy in Palestine when we had the chance ? '
So to the Council I say please tell us again what the Palestinian Government has to do , and to the Commission I ask , when will you suspend the EU-Israel Association Agreement ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , the European Union is not uninvolved in the unspeakable events taking place in Palestine today .
That is because it failed to act decisively at the appropriate time and in the right direction .
Twenty days ago , Parliament 's delegation for our relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council made an official visit to Palestine .
Our visit was made at an historic moment in Palestine , following the swearing in of a new government that was the product of free and democratic elections , a government which , even though it had the support of 60 % of the electoral body , when it was challenged by the United States and the European Union , did not hesitate to share power with other political forces in order to form a national unity government under the unquestioned leader of the Palestinian Authority , Abu Mazen , in faithful obedience to the calls of the Arab League Council .
It was to this government , therefore , that represents the entire Palestinian people , that Parliament 's delegation clearly tabled vital issues relating to the question of peace in the Middle East and , as my honourable friends have said , we received clear answers :
They told us that they recognise the right of Israel to exist within the 1967 borders .
All it has to do is to recognise our right to create our own state next to Israel .
They reject violence .
They acknowledge all the agreements made between Israel and the PLO .
Their immediate priorities include the release of Mr Johnston .
They are working to get Saleet released within the framework of an exchange of prisoners .
They told us , however , that in order to be able to achieve their goals , they need our help .
The political and economic embargo needs to be lifted immediately .
That is why I conclude with one call to Israel and one call to the Palestinians :
Israel should stop targeting missiles at its enemies and free all the elected representatives of the Palestinians ;
the Palestinians should stop making rocket attacks on Israeli territory .
I also call on the Council and the Commission to immediately recognise President Abbas 's new democratically elected national unity government and to put an immediate end to its policy of selectively approaching certain members of that government .
Stop the political and economic embargo immediately .
Get dynamically involved in a creative dialogue with the entire national unity government .
Support this government so that it can negotiate for peace .
Otherwise chaos will ensue and the European Union will bear its share of the responsibility for it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , sadly , the situation in Palestine confirms what the sovereigntists have been saying on the subject of the Middle East conflict for a very long time now , namely that it would be wrong to believe that this conflict can be summed up as a straightforward confrontation between Palestinians and Israelis , and even less between Muslims and Jews .
The true division , which is becoming increasingly wide , is between , on the one side , the advocates of conciliation , which not only several Israeli statesmen - and I cannot omit to mention the glorious name of Yitzhak Rabin - but also Palestinian statesmen , such as Yasser Arafat and Mahmoud Abbas , have shown themselves to be , and , on the other side , the fanatics , both Muslim fanatics and fanatics of the Greater Israel , whose connivances are , moreover , perfectly clear , since we know that Palestinian extremist movements have been backed , and even funded , by certain Israeli radicals .
There are therefore two camps : on the one hand , the camp that wishes to seek a political solution and , ultimately , peace , and on the other , the camp that seeks confrontation , hate and endless war .
Regrettably , despite the fine words , the United States is playing along with the hawks , the Israeli extremists and the Muslim fundamentalists , while Europe , by which I mean the main European States , have remained silent throughout this time .
The only European voice that showed any unity was that of the Venice declaration , in June 1980 , in which the Europeans stated that they were in favour of the creation of a Palestinian State .
Our divisions have increased , however , and Europe can now once again speak with one voice only when it has nothing to say .
The time has come to restore the sovereignty of the States of Europe , so that they can once again play their role freely in that part of the world , where much of their future is at stake .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , anyone who has followed the events in the Middle East in recent days can do no other than be dispirited .
Last Wednesday in the Conference of Presidents of our Parliament , I had the honour of attending a meeting with Amr Moussa , Secretary-General of the Arab League , and the Foreign Affairs Minister of the Palestinian Authority .
What this made evident to me was their genuine will to work on a peace plan for the region , but a number of things - how shall I put it - structural problems are left pending .
Hamas , the most important Palestinian government party , remains unyielding in its explicit refusal to recognise Israel and still refuses to renounce and condemn terrorism and violence .
It is anybody 's guess how the peace talks , in those circumstances , can lead to success .
In fact , in the last few days , the violence between the different Palestinian camps has also flared up , with even a foiled bomb attack on President Mahmoud Abbas .
There is no doubt in my mind that Israel has the right to defend itself against violence and terror , by military means if necessary .
Israel should be warned , though , against actions directed at Palestinian members of parliament and a fortiori at the Palestinian Prime Minister , although some have voiced an interest in choosing this path , for , were they to do so , they would be crossing a dangerous line , and making a subsequent , and even greater escalation of violence , inevitable .
- Madam President , the misery and suffering in Palestine is truly awful and , while the fact that it is largely self-inflicted does not lessen its impact , it undermines those who always want to blame Israel for every tragedy in the region .
Today , of course , the usual suspects in this debate , like Mr Davies and Ms Lucas , on their habitual hobbyhorses , have done their biased best to unreasonably shift all the blame onto Israel .
What we are witnessing is a veritable civil war in Palestine between Fatah and Hamas , and the particularly aggressive actions of Hamas show us that the pursuit of democracy and a democratic mandate has done nothing to tame or to temper their adherence to terror .
It is this undiluted attachment to terror that makes Hamas so unfit to govern .
Likewise , their continuing aggression towards Israel , with their sustained rocket campaign , wholly justifies the defensive response of Tel Aviv .
I fear that , as long as Fatah and Hamas can tout both gun and ballot , democracy and the peace that it can bring will not prevail in this troubled and failed entity that is Gaza .
Any international initiative that fails to address the removal of the gun from both sides in Palestine will flounder and fail .
Madam President , once again we are discussing this tragic situation in Palestine .
Let me say at the outset that all of us condemn terrorism wherever it occurs .
I should say that the suicide bombers who attacked London a couple of years ago all came from my constituency .
However , they were motivated by events in the Middle East - by Iraq and by Palestine - and therefore it is proper that we should not only consider the events in the Middle East as they affect the people there but also people in our own territories .
I used to say that Israel was the only democracy in the Middle East .
But two years ago I chaired our delegation for the elections of President Abbas , which were much welcomed by the international community .
However , when he came here a few months ago he said that if we , the international community , would not support him , there would be chaos and civil war in his country .
Last year I chaired the Election Observation Mission for the elections to the parliament in Palestine , and then the European Union turned its back on those results .
We seem to be paralysed by the roadmap .
However , in my view the situation has now got to the point where the EU simply has to change its approach .
Palestine is collapsing economically , politically and socially .
We are risking another Algeria , where , when the West turned its back on the results of the elections in 1992 , the result was 200 000 dead .
I believe the time has now come for the EU , if it cannot recognise the government of national unity , at least under the terms of a draft resolution some of us discussed last week , it should cooperate comprehensively with that government .
Secondly , it is surely high time that the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs had a working party - not just on the United Nations or the Balkans or the five external financing instruments : let us have a working party on the Middle East .
( FR ) Madam President , let us imagine a city that is regularly plunged into darkness .
Let us imagine a city with no police .
Let us imagine a situation in which State employees have not been paid for a year and a half .
Let us imagine hospitals with no drugs and schools with no educational supplies .
Let us imagine a sealed-off city , left to its own devices , with no administration in operation .
And let us imagine that money is circulating there , and weapons .
Remember that one night of power cuts in New York led to looting and crime , in the world 's largest democracy .
So what can we expect today in Palestine ?
Our irresponsible policy has led to the collapse of the administrations that we had set up , to the weakening of the power in place , to increased poverty , to the re-emergence of diseases that had disappeared - even the World Bank agrees on this - and this , despite the laudable efforts of the Commission .
We have now just climbed a step further into misery : the Palestinians are killing each other !
This situation was predictable though , ladies and gentlemen .
Rather than seeking unity between the two great Palestinian factions , whose legitimacy was based on fair elections , rather than backing their unity from the outset , we decided to play the game of sanctions , thus dividing them .
While President Abbas risked his life and staked everything on ensuring the creation of a government of national unity , based on a political platform inspired by the principles of the Quartet and respecting the peace commitments that had previously been made , we stood by and waited .
We have not been able to take advantage of this glint of light and of the hopes raised in Mecca .
Today , Javier Solana , who is on a visit to the region , has quite rightly stated : ' We must support Palestinian unity ' .
But we will not support that unity by sending money and weapons to one of the parties !
There is only one way to do that , as you all know : politics .
That is why , together with some of my colleagues , I shall say this to you : we must urgently recognise the government of national unity !
Its authority must be established , and we must help it to establish that authority and to ensure the subsistence of its population .
He who sows the wind shall reap the whirlwind : I am not the first person to say that .
If we refuse to work with moderate Islamists , however , we will just be stuck with the radicals and the extremists , and it is not just in Palestine that they will make their voices heard !
( DE ) Madam President , the situation is indeed a tragic one .
Groups of Hamas radicals are day by day bombarding Sderot with Qassam rockets , and these attacks , far from being random , are the fifth breach of the cease-fire so far .
What is evident is that the attempt is again being made to distract attention from the in-fighting between the Palestinians themselves , that is to say between Hamas and Fatah , with fighting in which 55 Palestinians have died , killed by Palestinian hands .
It seemed to them that the time was ripe for attention to be diverted to their common foe , Israel , and how did Israel respond ?
It responded with the mailed fist .
This Israeli Government , whose approval ratings lie around the 3 % mark , is doing Hamas a favour by trying to wipe out the source of the attacks by military means , leading to more Palestinian victims , whose deaths we lament .
Hamas has again won itself time and can put off to another day the political concessions that have to be made .
Yet again , we appear to be paralysed .
Concessions were , after all , made in Mecca ; they may not , to be sure , have been sufficient , but , despite the weaknesses of Mecca , these concessions amounted to a major step in the direction of peace .
That agreement has now been stricken to the heart by this resumption of violence .
I do believe , then , that it is for the time being right and proper that the European Union should insist on compliance with all the Quartet 's conditions and with what was agreed at Mecca before it resumes making payments to the unity government .
This does not run counter to Mr McMillan-Scott 's call for pragmatic and all-round cooperation to be sought where it really is for the people 's benefit .
We should not , nevertheless , abandon this vital tool before it is time to do so .
I would encourage the Council , the Commission and the Arab League to make the effort to press ahead , and would very much like to see them achieve success as soon as possible .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , the European Union managed to retain its credibility at the recent summit in Samara .
Mr Barroso , the President of the Commission , and Mrs Merkel , the President of the Council , had no hesitation in making pertinent and forthright comments on the unfair treatment meted out to Poland , a Member State of the European Union , over the meat issue .
Mr Barroso and Mrs Merkel also commented in the same vein about human rights in Russia .
The question arises as to why the Union does not go further and highlight the fate of Palestinians in Israel , or that of Cyprus , which has been under Turkish occupation since 1974 .
Major injustices are being still perpetrated on the Union 's doorstep in the 21st century , and we continue to do too little to help overcome them .
Did people not die in Palestine before the creation of the state of Israel ?
How much longer will the Israeli army of occupation remain in the Palestinian Territories ?
Do the Palestinians not have a right to their own state ?
The Jewish people were denied their own state for so long - how can they deprive others of that right ?
The Palestinians ' response to the ongoing occupation is to launch attacks on Israel .
In comparison to the actions of the Israeli forces , those perpetrated by the Palestinians are amateur efforts .
It should be for Israel to make the initial move towards facilitating the creation of a Palestinian State .
That would be the first step towards reducing violence in the region and promoting coexistence .
It is the European Union 's duty to be the guardian of freedom in the world , especially now that the United States has relinquished that role and sided with Israel .
Perhaps the events of September 11 would not have taken place if the United States had persevered in its previous role of impartial guardian of law and justice the world over .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , having said , in our last debate , which followed the Hamas victory , that Europe must never again allow the existence of Israel to be jeopardised , it is with all the greater anguish and sadness that I return from travelling through Palestine .
What I mean by that is that , though I wanted to visit Palestine , it was nowhere to be found ; what I found instead was a military hinterland , dismembered , divided , a land in which members of families are cut off from one another and from their places of work , in which towns are deprived of water and settlements of fertile land .
All I can say to you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , is that nobody can live under such circumstances .
The Israeli Government 's occupation regime is not making the country more secure ; it is putting it in jeopardy by turning Palestine into a seedbed of despair , hatred and violence .
I can tell you , Commissioner , that the situation has got worse ; it will , indeed , get worse still , and nobody can or should be surprised at that .
Politicians always find the analysis of military measures difficult , but one fundamental conviction derived from my trip that I would like to share with you is that this occupation regime also serves other purposes : quite obviously , and undeniably , the protection of illegal settlements and the links between them .
It also serves to keep the country 's water resources in Israeli hands , to put in place a system of land acquisition whereby Israel 's borders may be set still wider .
That cannot be a means to peace .
As I said earlier , no longer must anybody put at risk Israel 's right to exist , and so , critical as one may be of it , and whatever demands we might make for the sake of peace in Israel , what I want to say today is that we need to demand that this regime of occupation be abandoned and that help be given in establishing a viable Palestinian state .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Palestinians are continuing to die and so many have already died ; again they are being collectively punished .
The army 's response is to a group of terrorists , who should indeed be confronted , but once again it is the Palestinian people that is paying .
It is our duty and our responsibility to recognise our failure as international communities , political parties and movements : after forty years the Israeli military occupation continues and the wall is stealing water and land from the future Palestinian State .
The tragedy that is unfolding has been predicted many times .
Since 1980 we have been talking about two peoples and two States : one State exists , but the other does not .
The Palestinian people is deprived of freedom , humiliated , expropriated , and hostage to extremist groups that have taken the people and also the leadership hostage .
It is not enough !
It is really not enough to promise that we will give more economic aid .
The solution is a political one : stop the military occupation and the expansion of settlements , recognise the Palestinian Government of national unity , and work to achieve Palestinian unity and not division .
We must show that the European Union believes in international legality and says so to Israel , which is continually infringing it .
The country is in fact , day by day , as David Grossman says , losing its very morality .
We must act quickly !
Act quickly , because the Palestinians and Israelis and Lebanese are paying the price of our incapacity and of our double standards .
We should recognise the government and also perhaps place an international United Nations force in Gaza and the West Bank .
In my view this is vital .
( EL ) Madam President , we are still living with the consequences of a mistake made in 1947 .
If there had been no unilateral recognition of Israel and the state of Palestine had been recognised back then , we would have saved a great deal of bloodshed .
One statistics office has concluded that all the blood shed in the area could have saved one million children with blood transfusions .
All these tragedies which happened with the twin towers , in London , in Madrid and elsewhere are the result of this policy in 1947 , which we are continuing today .
Why go into interminable details ?
Will we have the strength tomorrow to recognise the state of Palestine ?
That would be some sort of progress .
We are blowing the final whistle when the score is 90 - 10 .
When the umpire blows his final whistle when the score is 50 - 50 , he leaves the pitch with his head held high .
When he blows his final whistle when the score is 60 - 40 , the game is over , but when he blows his final whistle when the score is 90 - 10 , all hell breaks out both on the terraces and on the pitch .
We therefore are responsible for this hell , because we blew our final whistle when the score was 90 - 10 .
The world is going to the dogs and we hear references in Parliament to Iran 's nuclear weapons every day .
No one has ever spoken about Israel 's nuclear weapons and that is wrong .
If we want to be fair , if we want to believe our citizens and for them to trust us , we must administer justice and there will only be justice with the recognition of the state of Palestine .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Berlin Wall may have fallen , the Soviet Empire may belong in the past , the world has become globalised , but there is at least one thing that is unchanging , a place where history has come to a standstill , which is Palestine , the Palestine that is becoming mankind 's black hole : Gaza , the camps , rockets , intifadas , attacks , one land for two peoples , a long war that has been going on for sixty years now .
It is also a great jungle of myths , with esplanades , tombs , patriarchs , temples , mosques , monotheism and cynicism , a cynicism shared , moreover , by the hardliners on both sides .
On the Israeli side , there is technology , force , the elimination of Arafat , of Fatah , economic strangulation , the prisoners , in short , everything , but most definitely not negotiations , Iran over Iraq , Shi 'ism over Baathism , and , on the Palestinian side , the hardliners clearly have demographics on their side in the long term .
In the meantime , three generations have already been sacrificed , and what do we do ?
Well , we make statements , visits , humanitarian missions - do we not , Mr Solana ?
That is all !
The fact is , this conflict is the descendant of the European conflicts of 1914-1918 and 1939-45 , and we are not doing what we should be doing , we are indulging in Pharisaism .
We know , however , that we should go further than emergency meetings , that we should stop the embargos , that we should invest , that we need a European Camp David , with all of the parties - not only Israel , Palestine and its government of unity , but also Syria , Iran and Lebanon - and we know that we must state the two rights , the right of the Israeli State to exist in perpetuity , of course , but also the right of the Palestinian State to exist , to be recognised .
Madam President , the recent downward spiral of internecine violence between armed secular Fatah and Islamist Hamas militias in Gaza is of grave concern , as we now see the consequences of a weakened Israeli leadership post-Lebanese war and a weakened Palestinian President Abbas having to deal with the religious fundamentalists within Hamas , who won the elections last year .
The Hamas members of the unity government are clearly not able to break away from their intransigent positions based on theocratic obscurantist views that the State of Israel can never be explicitly recognised , that terrorist violence is justified and that they are not bound by previous agreements signed by the late Chairman Arafat .
So clearly this Palestinian Authority unity government does not fulfil the Quartet criteria and the EU cannot lift the ban on Hamas as a terrorist organisation or directly fund the Palestinian Authority at present , relying instead on the TIM for delivery of humanitarian aid which now totals over EUR 500 million yearly and has actually risen during the last three years .
There is increasing acceptance amongst Arabs , as evidenced by the recent proposals from the Arab League , of the desirability of a negotiated solution .
The Israelis all recognise the damage to Israel 's economy and society of the continuing violence after the recent spate of over 100 Qassam missiles launched by Hamas at civilian areas .
In fact there was one fatality last week which constitutes , in my view , a war crime under international law .
Only the extremists , it seems , are afraid of peace .
Whatever the origins of the Middle East conflict , there is increasing recognition amongst Arab States that Israel is here to stay , whilst Jews around the world can see that Israel 's long-term security is best served by recognition of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to have their own secure state also .
But the Palestinian Authority must first be able to secure law and order on its territory , which it is failing signally to do right now .
Securing the release of the BBC reporter Alan Johnston and the kidnapped soldier , Corporal Shalit , would be a great start and create a climate conducive to restarting the vital roadmap for peace talks .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to apologise for the fact I have to leave as soon as I have finished speaking , as I have to go and chair something .
I know that is impolite , but I would ask you to understand and bear with me .
It is not , of course , a matter of doubt that Israel is entitled to defend itself against the Kassam missiles , for firing them at civilian facilities and persons is a crime .
It is a provocation to Israel , but also to the government currently in power in Palestine .
One might even say that that is the main object of the exercise - and what is the European Union doing about it ?

I regret to have to tell Mr Gloser that the answer he has given - on behalf of the Council presidency , of course - is quite utterly unsatisfactory , no less so than the one given at the last debate .
We are doing nothing to strengthen the hand of those forces that alone are capable of taking action against these terrorists .
Our statements will change nothing , nor , alas , will Israel 's retaliatory military actions , justified though they may be in individual cases , if the European Union does not give this government a chance .
I say ' government ' , for it is cynical to decide which individual ministers one will meet with and which one to avoid ; I did mention last time round that the President of the Council was having meetings with the Israeli foreign minister , but , when it came to meeting his Palestinian counterpart , claimed that she was not in the habit of meeting foreign ministers .
That way of going about things is not really going to produce results .
While I have no desire to make life difficult for the Commissioner for Foreign Relations , she did in fact talk in terms of supporting the government rather than individual ministers , and while the pair of them say we have to support Abbas , they are not actually doing so by denying their backing to his government and failing to enable it to take action against terrorism and those who engage in it .


That is the problem ; if Europe does not commit itself to doing that all these talks will avail us nothing , since peace can be established only from within , and there will be peace only if there are , in Palestine , strong forces that can enforce their will by reason of their getting support - be it political , moral or financial - from the European Union in their fight against the terrorists .
That will help both Palestine and Israel .
Let me say once again that , if you want to help Israel , you have to give this government a chance .
Nothing else is worthy of being taken seriously .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Presidency and the Commission for being present .
Clearly , the time available permits me to make just a few observations .
Palestine is a serious and urgent issue , and we must seek to correct the current downward spiral of events .
The government of national unity is our sole interlocutor , and we must take note of this in a realistic way and seek to gain time with a gesture of hope towards Palestine .
We could also put in a peacekeeping force and have the courage , as the European Union , to be joint guarantor of the security of Israel and Palestine .
This must be based on a policy of opening up to the Arab world , starting with the whole of the Mediterranean , and thus not isolating this conflict from the general problem of the relationship between Islam and the West .
I have a dream : that a reformed United Nations Organisation will have its headquarters in Jerusalem , so that this kind of hope can actually be created .
We can work at this ; I believe that we will be able to achieve it !
Madam President , the Hamas Charter is a sacred text with three Islamic seals .
Unlike the secular PLO , Hamas does not recognise the concept of peace .
The PLO may want a two-state solution , but Hamas wants to eliminate Israel .
What does the Hamas Charter say ?
In Article 7 it mentions an Islamic world order and the destruction of all Jews .
Articles 22 and 28 say that the Jewish people created the French and Russian Revolutions , the First and Second World Wars , but also the United Nations , drugs and alcohol abuse , and control of the mass media .
Stopping the conflict with Israel is high treason and perpetrators will be cursed , according to Article 32 .
Cooperation with Hamas would make the EU morally responsible for a peace process leading to the elimination of Israel .
We must help the Palestinians , but not by facilitating the Hamas agenda .
( NL ) Madam President , in early February , the German newspaper , the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , featured an extremely gloomy report on the EU 's police mission in the Palestinian regions .
Its outgoing leader , a Briton by the name of MacGyver , did not mince his words when he said ' We are working here in a quagmire of deceit and corruption ' .
Months later , an escalation of rivalry between Fatah and Hamas only made matters worse .
The necessary question arises as to how meaningful the Council and Commission deem the continuation of the EU mission to set up a civil police force on the West Bank and in Gaza .
You will hardly want to shoulder some of the responsibility for the far-reaching lawlessness in that area .
Meanwhile , the news agency Reuters announced yesterday that the European Union will be extending its border mission in Rafah by a year under the revealing , unchanged motto ' The Palestinians are responsible for the border ' .
Their police are sure to put something in the way of the smugglers of arms , drugs , money and people , according to Palestinian insiders , such as the one who spoke to me .
I would ask the Council and Commission the same question : are you prepared to face up to your responsibility in this , and do so in a spirit of humility ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I ask your understanding for the fact that I am able , at the moment , to make only a few brief comments , as I have a meeting with your Committee on Foreign Affairs at 6.00 p.m. , when I will be reviewing and evaluating the last meeting of the General Affairs and Foreign Relations Council .
While I can understand all the things you have said , not least that which has been said on the basis of your own travels and discussions , I would ask you also to take note of the fact that it was the European Union , notably the previous and current presidencies , that actually did something about reviving the Middle East Quartet and getting some sort of process in motion , without which process the Saudi Arabian initiative would not have happened , and so I would ask you to take a nuanced view and bear in mind that certain things cannot be attributed to the immobility of certain funds .
This is , after all , an intra-Palestinian conflict .
We have of course - as I made clear in the statement on behalf of the presidency - spelled out in our talks with Israel that the funds rightly due to the Palestinians , in the shape of customs duties and taxes , must be returned to them if various infrastructure measures are to be guaranteed .
The Commissioner has , on repeated occasions , and not least to the Council , commented on how the European Union has been providing support over recent months .
The public may occasionally have got the impression that we are paying too little or nothing at all , but the opposite is in fact the case , for the European Union has , and during a very critical period , transferred more funds than it had done under other conditions previously .

To Mr Davis , I would like to say that we do not want the Palestinians , on the grounds of their expecting everything , to have to be seen as some sort of saints , but one thing that did become clear from the Mecca conference when attempts were being made to put together a government of national unity , was that the conditions on which the Middle East quartet has always insisted must be met , those being the right of Israel to exist , the renunciation of violence and also the discharge of the obligations entered into by the previous government .
Certain things are moving , but there is as yet no clarity as to whether the government is committed to those things .
There is absolutely no reason for us to put up some sort of wall ; the government of national unity could well take this step , and the conditions could be established .
We are not , after all , treating this as a marginal issue ; every time it meets , the Council considers how progress can be made .
As I have already said , the presidency is trying to arrange , in the immediate future , a meeting of the Middle East quartet , since we know just how much depends on that .
The High Representative , who is currently in Beirut , many kilometres to the north , knows that this is not just about Palestine and Israel , but also about the issue of Lebanon 's security and its right to self-determination .
I would like to urge that we should go beyond just talking and try to get some initiatives off the ground to the end not only that there may be a dialogue between Israel and the Palestinians , but also that financial aid be given and that we may - as I have just again looked up - ask Israel to facilitate freedom of movement for the Palestinians , so that they may no longer be penned in in the way that they currently are , in a situation with which nobody can be satisfied .
I crave the House 's indulgence , but I really must now leave your debate .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for staying here with us today .
Unlike many MEPs , I have been to Palestine more than once .
In line with what everyone here wished , Israel has left Gaza , and handed it over to a free , democratically elected government .
Gaza is therefore not some military outpost , it is a country devastated by the extremism , fundamentalism , terrorism , corruption and cynicism of the Palestinian warlords themselves .
Ladies and gentlemen , are we nave enough to think that throwing more hundreds of millions of euros without clear guidelines will stop Jund Al-Islam or Mohamed Dahlan from further acts of violence ?
Do we honestly believe that legalising warlords and terrorists like Khaled Mashal or Dahlan will bring peace to the region ?
Fortunately , the Council and the Commission have taken a firm , clear stance , and I wish to thank them for that .
I am grateful that on this tricky matter , they have adopted the right position .
We should reject violence and pay tribute to the victims of Gaza and the West Bank .
We must state clearly our opposition to Hamas using its power in the Palestinian Government to attack Israel to further its appallingly extremist interests .
I wish to warn against working with Hamas , including Members of the government , as this is clearly proscribed , or with new Al-Qaeda organisations such as Fatah Al-Islam and Jund Al-Islam .
We call on the Palestinian Government not only to recognise the exchange of letters between Rabin and Arafat but also to stop lying about fulfilling the key condition of recognising Israel .
We call on the Palestinian Government and on all Arab politicians , in particular the Saudis and Egyptians , to acknowledge all of their political and human responsibilities and to take part immediately in peace negotiations involving full recognition of the State of Israel within duly recognised international borders .
We call on Fatah to begin negotiations with Hamas without delay on the sharing of power within the President 's Office .
It is only by adopting the right position and having a clearly-stated standpoint that we will be able genuinely to provide humanitarian aid and , most importantly , to support the emergence of a viable , democratic Palestinian state .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , as previous speakers have mentioned , Parliament was in Palestine at the beginning of the month .
That was a very tense time , but now , two weeks on , that tension has increased and unfortunately the citizens of the region are expecting less and less of the EU .
In spite of the various sources of tension , Parliament sought to be there on the ground .
It was indeed there , and today , despite the increased tension , Mr Solana is also in the region .
We saw human tragedy , which you described , Commissioner , and which you of course acknowledge .
We also saw a wall 852 km in length , which , with a view to combating violence and to keeping Israelis safe from Arab attacks , has invaded 25 % of West Bank territory and has annexed territory that is central to any peace agreement based on the 1967 plan .
It is a wall that imprisons people in their own homes , that stops children from getting to school and that stops farmers from cultivating their land .
It is a wall that has turned Gaza into the best-known open prison in the world .
It is a prison which , according to a decision by the Israeli police at the beginning of 2006 , no one - or should that be nothing - is to enter or leave .
In this context , we all look on bemused and deny any involvement .
Today we hope that Mr Solana 's eyes and heart can convey some hope to these people on our behalf .
When we were there we passed on the message and recognised the government called for by the Quartet , and we are effectively calling today for that to continue to be the case . Let us hope that the Council and the Commission honour this commitment , that they meet their obligations and that they are ready to work with everyone .
What the EU is actually ready to do must be spelled out in the clearest terms .
Let us show the world once again that peace can only be achieved by extending our hand to those who need it and by eliminating their despair .
( FI ) Madam President , first I wish to say that , hearing this debate , I have felt that the overall picture is somewhat limited .
Any educated member of the public following it might think that very many Members of the European Parliament had very limited knowledge about the history of the Palestinian and Israeli region .
How did the state of Israel come about ?
What was the Balfour Declaration and so on ?
What was the UN resolution at the time ?
What was the basis for the partition ?
It is shameful of us parliamentarians if we do not first do our homework but instead come and speak very emotionally about things we do not necessarily know about .
That is why it is fitting to stop and consider what the issue actually is in this region , and take an overall view of it instead of just hinting at it momentarily .
We Europeans must support democracy and not terrorism .
Our values are human rights , freedom of thought and the rule of law .
We have to keep to them .
Moreover , if they are our values we cannot recognise the ' national unity government ' , which is a terrorist organisation led by Hamas .
We cannot acknowledge them : as Europeans we have to adhere to our democratic values .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following our visit to the West Bank and Gaza in early May , I can do no more than conclude that we are further away from a structural solution than ever , despite the agreement that was struck 40 years ago .
A huge number of illegal settlements are being set up on the West Bank .
We can only watch as the number of check points increases rather than decreases .
In Gaza , 87 % of the people are living below the poverty line .
There are still 41 Palestinian members of parliament behind bars and the subject of refugees returning is not being touched upon at all .
The wall is indeed growing into the world 's largest , something in which Israel can surely take pride .
Despite this , the Palestinians are also entitled to self-determination and a dignified existence , and they are prepared to bring sacrifices and compromise .
They have shown explicitly and on several occasions that they want peace and prosperity for their people .
Do the international community and the European Union still actually want this , though ?
I wonder about this sometimes , not least when I hear the Commissioner say today that , following talks with the minister , she heard the request made of the government of national unity to give its support and that Abbas has made the same request .
So why do you not recognise the government ?
What are you really waiting for ?
When will you finally give the Palestinian Authority direct support ?
I heard the presidency talk about the Quartet requirements , but we should not wait for a new Quartet meeting .
The European Union could take the lead in this .
We need to talk to the government as a whole .
Finally , Commissioner , you claim that all instruments are being used to force Israel to redirect those taxes to the Palestinians .
I cannot think what the instruments were to which you were referring and I should like to hear more about them , for I believe there is no time to lose now .
( FR ) Mr President , today we once again have to deal with the dreadful situation in the Middle East .
Since 6 May , thirty-six Palestinians , including eleven civilians , have died in Israeli raids on Gaza .
On the other side , 146 rockets have been fired at the Israeli town of Sderot , wounding six people .
The Palestinians are fighting amongst themselves .
In Lebanon , the 3 000 refugees in the Nahr Al-Bared camp are paying the price for the fighting between the Lebanese army and the extremists of Fatah-al-Islam .
In this regard , let us state clearly that there is never any justification for killing civilian populations .
More generally , we must call for a radical change to Europe 's policy on the Middle East .
It is no longer acceptable to refuse to support politically and financially , and with no exclusions , a Palestinian Government of national unity that we have advocated passionately and that , if we are to believe the Palestinian Foreign Minister , whom we received recently , firstly , respects political pluralism , secondly , does not question the existence of the Israeli State , thirdly , calls for the recognition of a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders , and fourthly , renews its commitment to the UN and Arab resolutions , particularly on the refugee issue .
Let us think clearly , the peace initiative drawn up at the Riyadh Summit has no chance of succeeding unless we Europeans work towards lifting the political and economic siege being suffered by the Palestinian Government .
Fifteen months of blockade , 70 % of the population living below the poverty line and 50 % unemployment provide an ideal breeding ground for fundamentalism and terrorism but do not provide a government with the best conditions for restoring law and order .
Since we are calling upon the Palestinian Government to fulfil its responsibilities , we must fulfil ours .
Mr President , as a child I was happy to believe that all people were equal .
Growing into a young man I was very upset to realise how wrong I was : that there were in fact two kinds of people - those whose lives matter and those whose lives do not matter .
Then , I became involved in politics and I was taught that what was really important was not what is right but what brings in votes .
Today , as an MEP , I have finally formed the opinion - simplistic and cynical as it may sound to some - that there are indeed two kinds of people : those liked by the American Government and those who are not .
Based on this view , the Palestinian people can be humiliated , starved , imprisoned without trial , tortured , executed , etc. and it does not really matter , because the Bush Administration and their obedient servants , e.g. the ' Blairinos ' of this world , consider Palestinians to be subhuman .
Therefore , why waste our time debating Palestine when we know that nothing significant will come of it ?
If we really care about the issue , then we should address our efforts towards the planet 's Grand Master , Mr Bush , and try to convince him that Palestinians are in fact human .
If we succeed , which I very much doubt , then perhaps we can contribute constructively towards solving the Palestinian problem .
( PL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all long for peace in the Middle East .
Nonetheless , the suggestion that the European Union should resume provision of its entire package of financial aid directly to the government of the Palestinian Authority is decidedly premature .
Holding democratic elections in a country is not enough to justify the award of European aid .
The European Union certainly does refuse to allow expenditure of its taxpayers ' money in a number of democratic countries .
I believe there are two fundamental reasons for disallowing expenditure .
The first is if the country concerned simply does not require our aid .
The second is if the country concerned does not recognise or does not implement fundamental principles that are crucial for the European Union .
It is this second reason that applies to Palestine .
Essentially , the disagreement over financing does not centre on Israel or Palestine ; it centres on our own principles .
The potential beneficiary is refusing to recognise the donor 's right to implement certain basic principles .
We should not be spending time debating when to use the terms terrorism or fight for freedom .
What we should instead be debating is whether it is possible to support an organisation whose programme centres on promoting the use of force against others .
Can we support those who really do not want peace ?
The answer to the question as to whether we should finance authorities that do not want peace is obvious , or so it would seem .
We should not .
The reasons why we should deny support have nothing to do with the chaos in the Palestinian Authority , or with the uncertainty about how long the national unity government is likely to be able to govern .
They have nothing to do with how long that government will be able to exercise genuine power .
They have nothing to do either with the fact that 50 Palestinians were killed last week in clashes between Hamas and Fatah , nor do they have anything to do with the fact that children 's television broadcasts by the Al-Aksa station call on Palestinian children to help destroy Israel and take part in the war .
The main reason why we should deny aid is that we must be true to our own principles , values and past .
It should be clearly stated that the choice between victory and martyrdom offered by Prime Minister Hanieh is flawed and detrimental to the national interests of the Palestinian people .
Mr President , I was mildly encouraged by what the Commissioner had to say and , frankly , thoroughly depressed by what the Council had to say .
It seems incredible that the Council fails to recognise that the creation of a government of national unity in Palestine was a major political risk both for Fatah and Hamas .
The platform of unity government is a platform of negotiations and trying to reach peace , something the Council failed to acknowledge .
I believe - and I think the majority in this House now believes - that the time has come to stop all restrictions on our dealings with the Palestinian Authority .
The Commissioner has said today that the conditions for renewing direct aid have almost been met .
Commissioner , let us not wait for protection .
I plead with you to go to the next Foreign Affairs Council meeting and ask them to recognise the Palestinian Authority 's government of national unity .
If the Palestinian Government fails to keep its promise , of course we can then end our negotiations and our involvement with them , but let us give them a chance .
Failure to cooperate with the Palestinian Government does nothing to end the cycle of violence or tackle the grave humanitarian crisis that so many of my colleagues have spoken eloquently about this afternoon .
Failure to cooperate with the Palestinian Government also does nothing to encourage Israel to end its financial and military assaults on Palestine .
Even today , the Deputy Defence Minister of Israel warned that his country could single out the leader of Hamas , the current Palestinian Prime Minister , for extrajudicial killing .
Does anyone really believe that actions such as this would help the peace process ?
Mr President , after the tragic failure of the Bush administration to push for an Israel / Palestine peace deal in the last five years , the Arab peace initiative is a rare bright spot .
The release of Corporal Shalit and Alan Johnston and the 40 Palestinian legislators would create much-needed goodwill .
The fact that the EU and the US are maintaining links with Palestinian Foreign and Finance Ministers shows that there is no boycott , no failure to engage and the hundreds of millions of euros of humanitarian aid mean our back is not turned to the peoples ' plight .
However , it is very difficult to conceive of resuming budgetary support to the PA when the unity government has not , despite some claims to the contrary , fulfilled the Quartet demands .
Even if we do not attribute to Prime Minister Haniyeh the continuing statements of Hamas spokesmen vowing to destroy Israel , we cannot ignore his invocation of God or martyrdom to rally Palestinians just last night .
Colleagues who wished to argue pragmatically that the unity government is the best deal on offer should stick to that justification for supping with them and not try to persuade us that something has happened which has not .
Mr President , our message to every Israeli , every Palestinian , every member of Hamas or Fatah must be : In the name of your god and for the sake of your children , pull back !


Today we have the Israeli spokesman threatening to kill the elected Prime Minister of Palestine ; we have the Hamas threats to seek vengeance ; we have Fatah and Hamas in and out of conflict with each other ; the killing of a Palestinian family on a Gaza beach leading to the capturing of the soldier Shalit , which led to attack and counterattack , tit for tat and on it goes .
Stop ; think ; talk .
Release soldier Shalit , release Alan Johnston and release the speaker and the 40 members of the elected Palestinian Parliament .
And to the EU I say , engage with both the Palestinian Government and with the Israeli Government .
Secondly , one says , let us find ways of ending the causes of violence , and the biggest cause is poverty .
Palestinian poverty has rocketed and poverty comes from withheld taxes , from unpaid employees , from trade and banking embargoes .
It is time for all that to end before it ends in more violence .
It is time to stop and remove illegal settlements .
It is time to stop and remove that gruesome , cruel , immoral wall , and it is time , Commissioner , to publish the document compiled by the heads of mission in Jerusalem and Ramallah , who reported on East Jerusalem and whose summary was that Israel 's activities in Jerusalem are in violation both of its roadmap obligations and of international law .
Let us have that out in the open ; let us talk , and let us then persuade everybody to think about their children 's future , stop the violence and work for peace .
( Applause )
( CS ) Violence and unrest continue in the Palestinian territories .
The world 's press agencies bring daily news of the numbers of injured and dead .
Despite repeated ceasefire declarations between Fatah and Hamas , the armed conflict between the two factions goes on .
The shelling of the town of Sderot from the Gaza Strip and retaliation from the Israeli side also continues .
Palestinian health workers and teachers have gone on strike , and Palestinian policemen and other public service workers have not been paid .
As has been said on a number of occasions , poverty is rising fast .
Over 80 % of Palestinians on the Gaza Strip live on less than USD 2 per day .
The bottom line is that Palestine and Israel need our help because they will not be able to escape the cycle of violence on their own .
I count myself among those MEPs who are calling for broader and deeper EU support .
I should therefore like to call on the Commission , once again , to do all it can to mobilise international assistance as rapidly and as effectively as possible .
I feel that if this does not happen , the probability will increase of Palestinian self-rule collapsing completely and of all-out civil war being unleashed , with incalculable consequences not only for Palestine but also for the whole of the Middle East .
The same can be said , too , of Lebanon .
Mr President , it has been a very passionate discussion and I completely understand why because , as I said before , we all feel a great frustration .
But you have to understand that , over the last 10 years , the European Union has really tried to play an important role for the peace process - not in order to enhance the conflict but in order to make peace , or help to make peace .
In the end it is always the two parties that have to be ready , but we try to push them .
We were then quite happy to be an important and influential member of the Quartet .
However , we can only be a facilitator of this peace .
That means we have to look to both sides .
We cannot just go to one side , and therefore we feel that we embraced the three Quartet principles as important basic principles .
It really is the Council , not the Commission , that can recognise the Government - there are 27 Member States .
I understand if you ask me to do so , but it is not me who can take this decision .
I know there is one instrument which you have indirectly mentioned : the cancellation or suspension of the association agreement with Israel ; but do you really think this would make a difference ?
I do not think it would .
We would no longer be a facilitator of this process , so it would be the wrong instrument at this moment .
What we have as an instrument is a continuous political dialogue where all the parties work with all the parties , but it is true that there are other members of the Quartet too , for instance the United States of America , as has been mentioned .
It is very important that we feel that there is also a push from that side too .
Over the last months , we have seen a much greater effort on the part of the USA , particularly from Condoleezza Rice .
We have all welcomed that and have tried to move forward .
The German Presidency , in particular Mrs Merkel , but also Foreign Minister Steinmeier , have really tried to move forward .
A political solution can never be brought about by violence .
Unfortunately , we now have violence again .
I can promise - and this is within the Commission 's competence - that we will further engage with the National Unity Government , as we have started to do .
But as we have said our policy is a gradual engagement and we cannot do everything .
Even Salam Fayad said to me when I first met him after the formation of the Government that I would need some time to clean up the mess in the Finance Ministry - and this is still not completely done .
Therefore , we are nearly there , the technical conditions would be ready , but you also know that the Council has to give us some political backing .
I want you to understand these things .
I think the situation is very dramatic , and I hope that the Council understands that we have to engage in order to help this National Unity Government achieve the right platform to continue with the peace process and with the talks on the political horizon .
We know that it is a complicated situation , and that is why I said that I see at least some positive hope in the fact that Foreign Minister Livni will attend the next Council meeting after the very positive meeting we had with the Arab League , but on the ground I agree that the situation is very difficult , and , besides all this , it is also those factions and those different radical groups that are outside the Government that would like to jeopardise the whole process .
It is a vicious circle and I agree that we have to try to break it up .
An honourable Member mentioned that we have extended our mission monitoring the Rafah border crossing .
We did that because we think that opening up freedom of movement of goods and people is so important .
I myself have been working on that with Prime Minister Olmert .
I remember my last visit there when I took it up in order really to go into the details .
But there are security concerns .
Unfortunately , there are suicide bombers coming over the borders , a lot of funds are being smuggled , so you always have the two sides of this conflict , but we think that it is important to have prolonged this mission at the Rafah crossing because only with the European Union is there a chance of there being an opening .
We are engaging .
We are also working with the Finance Minister , not only on the Temporary International Mechanism ( TIM ) , but also on institution building and technical assistance , helping them particularly on the question of customs , revenue collection and on auditing .
This has been asked for by Salam Fayad , so we are working with them .
I said we will also look at what we can then perhaps fund through the TIM as regards their particular desires , so not only those things that we have been funding up till now in order to help the population to survive , but to go further .
This is what I can offer you in this delicate and difficult situation .
We have to go on pushing and bringing the different parties together .
I hope that the time window is still open .
Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0018 / 2007 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : The negative consequences of the EU biofuels targets
83 % of the world 's biofuels are produced in Indonesia and Malaysia .
In part a response to the EU 's growing demand for biofuels , both Indonesia and Malaysia are deforesting large areas of land often high conservation rainforest for oil palm plantations .
Is the Commission aware that , according to a recent UN report , 98 % of these forests could be gone by 2022 ?
Is the Commission aware of the effects that deforestation has on native wildlife , for example , that many orang-utans end up in rehabilitation centres with little hope of being released back into the wild ?
According to a Dutch pressure group , as much as 50 % of space for new plantations is cleared by draining and burning peat land , releasing huge amounts of carbon dioxide .
How can the Commission reconcile the EU 's target to cut emissions by 20 % by 2020 with the possible increase of Indonesia and Malaysia 's carbon emissions ( Indonesia has been ranked the world 's third largest producer of CO2 by the same pressure group ) ?
What plans does the Commission have to introduce eco labelling of ' sustainable ' palm oils ?
Will the Commission consider a ban on the import of biofuels into the EU ?
The Commission fully shares the Honourable Member 's concern about deforestation and peat land draining in South-East Asia .
It is aware of the link with the fast-growing demand for palm oil .
Production of palm oil is growing at about 9 % per year ; more than 80 % of the production comes from Malaysia and Indonesia .
In deciding how to tackle this problem , it is essential to have a clear picture of the supply of and demand for palm oil .
About 1 % of the world 's biofuels came from Indonesian and Malaysian palm oil in 2006 .
The main use of palm oil today is in food and other non-energy sectors .
Only 1 % of palm oil production from Indonesia and Malaysia was used for biofuel production in 2006 .
However , demand for bioenergy is likely to rise in the future , and not only in the European Union , and that leads to increased production of palm oil for biofuels .
Having said that , the Commission is aware that , if nothing is done , the increasing demand for biofuel , linked to the proposed Community biofuel target for 2020 , could create additional environmental pressures , which would be contrary to the sustainable approach supported by Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Today , no mandatory certification exists that will guarantee that tropical rainforests or peat lands in South East Asia are not suffering from the production of palm oil , regardless of its use .
Within the framework of its legislative proposal , the Commission will therefore include a biofuel sustainability scheme designed to ensure that the biofuel sector plays its part in tackling this issue .
The Commission is currently working on the design of this scheme .
It aims to include measures to deter the conversion of both tropical forests and peat lands for biofuel production , as well as measures to deter the use of production methods that are inefficient in greenhouse gas terms .
These measures will apply to domestically produced biofuels as well as imported biofuels .
In view of the above , any attempt to deal comprehensively with the impact of oil palm cultivation on the environment would need to take into account oil palm production for all end users .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament have all expressed support for a balanced approach to biofuels in which domestic production and imports will both contribute to meeting the huge requirement , but production will be carried out on a sustainable basis .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that reply .
Do you accept that the objective of the biofuels policy of the European Union is to reduce global emissions , not just European Union emissions ?
My concern and the concern that lies behind this question is that if we only measure the emissions from biofuels in Europe and not the emissions involved in the production and shipping of those biofuels , we might not actually be contributing to the reduction in global emissions .
I am pleased to hear what the Commissioner said about the sustainability scheme .
Will the Commission look at how we can distinguish between good and bad biofuels from the point of view of emissions ?
I definitely agree that our global scheme is to fight global emissions of CO2 and for this reason we are certainly looking at the carbon footprint of biofuels use .
At the same time , if the biofuels produced in one region would have to be transported to another region , we cannot artificially forbid this .
For this reason , our scheme should include that the best biofuels are the more rewarded with the support and in this way it is a part of the scheme that will not encourage transporting palm oil to supply our market .
Additionally , I believe it is extremely important to understand that we need to work in parallel towards a way of protecting peat lands and rainforests .
Because , whatever we do , we perhaps will be sustainable .
There will be other regions that will just go for palm oil .
So , in the negotiations which are to start in Bali , we need to work towards a scheme for protecting the rainforests , as well as looking at how to encourage the planting of more forests on the Earth , not for palm oil for our transport , but for less CO2 emissions from transport as a whole .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to ask how an increase in the production of biofuel might affect the food market .
The American maize used to produce biofuel is significantly more expensive than grain .
In the long term , as we transit to such renewable energy sources , will we then have crises in the food production market ?
It is a justified question .
There is a lot of land in the European Union that is not being used .
Therefore much of this land could be used for producing biomass , not only for biofuels but also for producing heat , for cooling or for producing electricity .
A number of countries have a situation that is sustainable ; they produce 12 % of their electricity from biomass .
At the same time , they also produce biofuels .
So there is potential for using that land .
If I look at the second generation of biofuels , there is land that could be used for producing biofuels .
The Commission has calculated that the European Union could cover 14 % of its needs , even if we do not import biofuels from other parts of the world .
Concerning the increase in the price of food products , this is influenced by many elements .
You mentioned the example of maize .
The price of corn is decided on the global market and it has been highly affected by the severe drought in Australia and the potential growth in the United States .
There is some correlation if the farmer is given the choice of using his land for producing either biofuels or basic foodstuffs .
But I believe the market will respond appropriately and , if our sustainability scheme that will encourage the production of biofuels with fewer CO2 emissions is put in place , there will be a balance in this market .
I have never said that we will be able to replace all the oil we use with biofuels .
There is potential both in the European Union and globally , but it will never replace all the oil we use .
At this stage I would say that it is not a question of food prices or the use of biofuels , because globally biofuels are used on a very small scale and they definitely have not had any impact at this stage on the price of foodstuffs .
( DE ) Commissioner , you quite rightly said that it makes perfectly good sense to now use fallow land for the cultivation of plants from which fuel can be produced .
This currently makes for a problem as regards the production of barley for brewing purposes , since the subsidies for the production of biofuels make the cultivation of other crops a more attractive proposition for farmers , so , back home , we have had problems that affect our own economy , in cultivating the crops necessary for the brewing of beer , which is not the least important of economic sectors .
One might well ask which is the more important - food or energy ?
In the days when we still had our own supplies of crude oil and natural gas , the situation was quite different ; now we have to import everything .
Even though we know that global demand for crude oil and natural gas is on the rise , we still aspire to maintain the same standard of comfort , and consequently , some of our efforts have to be devoted to the production of energy .
As I have said , we currently have so much in the way of reserves and options , that we have to make the fullest possible use of the latter .
We must , however , also be smart enough not to do something for which we will have to pay a high price later on .
The schemes we are devising constitute a first step .
We have every chance of organising them in such a way that no great problems ensue for the food industry .
Subject : Energy agreement between EU Member States and Russia
The Commission 's publication of the energy package in January 2007 brought fresh impetus to the efforts being made by some Member States regarding the supply of energy resources from Russia through the conclusion of bilateral or trilateral agreements with that country .
Russia , Greece and Bulgaria have signed an agreement on an oil pipeline linking the Black Sea and the Aegean .
Construction work is to start at the end of 2007 , and the pipeline is to be completed in 2011 .
Hungary is to build the gas pipeline ' Blue Stream ' in cooperation with the Russian Gazprom . The pipeline is to start in Turkey and pass through Bulgaria and Romania .
This gas pipeline will follow the same course as the Nabucco pipeline planned by the EU .
A new agreement with Russia is entitled ' Agreement on the diversification of gas supply ' .
What is the Commission 's view of such a diversification of energy supply where the supplier is the same Gazprom ?
What impact might such agreements have on the implementation of the EU 's common energy policy ?
These are issues that we have discussed previously : how to supply the European Union with sufficient energy resources .
As you know today 50 % of our energy supplies are covered by imports and we know that in the future the percentage will be even higher .
It could be 65 % , with more than 80 % of gas being imported and even more oil , with over 90 % being imported .
For this reason we will continue to work with all traditional suppliers .
For gas it is Russia which today provides 27.5 % of our supplies .
Oil is supplied by Norway at 14 % and Algeria at 12.5 % .
For this reason , we are interested in strengthening ties with traditional suppliers and obtaining more supply routes .
Supply routes that deliver gas and oil are exposed to danger .
I would mention a recent explosion in the Ukrainian gas pipeline system .
That certainly had an impact on transport but , because there were other ways of delivering gas , it did not affect the EU internal market .
However , it is very clear that having more supply routes is more beneficial for consumers .
EU dependency on Russia should not be over-emphasised because it is clear that , with Russia having the biggest gas resources as well as being one of the countries with the biggest oil resources , it is natural that supplies from Russia are topping our import list .
The Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline is in my opinion a very important project because it bypasses the Turkish Straits .
In this way , it reduces first of all the possibility of an environmental disaster and secondly it is an additional supply route to channel oil that is produced north of the Caspian to European markets .
So , for this reason , this project also got support from the Commission because it is an additional supply route and it does not increase our dependence on Russia .
At the same time it is very important to diversify ; first because relying on one supplier gives the monopoly supplier a chance to dictate the price but also because it gives an opportunity to influence consumer choices .
For this reason the European Union has actively diversified its supply .
One of the areas where we have been getting supplies this year is the Caspian Sea and Shah-Deniz in Azerbaijan , where we have established very good cooperation from the countries surrounding Azerbaijan , Georgia and Turkey .
Nabucco will be the next project that will be implemented .
Nabucco is a more ambitious project .
It will take a bit more time but we are well on track to obtaining supplies from this source through the fourth potential gas supply corridor .
At the same time we are also diversifying oil supplies because a project has also been announced from Samsun to Ceyhan , an additional oil supply project that again will bring oil from the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea region towards the European Union .
We are encouraging cooperation with these countries around the world because , even if there are three big suppliers to the gas market - Russia , Iran and Qatar - there are other suppliers who could increase supplies .
Norway will increase supplies to the European Union in the next few years by close to 50 % .
The same is happening with Algeria , which will provide additional supplies and more and more LNG terminals are coming on-stream .
For this reason , I believe that we should continue to work with Russia .
We should continue to buy energy resources because , for Russia , the EU is the best possible market because it is the closest market and mutual ties have existed for some time , but for security of supply it is important to diversify .
Additionally , I would like to stress two further elements because it is never the case that you can rely only on imports .
It is important to develop energy sources inside the European Union , to be extremely energy-efficient and to build internal energy infrastructure whether it be pipelines or electricity transmission lines .
The European Union is very active in all these areas , even if we always recognise that each country decides on its own energy mix .
But , through the instruments of the internal market and through the instruments given us by European legislation , we are encouraging the use of local resources and being very energy-efficient .
( LT ) I thank our Commission colleague for the answer and the hopes expressed that we will nevertheless find other , alternative sources of energy .
As I said in my question , and in regard to the current situation , it is evident that no matter what agreements are in place , at the other end of the pipeline , be it a petroleum pipeline or a gas pipeline , there is Russia .
Russia has stopped delivering petroleum to Lithuania , and it is doing the same to Latvia .
Therefore , we cannot put much trust in this source of supply .
Nevertheless , I would ask that we all make a united effort in seeking to quickly implement projects for other , alternative sources of energy .
Well , I always advise Member States to be active .
I hope that they hear what you are saying and what I am saying because it is always important for Member States to cooperate among themselves and look for alternatives .
Theoretically , if there is a need , the Baltic States could use one additional energy terminal .
But it is the governments that should decide how to diversify and how to cooperate and how to get interconnection .
I am very glad that we have managed to interconnect the Baltic countries ' market with Finland .
Now the big task is to achieve interconnection with Poland and in the future with the other Nordic countries .
This would also eliminate the risk of a possible disruption of supply from one direction affecting the whole country .

( DE ) Commissioner , I would be interested to know how the financial support for the Trans-European Networks ( TENs ) is to be secured ; is there a planned date for when money will actually be forthcoming for these TEN pipelines - Nabucco or Bluestream , for example - and could you envisage a timetable being prepared in time for the 2008 review ?

The Commission can offer only partial support in this area , since there are fewer resources available to us for it in the Budget .
We do , of course , support those companies and enterprises that are able to invest money in it , for investment in energy transport is economically of very considerable interest .
What I can say right now is that the timetable for Nabucco has been decided on and that the date of 2012 has been set .
The Commission has already given financial support to a limited extent , but political support is important too .
Over the coming months , the coordinator of the project will be announced , and this will of course be done in collaboration with your House .
It is my belief that the adoption of the energy package will enable us to get back to this issue when the Budget perspective is debated ; I also take the view that it is necessary to set aside more funds for the trans-European energy networks in views of the directions involved that may well be strategically important , but are not as profitable for the business sector .
It is for that reason that we need more money , but we still have time to analyse all these things and prepare a proposal .

Thank you for your answers , Commissioner , they are really impressive .
I would like to ask you whether the Commission has noticed that Russia has never created difficulties as regards supplying ' old ' EU Member States with oil and gas , whereas with Lithuania , Latvia , Hungary and other new EU Member States , there have been many difficulties .
What do you think about these first- and second-class forms of treatment ?
There are two explanations for this .
First of all , sometimes new Member States ' policies have not been very clear as regards diversification ; at least some of the new Member States have not tried to encourage as much diversification as could be possible , thereby becoming more dependent on one supplier , Russia .
Secondly , I do not think that Russia does this on purpose ; it is just because those countries are the first in line whenever supplies are disrupted and , as they are more exposed than older Member States in terms of diversification of supply , they are affected more .
Member States should do much more and invest more in the diversification of the energy mix , of supply routes and of suppliers .
Furthermore , when the infrastructure is affected , those countries are the first to have a problem because the historical networks were constructed precisely to connect Russia , as a supplier , with those countries , as consumers .
That is why this perception exists , but I would repeat that diversification is the key to avoiding this state of affairs , and every country should embark on diversification in order to minimise any problem that may arise in the transport of supplies .
I believe also that the suppliers would then take more care to deliver in the best possible time and to repair the networks as soon as possible if any leaks occur .
Part Two
Subject : Hate websites
What views does the Commission have on the proliferation of so called hate websites ? Particularly those that promote and incite hatred , that is , racist , anti-Semitic and anti-Roma websites including websites which indicate names and contact details of activists that then may be targeted .
Is the Commission aware of parliamentary activity in the UK and elsewhere to tackle such websites ?
Does the Commission propose any similar action ?
Racist and xenophobic violence and hate speech are a very sad reality all around Europe .
According to the 2006 annual report of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , the majority of Member States have recorded an increase in racist violence and other racist crimes over the past few years .
The Commission has always rejected and condemned in the strongest possible terms all manifestations and expressions of racism , regardless of their source and form of manifestation .
A measure to fight racist speech is perfectly compatible with freedom of expression if - and only if - it respects Article 10 ( 2 ) of the European Convention on Human Rights .
I would be the first to admit that defining the border between safeguarding freedom of expression and defining racist speech as a penal crime is not an easy task and that it requires careful consideration .
However , I am convinced that there is no contradiction in simultaneously protecting people against racist speech and making sure that freedom of expression remains one of the key pillars upon which our societies are founded .
This is the spirit in which the Council reached a political agreement on 20 April 2007 on a framework decision aimed at ensuring that racism and xenophobia are punishable in all Member States by effective , proportionate criminal penalties .
This framework decision requires Member States to criminalise intentional conduct , such as public incitement to violence or hate towards a group of people or persons belonging to a group defined on the basis of race .
Incitement to violence or hatred will also have to be made punishable throughout the EU if committed by public dissemination or distribution of pictures .
Distribution in this context means disseminating action by any means of transmission , including through websites .
I am not aware of any parliamentary action in the UK or in other Member States to tackle those websites .
However , the framework decision is expected to lead to the adoption of new legislation , at least in certain Member States , to address racist crimes , including those committed via the internet .
Commissioner , your answer clearly reflects the efforts that you put into the framework decision on racist crimes and you are clearly saying that that this kind of cybercrime has hit websites which , if they were in the printed word , would be deeply offensive to everyone in this House .
Now that they are on the web they are equally as offensive .
Do you feel the framework decision will do the job adequately or do you feel that the cybercrime communication , which again is current , may be a way forward or do you believe it is just a question of asking Member States to implement adequate laws which will cope with an accelerating rise in the most offensive sites which excite racial hatred and violence based on difference ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view this framework decision is adequate .
We have adopted it after five years of political debate and in my view we now need to be vigilant with regard to the Member States to see that they transpose it fully and swiftly , and , above all , that these rules are successfully applied in practice .
Today the Commission has adopted a general communication on cybercrime which stresses the need for a European network linking all the police authorities to ascertain whether the Internet , that extraordinary and positive revolution , is being used by criminals , as unfortunately does happen .
We have , in fact , seen that racist crimes and incitement to violence are on the increase in Europe .
( DE ) Commissioner , another aspect of this issue - and one that I think must not be overlooked - is the plethora of websites run by fundamentalist Muslims for the purposes of anti-Western propaganda , which incite people to fight against the Western world and its ideals .
Is the Commission aware of these activities , and are measures in place to counteract them ?
This aspect will be at the heart of the discussion that will take place in two days ' time , this very week , within the G8 , where the European Union and the other partners will precisely deal with this issue of incitement to violence and terrorism on the Internet .
The approach that I am proposing to explore is to criminalise the behaviour of people who are guilty specifically of incitement to carry out criminal terrorist activities and who exploit the Internet for that purpose .
My proposal will be presented to the Council of Ministers in a few months ' time .

( DE ) Mr Vice-President of the Commission , my question has to do with the Internet and , indirectly , with terrorism , against which the directive on data retention was intended to be a measure .
Is it the case that it cannot apply to pay-as-you-go mobile phones , to webmail operators such as Hotmail , or to private servers ?
That amounts to quite a lot of cover of which terrorist networks , among others , can avail themselves in order to avoid detection .
What , then , does the directive on the retention of data actually provide by way of added value ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the added value of this directive is that it permits the recording of a telephone call : not its content , but just the fact that a telephone call was made from a certain place , at a certain time , from a certain telephone .
This , as we all know , has been useful in detecting the specific movements of certain criminals and certain terrorism suspects .
Obviously , with the use of technology we ought to succeed in detecting even those using more advanced technologies , such as private providers or SIM cards that have not been officially registered .
This , however , is a technological issue .
In today 's communication on cybercrime I am proposing a European conference with the private sector and with industry to be held in November in Brussels , at which we will see how things stand on this very point of security technology to protect the proper use of the Internet .
Subject : EU-wide hotline for victims of forced prostitution
Following pressure from the European Parliament back in June 2006 , the EU Commissioner for Justice , Freedom and Security spoke of plans to establish an EU-wide ( multilingual ) hotline for victims of forced prostitution .
The aim of the hotline would be to provide first assistance for the victims of trafficking , enabling victims to talk to an impartial listener , an important channel for encouraging victims to seek advice and support .
The difficulty in getting all telephone companies in the then 25-Member bloc to agree was cited as an obstacle in the setting-up of such a hotline .
What measures is the Commission currently taking to turn this hotline into reality and what progress , if any , has been made in bringing the telephone companies on board this plan ?
As you know the Commission and I personally are committed to fully implementing the European action plan against trafficking in human beings which I proposed here at the beginning of 2006 and which this Parliament endorsed .
This action covers the protection of victims of trafficking .
Its implementation requires close cooperation between Member States , institutions and civil society organisations .
The action plan should be regarded as a long-term programme which will guide continuous EU action in the near future and in any case far beyond summer 2007 .
I consider free telephone helplines as a valuable mechanism , offering advice to victims in need .
They are particularly useful to spread confidence .
I am committed to setting up without any delay a hotline for victims and those vulnerable to trafficking , covering all Member States in the European Union .
You may know perhaps that on 15 February 2007 we adopted , as a Commission , a decision which requires Member States to reserve a range of six-digit national telephone numbers for single freephone numbers all beginning with 116 for services with social values .
One of the many subjects to be covered could be telephone hotlines for victims of trafficking in human beings .
The above decision has already reserved the number 116000 for hotlines to report missing children .
I will discuss the latter project in more detail at a Conference on an International Day for Missing Children which will be held in Brussels on 25 May , and at the Conference on the Rights of the Child , to be held in Berlin on 4 June 2007 .
' 116 ' numbers can be compared with the emergency number 112 in that they will give access to national or local organisations providing the service in question in the Member State in which the call was placed .
We have launched a public consultation for identifying other services which would benefit from single European freephone numbers .
This consultation was open for proposals until 20 May .
This is expected to lead to other numbers being reserved for other services later in the year .
Making them operational , allowing for citizens to be able to call these numbers , will then be the task of Member States , their telecom regulatory authorities and telephone operators .
The reservation of a common number and the creation of a network of hotlines is the first practical step to support victims .
In addition to setting up a network of hotlines we seek to improve the assistance to victims of trafficking by other means too .
My firm commitment to the issue is confirmed by the fact that the 2007 budget establishing a specific programme to fight against crime foresees four projects in the field of prevention and fight against crime in specific areas , including trafficking .
We are also supporting the creation of a European anti-trafficking day , which aims to increase the visibility of the problem connected with trafficking .
The initiative will take place on 18 October this year .
We are highly committed to raising awareness and reinforcing policy means in order to provide quality services for those in need of assistance .
Thank you for that very comprehensive answer , Commissioner , but you give your opinion on whether you feel that the EU 's efforts to tackle forced prostitution during the World Cup in Germany were successful , and what lessons can be learnt from this experience for future international sporting events held in Europe , such as the 2012 Olympic Games which are to be held in London ?
I can tell you that we have carried out an assessment of the results of police cooperation during the football world cup in Germany , the conclusions of which we will publish , and there will then be a debate in which , in my view , the European Parliament should be fully involved .
We believe the experience of the world cup in Germany was a case of positive education .
We probably succeeded in preventing the transportation to European territory of thousands of young girls destined for prostitution .
There was cooperation between 12 European Union Member States .
Germany and the German police did an excellent job .
We have offered the conclusions which we are going to make public as a contribution to other future sporting events in Europe .
I can tell you that there is an interesting amount of attention from the Chinese People 's Republic in relation to the conduct of the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008 .
In other words , it is an experiment that has been judged useful as a model .
( DE ) Commissioner , I think that is an excellent initiative to take , but how are the victims to be made aware that they can use this number ?
Has the Commission made provision for the funds needed to disseminate this information ?
How do you propose to ensure that it actually works in practice ?
The victims , who may , for example , be young women from Russia , are , in the main , young women from Russia who do not speak any of the EU 's languages .
How will you ensure in practice that these hotlines actually work , for there are generally very considerable timelags , and that people do not get put into a queue and perhaps have to wait all of half an hour before their call is answered ?
We have certainly tackled and examined this operational problem : the first number , which is 116000 , will be for children .
We will advertise it everywhere : in schools , airports , stations , and through publications that will explain in very simple terms that there is a number and that the person answering the number will not speak just the language of the country where the telephone call is made .
We are gradually extending the possibility , laid down in the contract with the contractors that will provide the service , that as a minimum all the official languages of the European Union will be spoken .
Obviously we must also think about languages such as Russian .
For now , as a first stage , the contract will be awarded before the summer holidays , so that this telephone number can actually be used , and we will launch a massive publicity campaign .
We will do the same thing when the other numbers , apart from 116000 , are allocated with specified priorities , which will certainly include victims of forced prostitution .
( LT ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have truly presented a thorough crime-fighting programme , and you mentioned some special telephone hotlines .
I would like to ask whether the abundance of those lines might cause some confusion .
For example , will the victims of illegal trafficking in humans be able to dial 112 and ask for help ?

This special number , 116000 for example , will replace all the national hotlines , so there will be only one number .
In my country there is now one number and in France there is another one .
In the near future there will be only the number 116000 for missing children , and so on .
All these special European numbers will replace national numbers , of course .
Mr President , on a point of order , I have to object to the way the questions are being handled .
Members take the time to draft questions , submit them six to eight weeks in advance , and then you do not take those questions because you give the floor to other Members who wander in , look at the list and may have a fleeting interest in the question .
You have taken up time with two questioners or people who have not taken the time to question the Commissioner properly .
I object to that on the basis that I have taken the time to draft proper questions and I would like an answer from the Commissioner so that I can also follow up with the press on those issues .
In future Members will not want to table questions if this is the way you intend to conduct Question Time .
Mrs McCarthy , your question is relevant , but I am merely complying with the Rules of Procedure .
As Mr Tarabella is not present , Question No 38 lapses .
Subject : Access to communication for people with disabilities
What is the Commission now doing , and what steps will it take , to enable people with disabilities to gain access more easily to communication tools , in particular broadband Internet , cost-price text messages and video calls for the deaf , subtitling of television programmes , starting with public information and party-political / election broadcasts , and free digital signatures ?
In answer to the Honourable Member 's question , I should like to say that the European Union 's strategy in terms of people with disabilities has been laid down in the Disability Action Plan of 2003-2010 , where access to ICT is a priority .
You might also know that one of the pillars of the i2010 Action Plan is inclusion .
On that basis , the Commission adopted a communication on e-accessibility in 2005 and a communication on e-inclusion is in preparation for the end of 2007 and in this text there will be a proposal for new actions when appropriate .
We are not only working on concrete actions in that way , we are also encouraging our research efforts in the direction of developing new methodologies and new services for the disabled .
We also have the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme - the CIP - which supports our ICT policy with pilot projects and so on and so forth .
Several actions are proposed on e-accessibility and on something that will become very important in the future - ICT for the elderly .
Very often they are the people , because there are people with disabilities and very often the elderly have those disabilities too and they represent a very high future percentage of our population .
That is why ICT for the elderly for ambient living will become one of the strong elements of our future policies , not only in theory but also in research and in practical implementation .
We are also supporting standardisation on e-accessibility .
For instance , we have taken an initiative to harmonise at EU level the accessibility requirements for public procurement in the ICT domain through an EU standard , because we believe that common standards can facilitate the development of accessible ICT products by the industry , leading to more uptake which also means to lower prices .
Therefore the one is linked to the other .
There are also some vertical issues .
In June 2006 we will propose strengthening the right of disabled users to access emergency services and introducing a Community mechanism to address e-accessibility issues .
We will have an opportunity to discuss those problems with Parliament when together we will try to find a solution for the universal service .
There will be a public consultation on the scope by the end of 2007 or the beginning of 2008 - I do not know yet exactly when - but that will be the time for Parliament and our main stakeholders to come forward with proposals to see what we are going to do with the universal service .
A very concrete problem should be solved the day after tomorrow , because then the Council is going to accept the European Parliament 's amendment at its meeting concerning the Audiovisual Media Services Directive .
Parliament introduced an amendment on subtitling , improving accessibility for people with disabilities to audiovisual media services .
I hope the Council will accept this and then the new policy will go also in this direction .
The question of digital signatures will gain in importance as secure electronic communications are developing between commercial and public service providers and users .
The Commission will look at this issue in the follow-up to the European Electronic Signatures Directive and the e-government Action Plan , also bearing in mind people with disabilities .
I can just tell you in a very personal way that the various presidencies of the European Union have all held a congress or an exhibition - something official and public - to show how the results of the research have been put into practice .
I have always thought that this was a very good example to be taken up in our e-government activities , which are there to be proposed by the Commission and the European Union , but they have to be implemented by local governments most of all and by regional and national governments .
I have seen the enthusiasm with which regional and local governments in particular have taken up the results of our work to provide practical help for the disabled people living in their region .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mrs Reding for her very detailed and systematic reply regarding the policies in force .
I would particularly like to thank her for the connection she made , in the terms that I myself intended to use , regarding the close link between technologies to help disabled persons and those that can help the elderly .
In view of the European demographic trend , with a population that is , on average , growing increasingly older , the technological revolution can provide answers of huge social significance .
The last point that I wanted to make to you is that , for persons who are completely immobile and only able to speak perhaps by moving their eyes , technologies such as these are not merely a concern or an aid , but are a means of achieving a fundamental civil right , that of freedom of expression .
There are many technologies and many techniques that can be utilised in order to help in this respect .
I really believe that the ageing of the population will first need a response from us on the societal level , but this response on the societal level is also an opportunity for the European industry , because if our industry gets the societal response from the policymakers , from those who are responsible in areas , in regions , in countries and at European level , then they can start to market systems , services and items for the elderly .
I believe that this will not only help our society but also our economy .
So this is a turning point .
It is also a question of growth and jobs , because , if we get it right , we can export systems on the societal level , as well as commercial items and services , outside of Europe .
So I really believe that all those elements are working closely together for the betterment of our society and of our economy .
Subject : Separation on electronic communications markets
Speaking in Brussels , Commissioner Reding recently stressed the need for a ' European way of separation ' of infrastructures and services in the EU telecommunications sector so as to ensure genuine competition with regard to fixed infrastructures .
She recommends ' the legal separation of the network infrastructures from the service layers ' as a basic tool for use by national legislators while not excluding full functional separation regarding the electronic communications markets .
Can the Commission further specify what is meant by ' the European way ' .
Does it consider that the Greek telecommunications body fits into the category in which full separation would be possible in practice ?
The honourable Member asked me what I mean by the expression ' our European way of separation ' .
We currently have a framework for telecoms that provide regulatory tools or remedies to the NRAs in cases where markets are not competitive , and in its review of the framework the Commission will be looking at ways of strengthening the single market for telecom services .
One possible innovation is to work more closely on remedies , because remedies are sometimes either not applied or not applied swiftly , which is the same problem .
We have also analysed that one possible tool as a remedy could be functional separation , which means separating the network business of a dominant market player from the part of the business that provides a service to the end customers .
This functional separation can provide the right incentive to providers of network services not to discriminate between customers for wholesale services .
This can in turn mean that the conditions for real competition in the telecom markets are improved .
So we are not speaking here about forcing dominant players to sell off part of their businesses , as has happened in other parts of the world - for example in the United States with AT [ amp ] T. We would not like to go in that direction , and that is why I am talking about ' the European way ' .
It would then be for each national regulator to assess the condition in its own Member State before considering such a remedy .
This has already been done in Britain with Openreach , so that is one example which we have in that case .
The honourable Member also asked about Greece .
In the case of Greece it would then be the Greek regulator , on the basis of national law in line with the updated EU framework , to take account of competitive conditions and all other relevant factors in the Greek market , and then to propose - or not - such a remedy if he thought it to be necessary and in the interests of the Greek market .
( EL ) I thank the Commissioner for her reply .
However , I have a feeling that in practice , we have 27 different regulatory systems in the European Union .
As far as electronic communications are concerned , we are a long way from talking about a real internal market .
You are certainly making a huge effort in this sector .
This regulatory uncertainty or , to put it another way , the high level of fragmentation is causing uncertainty for investment , it is causing uncertainty in competition , uncertainty in innovation and , of course , it is creating few jobs .
My question is : can we talk about a European telecommunications industry without pan-European regulatory cohesion ?
The honourable Member is absolutely right .
For the time being we do not have a European market for telecoms .
I think that has to be changed , because the only way for Europe to stay strong in matters of telecommunications - and Europe is strong , we are really one of the leading forces on the world market in this - is to get rid of 27 sometimes conflicting regulatory systems and come to one system which makes sense and which will also permit cross-border services and investments to take place , and enable us to have big European players which will work across several countries .
So we are now working towards opening the market for international roaming .
Parliament is going to decide on that tomorrow , and that is always a sign to show where we want to go in the future .
I will certainly come forward with a proposal for the reform of the e-communications package in order to get this European market to function , not to get rid of the national regulators - I think that we still need them because they know their market best - but in order to get not harmonisation , but logic in the remedies which they propose and which have to be applied swiftly so that there is a level playing field between the different markets and so that the cross-border activities of the industries can take place without being blocked by a lack of market opening in other markets .
Subject : European framework for the safer use of mobile telephones by adolescents and children
The entry into force of the European Framework for the safer use of mobile telephones by adolescents and children , adopted on 6 February by leading EU undertakings in this sector , is welcomed as a first major step towards the protection of juveniles from certain dangers arising from the use of mobile telephones .
It has been suggested that this approach should be included in the Commission communication Towards an EU Strategy on Rights of the Child final ) .
What are considered to be suitable measures to ensure that the European Framework is effectively implemented at national level and can be monitored by parents , teachers and those responsible for the supervision of juveniles ?
Given that the European Framework is based on a code of self-regulation by European companies , how will the Commission help to ensure its proper implementation in the Member States and assist in the evaluation of its effectiveness ?
What will be the responsibilities of the national regulatory authorities in drafting codes of self-regulation by February 2008 at the latest and monitoring their implementation ?
Does the Commission consider the future adoption of a Community legislative measure binding on the Member States and on companies to be advisable , given that self-regulation alone cannot be sufficient ?
I think that , if I have heard correctly , this question has already been partially answered by my colleague Mr Frattini who also spoke on this subject .
The fact that he partially answered this question clearly shows that it is the Commission as a whole that is worried about the development of our society and the Commission as a whole that takes measures to move ahead in this area .
On 6 February this year , 15 leading European mobile operators and content providers united to sign a European framework for safer mobile use by younger teenagers .
That is a voluntary agreement ; it is a memorandum of understanding whereby the mobile industry , together with the GSM Association of Europe , agrees to monitor , publish and translate codes on their website , both those which already exist and those which will be adopted .
These self-regulatory codes will then , for instance , help parents or grandparents or educators to understand what the problems for children using third-generation mobile phones might be .
This agreement came out of the discussion in a high-level group that I convened , which included children 's organisations , consumer organisations and bodies for content classification , as well as regulatory bodies .
The memorandum of understanding sets out a number of principles and requires signatories to work towards implementation through self-regulation at national level .
When we signed this together and we held a press conference , I said that I had confidence in the signatories .
I will give them one year , until February or March next year , in order to implement that .
Then we will come back to the subject and we will see if they have implemented it .
If they implement it - fine - then maybe we will have discussions about possible corrections or future projects .
If our expectations are not met , the Commission will then consider the introduction of specific measures .
( EL ) I thank the Commissioner for her reply .
No one here doubts the Commission 's role on this important issue .
I should like to ask the Commissioner two questions , rather to facilitate the debate .
I think that this is a voluntary memorandum , as she herself said , and that the sector is expected to self-regulate .
I would therefore say that the Commission should in essence know what it will be evaluating after February 2008 .
In other words , will it urge the Member States to proceed with certain common codes so that they can monitor this issue ?
Will the best practices of each Member State be codified and analysed ?
Finally , what is the communications policy vis--vis parents who have no knowledge of this sector and what Community programmes can be used to inform them ?
Thanks to the preparatory work it has done , the Commission has brought the mobile operators to take this initiative because the mobile operators understood very well that the Commission would not stand still and not do anything .
We had seen in our recent surveys that there are many children who use mobile phones - in fact the majority of children over 12 years old .
Most of all , camera phones and the location services can be a problem ; for instance in the UK 10 % of respondents say they had an unpleasant image taken of them , 17 % of the kids feared that the image was posted online and forwarded to others , and 14 % had experienced cyber-bulling .
In Save the Children Finland 's survey , 30 % of 7 to 15 year olds had experienced bullying through their mobile phones .
So we know that there is a problem , but this does not mean that we have to push the parents now into saying ' no more mobile phones for our kids ' .
That would be the wrong reaction .
That is why it is so important that for instance the access for control for adult content should be available and that there be awareness-raising campaigns for parents and grandparents - who often buy mobile phones for their grandchildren - and for the children themselves .
It is important that the classification of commercial content according to national standards of decency and appropriateness is taking place , and that , as Commissioner Frattini has explained , the fight against illegal content on mobiles is really carried out .
We decided no later than today in the Commission to establish this fight against illegal content .
What we are speaking about here is not the illegal content as such , it is the dangers which can occur for children , and here the awareness-raising campaigns are the most important .
We will monitor what is happening in that field , and we will monitor what the signatories of this memorandum of understanding have agreed upon .
I have the European framework for safer mobile use by younger teenagers and children with me ; I can hand it over to the Member and then she can see if this is taking place in her country , for instance , and I would be very grateful if she would inform me about that .
Subject : Situation in Vojvodina
In the past few years there have repeatedly been brutal attacks on members of minorities in Vojvodina ; Serbian refugees have systematically been settled in villages inhabited by minorities in order to outnumber them ; and EU funds , such as for training teachers in the minority languages , have not reached those for whom they were intended .
Have these irregularities been ended , and how does the Commission assess developments in Vojvodina in general ?
The Commission has been monitoring the situation in Vojvodina very closely .
We have urged the authorities to tackle inter-ethnic incidents promptly .
We have encouraged the authorities to promote good inter-ethnic relations and to preserve Vojvodina 's multi-ethnic and multicultural model .
As noted in the November 2006 progress report on Serbia , the inter-ethnic situation in Vojvodina has improved .
There has been a decrease in the number of incidents .
No significant incident has been reported in the first few months of 2007 .
The authorities have taken a number of measures concerning the official use of minority languages and scripts as well as the representation of minorities in the judiciary and police .
Improvements have also been recorded concerning education .
The importation of Albanian- and Hungarian-language text books for use in Vojvodina has been approved .
A Hungarian-language teacher-training faculty has been set up in Subotica , which has been operational since October last year .
These measures obviously need to be further developed and complemented .
We have noted , however , that there has been no progress in the adoption of new legislation on the national councils for the minority groups , and problems persist in the area of information in minority languages .
Therefore , we have requested that the Serbian authorities take further effective action on these matters .
( DE ) There are two questions I should like to put to you , Commissioner .
The first is to ascertain how things stand as regards the systematic resettlements of Serbian refugees from Bosnia and Kosovo , which , regrettably , are altering the ethnic composition of areas such as the Hungarian community of Temerin in the vicinity of Novi Sad .
Secondly , I should like to know what is happening as regards the teacher training establishments that are supposed to be being set up , with EU funds , for the Romanians , Slovaks and Ruthenes , but which process seems to have come to a standstill .
Have they now been set up ?


As regards Mr Posselt 's supplementary question concerning EU assistance to Vojvodina and its relation to minority rights , while it is not possible to extrapolate exactly the total amount of aid given to the autonomous province of Vojvodina , the territory has received significant EU assistance , which has been directed to those needs to which Mr Posselt referred .
We have based our economic assistance on the following considerations : history , i.e. post-war reconstruction , notably as regards the Sloboda Bridge ; geography , through integrated border management ; and the economy .
Vojvodina is a relatively wealthy area compared with other areas of Serbia .
Therefore , even though it occupies 25 % of the area of the republic and has 20 % of the population , Vojvodina has absorbed 36 % of the credit line that the EU has earmarked for SMEs .
All in all , it is clear that we are using this economic assistance for the purposes to which Mr Posselt referred , and I can assure him that this money is well used for the protection of minorities and their rights .
( DE ) You rightly pointed out , Commissioner , that a great deal of EU grant money is spent on protecting minorities and on matters of special concern to the EU .
Might it not also be possible - or is it perhaps not necessary - to ensure that political pressure is also brought to bear on Serbia to get it to prevent certain abuses from being committed in accordance with its policies or to change those policies in such a way that we do not need to spend EU money on repairing the damage later on ?
I agree with the Honourable Member that we have to use political methods in parallel with economic assistance .
That is what we have been doing as regards Vojvodina .
We have raised these issues with the Serbian Government .
Now , as the country has a new democratic government which is reform- and Europe-oriented , I expect that we have an even better chance of making our voice heard and ensuring that our concerns are taken into account in Serbia as regards Vojvodina 's position .
The new Constitution of Serbia contains detailed provisions concerning human rights and the protection of minorities .
However , it contains some ambiguities in relation to the scope of territorial decentralisation .
The new Serbian Parliament will have a key role in implementing the Constitution soundly , especially in enhancing the protection of minorities , as well as establishing forms of local self-government that are in line with European standards .
In this respect it is certainly positive that , thanks to the revision of the electoral law , ethnic minority parties now have several seats in the new Serbian Parliament .
( HU ) Since I was born right next to Vojvodina , I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioner to certain aspects of the real situation .
One of these is the question whether or not it is a problem that the indigenous Hungarian minority in Vojvodina are in practice still considered war criminals .
The law of Antigone is not honoured there , that is , they are not allowed to bury their dead or even to remember them .
Or is it not a problem that there is no equity anywhere in the areas of employment , in privatisation , in state institutions , or education ?
And it would be good if he would once again respond to Mr Bernd Posselt 's question about where things stand with regard to forced settlements .
In fact , I would be pleased to offer Mr Olli Rehn a complete list of all the latest incidents which occurred only recently .
Concerning the position of the Hungarian minority in Vojvodina , we have , as I said in our progress reports , analysed its situation very carefully .
We have also discussed the issue with the Serbian authorities , who have underlined that they are committed to increasing the participation of people from national minorities in the police and judiciary , but they claim that there is often a lack of interest from qualified candidates .
In my view , it is important that we continue this political pressure or political encouragement .
At the same time , once we solve the problems that have caused internally displaced persons to migrate , then we have better chances of avoiding the kinds of problems to which you referred .
I am of course referring in particular to the issue of the Kosovo status talks .
There must be a well-managed status settlement , and I am confident that , once we have that , there will be no destabilising effects on ethnically mixed areas such as Vojvodina .
That is why we urge all those concerned to show a sense of responsibility .
The Commission 's firm view is that no parallel can be drawn between Kosovo and Vojvodina .
Subject : Implementation by Turkey of the Convention on the Law of the Sea
In its answer to Question , the Commission states that ' the Convention on the Law of the Sea is indeed part of the Community acquis , which Turkey is expected to take over and enforce at the moment of its accession to the European Union ' .
In a previous answer to a related question the Commission stated that ' the Commission expects Turkey to adopt and fully implement the acquis by the time of its accession to the European Union ' .
Why did the Commission change its position within the space of six months ?
Is Turkey required to adopt and implement the above Convention ' at the moment of its accession to the European Union ' or ' to adopt and fully implement the acquis by the time of its accession to the Europe Union ' ?
Can the Commission explain the legal basis of its position ?
The Commission has not changed its position at all as regards Turkey 's acquis communautaire obligations .
There is no contradiction between the two answers the honourable Member refers to , which , on the contrary , reflect the very same approach .
Like all other candidate countries , Turkey is expected to implement and enforce the acquis communautaire by the time of accession , that is , at the latest at the time it joins the European Union .
( EL ) Commissioner , there have been numerous unfortunate occurrences with Turkey recently .
The Turkish army openly interferes in political developments .
The Republic of Cyprus receives threats because , in application of the Convention on the Law of the Sea , it and neighbouring countries are promoting the exploitation of its exclusive economic zone . 160 Kurdish candidates , including Leila Zana , have been excluded from the forthcoming elections .
Do these actions respect the acquis communautaire ?
Perhaps the time has come for the Commission to speak a clearer and stricter language to the Turkish leadership ?
The questions raised by the Honourable Member are extremely important , but they are somewhat beyond the scope of this particular question .
Unfortunately , time will not allow me to respond in detail .
However , I would like to underline that it is important that we are both fair and firm with Turkey in order to break the negative spiral in relations between the European Union and Turkey .
By ' fair and firm ' I mean that we have to be fair by keeping our word , sticking to the commitment that , if Turkey meets all the conditions of EU accession , it can join the Union .
At the same time as being fair and credible we can be firm and rigorous , and we can expect Turkey to carry out reforms and respect citizens ' rights so that , for instance , the Kurdish question can be addressed or women 's rights , trade union rights and freedom of expression can be enhanced in Turkey thanks to the credible prospect of EU accession .
So we have to be fair and firm at the same time with Turkey .
Subject : Political crisis in Turkey and prospects of accession
In the last few days , in connection with the appointment of the President of the Republic , Turkey has fallen into a deep political crisis which gives rise to serious doubts about the functioning of its democratic institutions .
The country 's Constitutional Court has annulled the first round of the elections , a decision vigorously contested by the government .
The Prime Minister has stated that the parliamentary system has been brought to a halt and he is calling for early elections , while the General Army Staff has issued a warning that it will intervene to prevent the election of the Islamist , Abdullah Gl , to the office of President .
What are the Commission 's views on this situation in a candidate country for accession to the EU ?
The Commissioner responsible for enlargement , Mr Olli Rehn , has stated that the armed forces should respect the independent role of the democratic process , that the EU is based on the principles of freedom , democracy , the rule of law and the sovereignty of political forces vis--vis the military , stressing that any country seeking accession to the EU must respect those principles , which are the key elements of the Copenhagen criteria .
Does the Commission believe that such interventions by the military are consistent with the requirements of the Community acquis and what impact could they have on the country 's accession procedure ?
Can any further response from the Commission be expected if developments are not compatible with the democratic principles of the EU ?
The Turkish Government respected the ruling of the Constitutional Court and took the measures to implement it .
This was important for the political stability of the country , regardless of the events that led to the ruling .
To this end of political stability , the majority party submitted to the Grand National Assembly a proposal to hold early general elections .
Subsequently , the Grand National Assembly agreed by a broad majority that the early parliamentary elections would be held on 22 July 2007 .
The Commission expects that the parliamentary , and subsequent presidential , elections will be carried out democratically in an atmosphere of responsible debate and political stability .
As regards the role of the military , I have often said that I have a high regard for the Turkish armed forces in the fulfilment of their duties of defending their country and contributing to international peace , but , as I stated after the statement by the Chief of Staff at the end of April , the military must leave the remit of democratic decision-making to the democratically-elected bodies of Turkey .
It should be self-evident that if any country wants to join the European Union it should respect all democratic principles , including ensuring democratic leadership of civil military relations , and , in my view , this is fully compatible with secular democracy , or democratic secularism , which is anchored in the Turkish Constitution .
Once the new Parliament is elected and a new government takes office , it will be crucial for Turkey to revitalise and relaunch fully the legislative work and implementation of the reforms that enhance the rule of law and fundamental freedoms in the country .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
You have indeed been forced yet again to repeat what you have said to Turkey on numerous occasions , as you yourself remarked , about the stand it must maintain as a candidate member of the European Union .
I wanted to ask if this crisis has not revealed something more , if it has not revealed a weakness .
Did you not use other means to approach the political and military players ?
Because I assume that your admonitions have been directed repeatedly and publicly during your contacts .
I wanted in my question to clarify if you have intervened to a greater degree given the seriousness of the crisis and of the information that it has brought to light .
Thank you for this very important question , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou .
In fact , I talk a lot with the Turkish Government - some people in Europe think that it is too much !
But in times of the political or constitutional crises which Turkey has undergone and , to my mind , is going through during this crisis phase , it is particularly important that we maintain a channel of communication and discuss intensively with the Turkish Government and with all the relevant players in Turkish society in order to make clear what the expectations of the European Union are , if and when Turkey wants to become a member of the European Union .
Of course , democratic leadership of civil and military relations is one of these cornerstones .
As the Commission stated very clearly in early May - after my statement concerning the political intervention of the Turkish military in the tense situation - that the European Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , the rule of law and the supremacy of democratic , civilian power over the military .
If a country wants to become a member of the Union , it needs to respect these principles .
This is the core of the Copenhagen criteria for EU accession .
This has been made very clear to the Turkish Government and those involved in politics in Turkey , as well as through the Turkish media to the Turkish citizens .
I do not think that a higher volume helps .
Instead we need clarity and precision and , concerning our statement , it cannot get any clearer than our statement of 2 May .
( EL ) Commissioner , I am not one of those who want Turkey to be an uncontrolled force in the area .
On the other hand , I wonder what constitutional court in a democratic country , not just in Europe but anywhere in the world , would have ruled that a quorum of two-thirds is needed in order to elect the president of the republic .
This would allow the opposition in any country to control the election of the president of the republic .
The Commission said in its statement that it respects the rule of law and its rules and does not wish to intervene in Turkey .
But is there rule of law ?
I do not think that the Commission 's statement was balanced .

Thank you for this follow-up question , Mr Hatzidakis , and for your own question , in which you called the Commission statement ' excessively indulgent ' .
You also called for a more explicit message .
I must say that , as a Commissioner , as I said before , I do not believe in high-volume or megaphone diplomacy .
I believe in clarity , precision and consistency .
In this regard I think we do not disagree with the honourable Member , because , as I said before , we have repeatedly underlined the importance of the supremacy of democratic civilian power over the military .
At the same time it is also important that we keep the accession negotiations alive and we make practical progress with them , because what the nationalists really want in Turkey is to cut the accession negotiations .
I do not want to give this present to the nationalists of Turkey .
It is much better to strive towards the EU accession of Turkey , keep the accession process alive and move towards the shared objective , because that is the way for Turkey to become a more European , more democratic country , where the rule of law and fundamental freedoms are respected .
As regards your reference to the Constitutional Court , I understand the reasoning of your question and we have also taken note of the ruling which was issued by the Constitutional Court .
I would like to quote what was said on 2 May by the College of Commissioners when we discussed this matter and we made our position clear to the Turkish Government and Turkish public .
We said , ' regardless of the unfortunate events leading to the ruling , this legal decision by the Constitutional Court should now be respected by all parties , because the respect of state institutions is essential to ensure political stability ' .
That is rather clear language .
We also stated that , ' under these circumstances , the European Commission welcomes the announcement of holding new parliamentary elections soon in order to ensure political stability and democratic development in Turkey ' .
Again , it cannot get any clearer than that .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )
Composition of the delegation to EUROLAT : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Estonia ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statement on Estonia .
Mr President , I welcome this discussion on the recent dispute between Russia and Estonia .
Let me state right away that this is not a human rights issue .
The moving of the bronze soldier statue in Tallinn and the exhumation of the soldiers ' graves were carried out with full respect for Estonia 's international obligations , notably under the Geneva Convention with regard to war graves .
However , I am aware of the sensitivity of this matter , which touches on the interpretation of history .
While there have been concerns in Russia about this , we made it clear to Russia at the last summit that these concerns should be addressed through dialogue rather than through ' megaphone diplomacy ' .
We regret that the demonstrations that took place in Estonia turned into looting and riots .
There is the right to demonstrate , which emanates clearly from freedom of expression .
However , the fact that it led to a siege in front of the Estonian Embassy in Moscow was unacceptable .
We have made clear our views about this and a demarche was conducted in Moscow immediately to remind Russia of its obligations under the Vienna Conventions .
We are concerned about cyber-attacks against official Estonian internet sites .
These need to be properly investigated and the perpetrators must be brought to justice .
We remind Russia of our joint commitment to cooperate in fighting cybercrime both in the context of the Common Space on Freedom , Security and Justice and by acceding to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime .
Today the Commission adopted a communication on cybercrimes and we will certainly work on its implementation .
We are also following closely the situation regarding trade between Russia and Estonia .
There have been calls in Russia for trade boycotts of Estonian goods and services and restrictions on transport operations .
At one point restrictions were imposed on trucks crossing the bridge over the Narva River and oil shipments through Estonia were reduced .
Our latest information is that expert talks took place today concerning the bridge and that oil shipments through Estonia have resumed .
We shall continue to monitor the situation .
I hope that this issue has now passed its climax and that emotions will subside .
We discussed it at the EU-Russia summit in Samara and it was also raised at the press conference .
President Putin even acknowledged that there might have been some overreaction on the Russian side and he regretted that the Estonian Ambassador had to leave Moscow .
I fully support the Presidency in calling for a ' dispassionate dialogue on the matter ' , addressing the problems ' in a spirit of understanding and mutual respect ' .
The Samara summit took place at a critical time in EU-Russia relations .
The discussions were open and frank and the media reports have , of course , highlighted the areas of disagreement between us .
I think it was highly important that we had this frank discussion : we have to talk to each other because Russia is and remains a strategic partner and an important neighbour .
At the same time , we also have to talk frankly to them .
The EU side placed considerable emphasis , as Mr Barroso in particular knows , on the importance of the respect for democracy and human rights , notably in the run-up to elections .
The detention of Garry Kasparov at Moscow airport , preventing him from attending a demonstration in Samara to coincide with the summit , was particularly regrettable and was very clearly addressed .
However , let me stress that there are also a number of positive issues to note from the summit .
I would say that the picture of the summit was mixed .
First and most importantly , Russia was left in no doubt of the importance we attach to EU solidarity in our relations with Russia .
Secondly , the summit confirmed that the EU and Russia see eye-to-eye on the underlying necessity of constructing a strong EU-Russia strategic partnership in the future .
Thirdly , both the EU and Russia recognise that our economic and trading links in particular are larger and more intense than ever .
Indeed , Russia is our third trading partner and we are their number one trading partner .
We are working together for Russia 's accession to the WTO this year , which will also see the signature of the Siberian overflight agreement , most probably in November .
Fourthly , the summit also registered that , despite our difficulties , cooperation is proceeding well in many areas covered by the four common space roadmaps agreed in 2005 .
For instance the agreement on facilitation of visas and readmission will come into force on 1 June 2007 .
In the field of education , we have the European studies centre in Moscow , where there are hundreds of students who study European law .
Europe attracts great attention from the students .
There are questions such as the early alert system for energy , which Russia agreed to in principle and which we now have to work on , and finally a sort of dialogue on the investment climate and on investment in general .
Therefore , as I have said , I do not think the picture is black and white : there is a full spectrum of different colours , from warm to cold shades .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I fully agree with the Commissioner 's statement that we do not have to look at the picture in black and white , but unfortunately the black and white situation was forced on us and was forced on one Member State by its big neighbour .
However , I would like to congratulate both the Commission and the Presidency for their convincing demonstration of solidarity in Samara .
I think the clear statement by the President of the Commission to the Russian President that Estonia or Poland are considered as equally important members of the Union as Portugal or Germany should be considered a key message .
I think the most important thing in the current situation was to make our counterparts understand what solidarity means for the Union , which is based on common values .
As the motion for a resolution on Estonia states , attacks targeted at one of the smallest Member States are considered a test case for the solidarity of the EU as a whole , and all the major political groups have agreed on the text of the joint motion for a resolution on Estonia .
I think there are some issues which you need to address collectively in future .
It is inadmissible to interfere brutally in the internal affairs of any State , especially a small one .
There is a crucial difference between two former totalitarian states .
New democratic Germany made it the basic principle of its foreign policy never to threaten any of its neighbours , and this has contributed to a very significant extent to a positive change in post-war Europe .
I think we need to act together to help Russia take a similar stand regarding its past imperialist deeds and help it to come to similar conclusions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to make two preliminary observations .
I agree entirely with the Commissioner when he talks about a strategic partnership and the value of one , and states that we must continue the dialogue with Russia and must see what we can get out of it on the basis of our own principles and values .
Secondly , I am a Dutchman .
I was not born in Eastern Europe .
I grew up in freedom and have always lived in it .
I think it is extremely important for me as a representative of what we could call an ' old ' Member State to comment on what has happened to Estonia and the way in which Russia has treated it .
It is also important to note that things related to the past are always sensitive , for us as much as for others .
One has to tread carefully .
I am a historian myself , and I know how dangerous it is if too much history is injected in politics .
Although I always counsel in favour of exercising a certain level of self-restraint , my group has still expressed its solidarity with Estonia , and this must also be the basis for the European attitude in the conflict that has come about between Estonia and Russia .
The fact that this conflict affects not only Russia , but the entire European Union was hammered home by the Commission President , Mr Barroso , in Samara .
The European Union has not attempted to trivialise the conflict .
Russia 's reaction was inappropriate and unacceptable .
European governments and members of parliament have tried to interfere in the domestic affairs of an EU Member State , and this is outrageous .
Add to this the fact that the Russian authorities have done nothing to protect the functioning of the Estonian embassy in Moscow , as a result of which the conflict ended up , to all intents and purposes , being a diplomatic crisis .
As I see it - and this is also worded well in the resolution - the Russian authorities , but perhaps we too , would do well to replace the hostile rhetoric by an attempt to contribute to a dialogue , not least between the communities in the countries in question , namely Estonia and Latvia , and not to drive things to a head , because this dialogue is also needed to create relations within those countries that match European values .
I hope that the message of dialogue , the message of talking about the future , not only about the past , will also be put across in Moscow .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to touch on two topics in recent Estonian-Russian relations , firstly the cyber war and secondly the disinformation that has been engaged in by President Putin .
Firstly , even after all of the declarations of support Estonia has received , Russia has not taken any steps to end the systematic cyber attacks on Estonia 's official information and communication channels and on the web pages of the Estonian Government .
The propaganda attacks on the Internet and via mobile messages include calls to violence and armed resistance .
These messages are even distributed on television and through other media .
Estonia is particularly vulnerable to cyber attacks , since it has an e-cabinet and e-government and this year had the first e-elections .
The cyber attacks taking place in Estonia should serve as a warning to the whole of Europe .
In the 21st century this danger threatens all countries .
We must seriously consider how to protect ourselves , and we must do this together .
This is the first ' cyber war ' in history , and it is clearly aimed at hindering the functioning of a sovereign state of the European Union .
Secondly , at an official press conference in Samara , at which the press of the whole world was represented , the Russian President said the following words , and I quote : ' It was not just that demonstrators were dispersed in Tallinn .
A demonstrator was killed there .
Moreover , it is not even the fact that an accident happened that is the issue , ' Putin claimed , ' We are concerned by something else , by the fact that the person in question did not receive any help when he was injured . '
According to Putin , Ganin died in the presence of the police .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is intentional disinformation .
Indeed , 20-year-old Dmitri Ganin was fatally injured in the course of the rioting , but criminal proceedings were initiated in connection with Dmitri 's death , and these showed that his death was not connected with the police activity in keeping the peace in Tallinn .
At approximately midnight on 27 April , the police found Dmitri , who had suffered a stab wound , and called an ambulance for him at 12.26 a.m.
The ambulance set off one minute later and reached the scene at 12.32 a.m. , that is to say five minutes later .
Dmitri was hospitalised at 12.51 a.m.
He was operated on , and he died in the hospital at 2.00 a.m.
I emphasise once again : the ambulance arrived five minutes after being called by the police , and thus Dmitri did not die in the presence of the police , but instead in hospital .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the recent tensions with Russia over trade discrimination against Poland and Russia 's interference in the internal affairs of independent Estonia provided what is probably the best possible demonstration of the actual mechanisms and forces underpinning European cooperation in the area of foreign policy .
It was our moral duty to show solidarity with Estonia , but such solidarity is also in our best political interests .
Recent incidents between the Union and Russia amounted to a substantial investment in the future of the European Union , one that is far more significant than further institutional changes .
The European Union has come into its own , as a result of the far-sighted attitude adopted by the President of the Commission and the President of the Council .
I am sure I speak for many citizens of Poland and Central Europe when I say to Mr Barroso and Mrs Merkel : thank you from the bottom of our hearts !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to distinguish between the Russian-speaking people in Estonia and Russian policy .
The Russian-speaking people in Estonia have the same civil and human rights as us , but the problems and differences of opinion do not entitle Russia to interfere in Estonia 's affairs , such as demanding that the Estonian Government should resign .
No one believes that the authorities in Moscow could not have prevented the disruption and the violence against the Estonian Ambassador and the embassy staff there when , just as the Commissioner said , opposition activists were stopped from travelling to the demonstration at Samara .
The row over the statue has brought to light two different interpretations of history .
It is true that the Red Army had a major role in liberating Europe from Nazism , but it is also true that the same army after the war became an army of occupation in Estonia and in many other countries .
The events have shown clearly how poorly the Russian-speaking population has integrated into Estonian society .
It is the Estonian Government 's and society 's job , and I know that it is not always an easy one , to find a constructive way to resolve these problems .
The police have an obligation to keep order , but accusations that the police have acted disproportionately harshly need to be investigated impartially and openly .
Russia seems to find it hard to understand that Estonia and the other Baltic countries are actually sovereign states .
We have to show Estonia solidarity .
The Member States of the European Union must help Estonia to find out who or what started the attacks on Estonian authority websites .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left naturally regrets the disproportionate reactions in Russia , and we naturally demand that Russia fulfil its international commitments under the Vienna Convention .
That being said , the following must also be stated : no party is served by an escalation of the conflict , as may result from certain actions or simplistic resolutions and statements .
Bridge-building and dialogue between parties is better than the setting up of walls and barriers .
It is also indisputable that the discrimination and restriction of civil rights to which the Russian-speaking population of Estonia is exposed constitute the biggest breeding ground for conflicts .
Responsibility for the conflict we are now discussing also resides with the Estonian Government , which does not respect the Russian-speaking population 's civil rights .
It is responsible for the fact that , before the monument was moved , no dialogue was conducted with the residents of Tallinn and for the fact that no account was taken of the monument 's significance for a huge number of people as an important memorial to all those who lost their lives in the fight against Nazism and Fascism .
Other regrettable factors are the escalation of the conflict , which was a reaction to the Estonian authorities not allowing peaceful demonstrations , and the further escalation , which was a consequence of the action taken by the Estonian police against the demonstrators .
The Estonian action of removing an anti-Nazi memorial and the remains of soldiers who died in the war against Hitler 's troops is seen as a provocation against all those who think that the fight against Nazism should be remembered in the future .
No one is entitled to re-write history , and political views should not prevent serious analysis , and understanding , of how conflicts arise .
It is only through such analysis and understanding that we shall be able to resolve conflicts in the future .
Mr President , I cannot agree with the last speaker in her interpretation of moving a war memorial to a military cemetery .
It seems to me that this is entirely the correct procedure .
It is the right of the Estonian Government to make that decision , and this was used as a pretext , not , Commissioner , as you said , for a dispute between Russia and Estonia , but for a dispute between Russia and the EU .
Commission President Barroso made the point extremely eloquently at Samara that we express our total solidarity with Estonia - as well as with Poland , with the Czech Republic and , indeed , with my own country , whose Ambassador has also been harassed by Nashi , an organisation from which President Putin does very little to dissociate himself .
We are told constantly that we have to de-escalate the situation , which we did not create .
In your reply , Commissioner , I wonder whether you can dwell on the WTO negotiations to which you referred .
Is it possible that we can continue to negotiate entry with a country which apparently appears to be implicated in the disruption of electronic communications - as Mr Savi has just explained - with the banking system , with our own security ?
Surely a very clear message has to be sent to President Putin that of course we want to continue these negotiations , but we cannot do so until the cyber-attacks cease .
( ET ) Permit me to express my warm and heartfelt thanks to the representatives of the Commission and of all of the Member States in this House for expressing their countries ' solidarity with , and support for , Estonia .
I will not dwell on the events that took place in Tallinn , which are spelled out in detail in the resolution , but I would like to emphasise the manner in which Russia has misrepresented the entire course of events for propaganda purposes .
As my fellow Member , Mr Savi , has already noted regarding the death of the only young man to lose his life , would-be eyewitnesses spread in Tallinn the very next morning a version of the story according to which he had died in front of the Drama Theatre from blows inflicted by police truncheons .
Since the location was identified incorrectly and the death was in fact caused by a stab wound , the Moscow version gradually dropped the reference to police blame , and President Putin claimed to the leaders of the European Union gathered in Samara that an ambulance had deliberately not come to assist the victim .
I directly checked the facts on Sunday evening , when I spoke to the Minister of the Interior , who said that the ambulance had arrived at the scene within five minutes .
Thus , this lie has twice been refuted in this House , yet I have once again had to emphasise the facts , because tomorrow spurious films are likely be in circulation here in this building .
A completely new issue , however , is the cyber war , which has received considerable coverage in the global media . ( the speech was interrupted )
Mr President , I would like to bring to your attention the historical background of the recent riots and violent demonstrations in Estonia .
The European Union should understand that during the 50 years of Soviet occupation the Communist regime committed multiple crimes against the populations of the Baltic States .
It moved hundreds of thousands of working migrants to the territories of these occupied , former sovereign states , which were members of the League of Nations , and created a real threat that Estonians and Latvians might become minorities in their own countries .
Following immense pressure from the international community , including the European institutions , Estonia and Latvia agreed to integrate those hundreds of thousands of non-citizens into their societies .
However , integration is a two-way process , and the recent developments in Estonia show that there are reverse tendencies .
The sentiments of Soviet times have been replaced by Russia 's new imperialistic approach .
Especially alarming is the fact that the younger generation , on which the most hopes for integration and loyalty have been placed , was at the centre of the recent violent events in Estonia , and this must give us some food for thought .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , events in Estonia have starkly illuminated various issues that are important for Europe :
1 ) Russia has not given up its designs on the Baltic States , but is attempting to use the ' divide and rule ' principle .
2 ) We must remind Russia of the need to acknowledge the fact of the occupation of the Baltic States , since a different interpretation of history will lead inevitably to similar conflicts in the future .
3 ) Like Finland in 1939 , the little country of Estonia did not quail in the face of attacks from the ' bear next door ' , retained its dignity , succeeded and gained the support of the countries of Europe .
4 ) Russia only understands a strong and determined stance .
Making concessions is seen as a sign of weakness , and so I would like to thank the Commission and Chancellor Merkel of Germany , the state with the Presidency , for their understanding of events and their solidarity in speaking to Russia with one European voice , and I would also like to express my conviction that this tactic will bring us all success in the future .
Mr President , I have listened with great attention to the Commissioner 's contribution , but I do not agree that the issue is just a dispute between Russia and Estonia .
Moreover , I wonder how the inter-ethnic conflict , the relations between minorities and majorities , one of the crucial points of which is a different approach to history , now becomes a matter of relations between the European Union and Russia .
I represent the Russian-speaking minority in Latvia and I have said on many occasions that we do not want to be hostages to geo-political games .
Unfortunately , Russian speakers in Estonia as well as in Latvia were so-called prisoners of the first Cold War by being denied their citizens ' rights - by being denied their language as an official language in the countries where they were a substantial minority .
Now , unfortunately , we might be the hostages of the new Cold War and we see appeals in this House to the behaviour which is very like the Cold War .
There cannot be solidarity when there is violation of human rights .
A number of international organisations just report on violations of human rights during the recent events in Estonia .
( EL ) The conflict between Estonia and Russia is not a bronze statue ; it has to do with the insulting rewriting of history .
It is an insult to the memory of the million of unknown soldiers who gave their lives in order to crush fascism .
The debate in the European Parliament during the last part-session in Brussels and the approval of the resolution expressing solidarity with the Estonian Government is a conscious policy to support the rewriting of history and the revival of fascism in the Baltic and other states .
We have repeatedly condemned with facts known to everyone that a methodical effort was made in Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania after 1991 to restore the collaborators of the SS and German fascism .
At the same time , they started demolishing monuments to the Red Army .
In July 2004 , the monument to the Estonian anti-fascist Lembit Prn was demolished and a monument was erected to the Waffen-SS commander Alfons Rebane .
In Latvia , the Salaspils concentration camp , where 100 000 adults and 4 000 children were murdered , was named a ' reformatory and labour camp ' by the government .
In Romania , the collaborator with Nazi Germany , Prime Minister Ion Antonescu , was acquitted on charges of war crimes .
Waffen-SS murderers and torturers are given pensions and looked on as freedom fighters in the Baltic States .
The Council is silent in the face of all these accusations and questions by the members of the Greek Communist Party in the European Parliament .
It does not surprise us .
Fascism is the pure child of capitalism .
We do not agree with Putin .
However , we do wonder , when you wipe out over 20 million dead , why you are so insulting and call for respect for international conventions .
You are rewriting history , but the facts do not change .
It is an historic truth that it was the Red Army , with the communists , the Soviet Union , at the vanguard that crushed fascism in eastern and central Europe and raised the red flag with the hammer and sickle on the Reichstag .
It was and still is the permanent nightmare that will always mark the defeat for those who dreamed of global sovereignty ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Russia regrettably will not wake up to the new geopolitical reality that the so-called ' near-abroad ' , where it exercised total power for most of the last century , from the Caucuses to Ukraine , is no longer a reality .
The Baltic States are now also proud , independent EU Member States and it is right and proper that the EU and NATO , which they have joined , should show total solidarity when Russia attempts to bully the smallest of them - Estonia - over what is entirely a sovereign internal matter of that newly independent republic .
Many might question the political wisdom of moving the statue of a so-called Soviet liberator .
However , I , fortunately , come from a country that has never experienced the brutal Stalinist invasion and annexation that these countries have .
One must appreciate that most Estonians do not see the Soviets as liberators but as tyrants , who extinguished the independence and freedom they enjoyed in the inter-war period .
The relocation of the statue and fallen Russian soldiers was conducted according to international law and it in no way justified the Duma resolutions calling for the resignation of the Estonian Government ; the subsequent violent demonstrations ; the cyber-attacks on Estonia 's sophisticated system of e-government ; the outrageous use of Nashi , an extreme nationalist organisation , to harass the Estonian Embassy - in violation of the Vienna Conventions , and on the back of a similar strategy adopted against the British Ambassador , Anthony Brenton , who attended the Kasparov rally last year .
If it wants good relations after the summit with the EU as a whole and if it wants to negotiate a new PCA , Russia must appreciate that it has to respect all the EU Member States equally .
The cosy bilateral days of former Chancellor Schrder , now richly rewarded by President Putin with a cushy job after his retirement , are well and truly over .
The new EU leaders , such as Sarkozy and Merkel , are going to get much tougher with Russia in future .
( Applause )
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your clear message that Russia must not treat Estonia as its province or constituent republic .
The Bronze Soldier was just a pretext .
If there had not been that , something else would have been found , possibly elsewhere .
This was an attempt to create a rift not only within Estonia , but also within the European Union ; an attempt by Russia to create instability that would justify greater interference and help direct attention away from its own removed monuments .
As former Minister of Population and Ethnic Affairs , I confirm that this was not an ethnic conflict , that is to say one between Estonians and Russians .
Although in many respects we have different views of history and its symbols , I confirm to you that those few thousand youths who rioted do not represent the Russian minority in Estonia .
Those who came onto the streets shouted ' Rossiya , Rossiya ' .
We are proud of our Russians who see Estonia as their home , and we will try to do everything we can to restore peace .
We cannot change the past , and it is unlikely that we could change the attitude towards it , but we can shape a common vision of the future .
A large part of the population has today adopted the position ' different past , common future ' .
( SV ) The riots following the removal of the bronze soldier in Tallinn were a shock for all those who have made efforts to integrate the Russian-speaking population into Estonian society and to strengthen the bonds between the population groups in Estonia .
Estonia now needs the maximum amount of support and solidarity from the EU and its Member States in order to move on from this setback , harmonise the relationship between the country 's language groups and stabilise the whole society .
Estonia must not be exposed to undue pressure and interference from Russia .
That is important for the whole of the European Union .
Estonia has proud traditions and all the prerequisites of success .
As long ago as 1920 , the Russian-speaking minority was given a strong position by Estonia 's first constitution .
An important step now would be to set up an Estonian TV channel broadcasting in Russian .
At present , too many Russian-speaking Estonians are exposed to one-sided information from Russia .
( PL ) Mr President , let us take a broader view of this issue .
The recent EU-Russia summit in Samara resulted in a change in our mutual relationship , as the existence of solidarity within the Union became apparent to the new Member States . Thanks are due to the President of the Council and the President of the Commission for this .
It may be deemed disappointing that no progress was achieved in the talks .
Nonetheless , the Samara summit should be regarded in a positive light . This is because the development of relations between the Union and Russia is conditional on Russia 's respect for the sovereignty of individual Member States of the Union and on Russia abandoning tactics that involve exerting political pressure through economic instruments or the use of information technology .
Unfortunately , the Russian authorities have failed to take this on board .
The cyber-attacks on Estonia have not ceased , and the embargo on Polish meat is still in place .
The trail left by Alexander Litvinienko 's murderers leads to Moscow .
All the Union can do is to maintain pressure .
We cannot attempt to understand contemporary Russia without considering its attitude to the past .
As a prerequisite for long-lasting and constructive relationship with Russia , the Union needs to develop a common vision of that past .
With that in mind , it would be helpful to create some kind of ' Truth and Reconciliation Charter ' .
( SV ) I think that what has happened in Tallinn since April of this year is eminently clear to everyone .
I am uncertain , however , as to whether everyone understands its significance .
The previous debates in Parliament on this subject indicate that not everyone understands why certain people have reacted so violently .
Allow me , therefore , to explain .
As early as at the time of his appointment as President , Mr Putin indicated that he would do everything he could to restore to Russia its former military strength and the power that he believes is Russia 's due .
If I remember correctly , only one newspaper - a French one - directly picked up on the signals from Russia .
Other media remained unaware of them .
Those of us who speak Russian and who have experience of living close to , or under the thumb of , Russia did , however , understand .
Over the years , it has , however , become ever clearer that Russia is developing in the wrong direction when it comes to human rights , media independence and political freedom .
Otto von Habsburg , one of Europe 's most respected political figures , described it as the route back to the time of Stalin .
He is now 95 years old . He has a perspective on things , and he remembers .
Others appear to have forgotten , however .
In the European Parliament , too , there are Members who appear to have forgotten the trials that had to be endured by the Eastern European countries on their way to freedom , independence and autonomy .
All the threats and boycotts , the interference in other countries ' internal affairs and the blackmail involving withheld energy supplies appear to have been forgotten .
A number of these events took place quite recently and are happening right now in some of the countries I would designate as the new Europe .
Some people from the old Europe appear , however , to have forgotten their historic lesson : that it is only through conducting a common foreign policy , showing solidarity and speaking with one voice that we can preserve peace .
This is not about the monument in Tallinn .
The debate is not about Estonia .
It is about Europe and about Europe 's sovereignty and independence .

( LV ) Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , first of all I would like to thank Mr Barroso for saying in Samara that a problem that any Member State has with Russia , even the very smallest state , is also a problem that the European Union has with Russia .
That was fine support for the Member States , the new Member States , and especially Estonia , but even for those politicians who have now lost their rose-coloured spectacles regarding relations with Russia it is vital to understand that attempts will continue to take place to demonstrate that for Russia there still exists the real old Europe and the territories close to its borderland , which , in Russia 's view , have temporarily , under the influence of various events , accidentally become part of the European Union .
At the same time there will be new tests of the strength of the European Union 's unity , and tests of new virtual weapons , which in modern society can do enormous harm .
So the question is whether the European Union will wait until it runs into more problems with one of the European Union 's ex-Soviet bloc Member States , or whether it will be able to urge upon Russia the requirements that any state must fulfil if it wants to become a democratic and prospective member of a partnership .
Thank you .
. - ( LV ) Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , it is particularly important for Europe not only to display solidarity but also to acknowledge the true reasons for the conflicts that occurred in Estonia .
Europe absolutely must understand that in Estonia there was a clash between Western democracy and the old Soviet totalitarian ideologies .
In recognising this , Europe must unfalteringly reject the historical interpretations of the totalitarian USSR era .
Europe must promote the removal of USSR symbols that offend the inhabitants of nations that were enslaved by the USSR .
Europe must participate in the renewal of historical truth in the occupied Baltic States and elsewhere in eastern Europe .
This might be a precondition for the reconciliation of representatives of differing ideologies and for future integration in the former Soviet-occupied territories .
This is also a joint problem for the whole of Europe .
I would like in particular to stress that the European Parliament ought from now on to be an active participant in achieving these goals of truth and the rule of law .
Thank you .
Mr President , this discussion has clearly shown that the key word is ' solidarity ' .
I should like to thank a number of Members for their words of thanks .
Mr Barroso in particular could not have been clearer on this issue .
Many of you know what he said .
His meaning was that aggression against one Member State - in this case Estonia - represents aggression against the whole European Union .
This was a very strong statement and it also showed that divide et impera politics cannot work if Europe speaks with one voice .
These were the main issues and main lessons of these proceedings .
These questions took some considerable time in the discussions in our meeting .
We emphasised again and again that we are working as an EU of 27 Member States and that solidarity will be maintained .
On WTO accession , both sides at Samara recognised that our economic and trading links are larger and more intensive than ever and it was encouraging to hear from the Russian side that they intend to accelerate the process of their accession to the WTO .
It is encouraging because it is in our interests to bind Russia into a rules-based system where it can then be held to account .
This is very important .
On cyber-attacks , it is now up to the Council to work on the Commission communication where we have added a specific paragraph on cyber-terrorism .
I can see there is generally much agreement in this House on how important it is to work on this question of solidarity .
( Applause )
Pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received seven motions for resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 24 May .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
1 .
Community financial aid in the field of the trans-European transport and energy networks ( vote )
- Report : Mauro
2 .
Roaming on public mobile networks ( vote )
- Report : Rbig
- Before the vote :

Mr President , on a point of order , in line with the Rules of Procedure , I would like to declare a pecuniary interest in the Rbig report .
I will not be taking part in the voting on the items in question .
That is very proper .
Most of us have mobile phones !
Mr President , I also rise under Rule 166 to declare a pecuniary interest .
As a Member of the European Parliament and a frequent user of mobile phones , I stand to gain a great deal from this legislation .
Therefore I disqualify myself from voting .
I trust many of my colleagues will join me !
( Laughter )
Well that is noted !
Mr President , following the logic of the last two speakers , will you enquire whether there may perhaps be a solitary Member of the European Parliament who does not possess a mobile phone ?
Then that Member can determine whether or not we adopt this legislation !
( Laughter and applause )
I think we can move on now .
- After the adoption of the legislative resolution :
President .
Congratulations to Mr Rbig and to the mobile phone users of Europe !
( Applause )

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , my thanks go to the House for its assent and in particular to the Council for having agreed that the Regulation will be put into effect on 27 June at the latest , while what I have to say to those Members who abstained is that we are reducing the cost to the taxpayer .
3 .
EC-Mexico : Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement ( vote )
- Report : Markov
4 .
Excise duty on alcohol ( vote )
- Report : Lulling
- After the rejection of the Commission proposal :
I should like to request that the document be referred back to committee , because now we have contradictory voting outcomes .
Because the Commission has not made any proposals , it will automatically be referred back to committee .
That will happen anyway .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I proposed to my group and to many of my fellow Members who supported me that they reject the report , because the line that I had proposed has not been followed and because I have the impression that , in view of the close outcome of the vote , certain Members of this House did not know what they were voting for .
( Protests )
Sorry , were unaware of the significance of their votes .
Furthermore , Mr President , given that the Commission is keeping quiet - even though Commissioner Kovcs spoke twice last night while I , the rapporteur , was not allowed to respond to him - I really must highlight its powerlessness .
We made a proposal in order to break the deadlock .
Unfortunately , we have not been supported , Mr President .
Therefore , there is no report by Parliament on this proposal , and the Commission and the Council can persist in maintaining the status quo and persevere in their state of deadlock .
( Applause )
There will of course be a debate when the matter comes back before the House .
5 .
Composition of the delegation to EUROLAT ( vote )
6 .
The exclusion of health services from the Services Directive ( vote )
- Report : Vergnaud
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am taking the floor simply to point out to the House that there has been an error .
Indeed , as the same sentence appears in three different paragraphs , Parliament 's services have rightly deleted paragraphs 47 and 53 from the report , since this sentence appears in its entirety in paragraph 51 .
I simply wished to inform my fellow Members of this matter .
7 .
Structural policies and EU cohesion ( vote )
- Report : Pleguezuelos Aguilar
8 .
The EU 's Aid for trade ( vote )
- Report : David Martin
9 .
The economic partnership agreements ( vote )
- Report : Sturdy
- Before the vote on Amendment 23 :
( NL ) Mr President , the last sentence of Amendment 23 now reads ' calls on the EU to set up the compensation mechanisms required to avert consequences of this sort ' .
This has met with opposition , for it seems to imply that we , the EU , should carry all financial consequences .
In order to avoid this misinterpretation , I would suggest an oral amendment according to which it would read ' calls on the EU to help to set up the compensation mechanisms required to avert consequences of this sort ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
10 .
Common Foreign and Security Policy 2005 ( vote )
- Report : Brok
- After the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when paragraph 10 was voted on , the Italian translation stated paragraph 11 , meaning that I voted differently than I would otherwise have done .
11 .
Decent work ( vote )
- Report : Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote


( DE ) Mr President , while I do endorse Mr Mauro 's report , I do regret the absence from it , as also from the Commission draft , of any reference to Community grants being tied to measures for protection against noise from rail and road traffic .
However much development work might need to be done , the people living nearby also need to be considered , and not only their health but also their acceptance of the work .
I therefore urge that the rules on protection against noise for rail vehicles be amended as soon as possible to make reference to lower maximum levels and to promote noise abatement measures in exactly the same way as they promote the extension of trans-European networks .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted against the Mauro report on the grounds that the amount of traffic in Europe is increasing enormously and that overcrowded roads and permanent traffic jams presage the collapse of the transport system .
Although it was many years ago that we decided what projects would form the Trans-European Transport networks , we are lagging far behind when it comes to putting them in place , so that what should be Europe 's masterpiece is still more like a piece of patchwork .
We must also do something about making rail travel more appealing , and I believe that should be done not only for transnational traffic , but also , and to an increasing extent , for local travel .
Although the proposal for a regulation on the granting of Community financial aid in the field of the trans-European transport and energy networks provides for an increase in the current level of Community cofinancing , it falls short of what the original proposal as regards both the transport and energy networks , due to the detrimental agreement on the financial perspective for 2007-2013 .
There is a further fundamental issue at stake here .
The ' trans-European networks ' are implemented with Community and Member State funding - in other words , clearly public funding - with the aim of completing the internal market , as explained in point 1 of the Council common position : ' strong and integrated energy and transport networks are the cornerstone of the European internal market and that better use of the existing networks and the completion of missing links will make it possible to increase effectiveness and competitiveness . '
In other words , the completion of the internal market lies at the heart of these projects , with the opening up of the markets and with key sectors in the economy of a country being handed over to private interests , once , of course , public investment has been made .
Given the importance of these sectors to the development of any country , we argue that they should be kept in the public sector and are thus opposed to its privatisation .
in writing .
Mr President , my group wanted to see our amendments incorporated to this report which would have increased the powers of Parliament over future budgets on trans-European Energy and Transport networks , though they were unsuccessful .
However , it remains important that this area of investment remain under close parliamentary scrutiny as it represents such a clear instance of ' EU added value ' .
The EU has broken down barriers across Europe for many years , yet so many infrastructural barriers remain in energy and must be addressed .
Scotland in particular has much to contribute to Europe 's energy needs but we need the necessary connections to do so , and I will be exploring all ways to lever EU funding into connections to maximise Scotland 's green energy potential .
( HU ) I believe this has been one of the most important votes , at least from our citizens ' point of view .
Ordinary citizens know little about EU legalities .
They are more interested in finding out what EU membership means in their daily life .
When borders crumble , when one can cross from one country to another without a passport , the question arises : why must we pay extra punitive charges for getting in touch by telephone across borders ?
I think the best thing would have been for Parliament to decide to abolish completely all roaming charges and declare that all mobile rates within the European Union shall be identical .
However , I admit this would have been difficult to implement as a first step , and therefore welcome the fact that at least we have come to the gradual reduction of roaming fees .
10 million people live in Hungary and 9.5 million of them use mobile telephones .
In my opinion , it was extremely important to vote for this .
( CS ) I voted against the proposals on roaming calls , for the following reasons .
Firstly , these measures are not economic but rather political in nature .
They are an expression of protectionism and the new form of European commercialism .
Secondly , they go against the principle of supply and demand .
Thirdly , although I do not expect the mobile operators to make up for the shortfall by raising prices on the domestic market , they will presumably cut investment in development and almost certainly break the cycle of falling domestic prices .
The most worrying aspect for the EU is that investors will lose confidence , as they will see that the regulatory body is moving the goalposts in the middle of the game .
in writing . It makes a pleasant change to welcome a piece of EU legislation .
The enforced reduction in mobile roaming charges is good for consumers across Europe .
Though still high at 35p per minute to make a call and 17p per minute to receive a call , they are set to fall further over the next three years .
Now reductions must be obtained on texting and email connections .
in writing . UKIP MEPs , like all MEPs in Parliament , have a vested interest in reduced mobile roaming charges .
Therefore , UKIP MEPs will not vote on the Rbig report .
UKIP believes it is morally wrong for MEPs to vote on an issue which could lead to personal enrichment .
Moreover , we never approve of EU regulation .
in writing . I warmly welcome the new deal on mobile roaming charges .
Labour MEPs have been campaigning for two years to introduce these measures which represent a genuine triumph for European consumers and could not have been achieved without the EU .
For too long mobile phone companies have been charging outrageous sums to people using their phones elsewhere in the EU .
It is a shame that Conservative MEPs sided with the mobile phone industry to oppose consumer protection , making the case for higher charges to be levied .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Rbig report on roaming on public mobile networks within the Community because the positions upheld in this report are going to make it possible significantly to improve the situation of European consumers .
Many European citizens , including the inhabitants of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais border area , frequently travel abroad , for professional and personal reasons , and the tariffs currently in force when they make or receive calls on their mobiles are excessive and unjustifiable .
The Rbig report remedies a situation that penalises mobility .
I am therefore in favour of the fixed tariffs in this report : the costs per minute that have been adopted are totally satisfactory and much lower than those currently applied .
We would , however , have preferred even lower tariffs , which could have provided a better incentive for people to move about Europe .
In addition to significantly reduced tariffs , the requirement for transparency that has been requested is an important principle .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament also sought greater transparency concerning the cost of calls and secured a result whereby , from now on , European citizens will be able to know how much a call received or sent from abroad will cost them .
I voted in favour of the Rbig report on roaming on public mobile networks in the Community . I feel that the preliminary agreement between Parliament and the Presidency of the Council on the text of the regulation , which MEPs from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament played a key role in formulating , represents a significant victory for the consumer .
I feel that these measures will prove vital for the future of the information society . They will enable us to save billions of euros and better to serve the consumers ' interests .
The reduction in roaming rates will make it possible to break down the remaining barriers in the internal market , thereby strengthening European competitiveness .
This regulation states that its ultimate aim is to ' create a smooth-running European internal market in telecommunications . ' This , as the report says , is because ' self-regulation does not work ' .
It is interesting to note , in this case , the acknowledgement that the market does not work . Hence the need to regulate prices .
They therefore propose both wholesale and retail price regulation , including the creation of a regulated retail price - Eurotariff - which all operators will be obliged to offer , in order to achieve a significant reduction in the price of roaming .
Even so , the possibility remains of huge profit margins for the large operators in the sector .
That being said , there are advantages for consumers : cheaper international calls , without this cost being transferred to national markets , and the freedom to choose the most favourable operator and tariff .
This is another example of the ' market ' clearly not protecting users and consumers , and this is why regulation is needed .
It is high time the Commission and the Member States acknowledged this in other areas and brought benefit to consumers .
There are times - extremely rare times in this House - when the Members are asked to vote on a text that is genuinely useful for Europeans and when , for once , Europe provides real added value .
Such was the case a few years ago for cross-border credit transfers in the euro zone : European legislation stipulated that the cost of cross-border transfers be the same as that of national transfers .
This was merely very logical and very normal , since the single currency had just been brought in .
It is the case today for the regulation on mobile telephone roaming charges .
Though imperfect , like all compromises , this text will nevertheless make it possible to monitor more effectively the prohibitive tariffs set by operators on Community international communications .
Furthermore , the revision clause , which will be laid down in 18 months ' time , will , we hope , be an opportunity to go further in terms of protecting consumers .
in writing . ( SV ) The report contains many practical proposals with a view to improving the situation for consumers .
The June List welcomes these proposals which , when it comes to consumer information and easily accessible price information , are to people 's advantage .
Roaming fees certainly seem absurdly high at present .
Before a decision is made on political measures , however , it must be made clear what market failure is behind this unsatisfactory state of affairs .
Is it a question of insufficient competition through what is known as implicit collusion ?
In that case , it would be quite wrong to introduce price regulation , as this would do nothing at all to solve the problem .
To propose treatment without a prior diagnosis would be absurd .
Researchers in this area should investigate what market failure we are facing before populist measures are taken .
In the long run it is free competition rather than price regulation that will most benefit consumers .
To allow politicians to set prices instead of the market is almost never a constructive long-term solution .
In my opinion , the proposal will also hit that part of the population that , for economic or other reasons , seldom travels abroad .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on the proposal relating to the Regulation of the European Parliament and Council concerning roaming on public mobile telephone networks within the Community and amending Directive 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications - C6-02442006 -
Mr Rbig correctly pointed out the need to find solutions that would allow EU citizens to use mobile phones to contact home while abroad .
There is no single market for mobile telephony at the moment , and this is a barrier to the daily use of telephones abroad .
I agree with the formula which sets maximum wholesale and retail rates .
It is very important to reduce the unreasonably high levels of roaming tariffs , to explain to users how to activate new tariffs and to inform them of the date the above legislation takes effect .
Another positive initiative is that any customer who does not choose any particular tariff within three months of the Regulation becoming effective will automatically enjoy the regulated EU tariff , and the fact that mobile phone operators will have to inform their customers of the roaming charges for outgoing and incoming calls for their particular tariffs .
in writing . - ( FR ) It was with a heavy heart that I voted in favour of the report on roaming on public mobile networks because it goes against my most important political convictions .
Indeed , I regard any tariff-fixing by the legislator as undue intervention in the market economy and as a vestige of another era that ought not to be revived .
The application of the Eurotariff thus set will create big problems for operators from the small Member States , who will have difficulty in funding the investments needed to apply the new roaming conditions .
The long-term effects of this regulation could even end in an increase in national communications tariffs , which would be counterproductive and disastrous for the proper functioning of the national economies .
I support transparent price setting and a reduction in roaming charges in a spirit of free competition , but this reduction must not be achieved by means of retail price fixing and at the expense of national communications tariffs .
I am also pleased that the ' opt-in ' principle has been safeguarded in this compromise , even though an ' opt-in ' with no conditions or time limits would have been preferable .
This regulation has a mere three-year lifespan : what a consolation !
in writing . ( SV ) The report contains many practical proposals with a view to improving the situation for consumers .
The June List welcomes these proposals which , when it comes to consumer information and easily accessible price information , are to people 's advantage .
Roaming fees certainly seem absurdly high at present .
Before a decision is made on political measures , however , it must be made clear what market failure is behind this unsatisfactory state of affairs .
Is it a question of insufficient competition through what is known as implicit collusion ?
In that case , it would be quite wrong to introduce price regulation , as this would do nothing at all to solve the problem .
To propose treatment without a prior diagnosis would be absurd .
Researchers in this area should investigate what market failure we are facing before populist measures are taken .
In the long run it is free competition rather than price regulation that will most benefit consumers .
To allow politicians to set prices instead of the market is almost never a constructive long-term solution .
in writing . I supported this first-reading compromise agreement .
This is an important victory which will benefit consumers , who will be able to enjoy cheaper roaming costs by this summer .
in writing . I voted for the report on the proposal for a regulation on roaming on public mobile networks , which will lead to a reduction in prices for millions of roaming customers .
The initiative will help an enormous number of consumers who are affected by the roaming charges that are unjustifiably high .
The regulation will ensure that prices paid for international roaming when travelling within the European Union will not be unjustifiably higher than the charges for calls paid within the user 's country .
Consumers will benefit from lower prices for making calls in the visited country , back home or to any other EU Member State .
Consumers will also make considerable savings when receiving calls .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left voted in favour of the Rbig report on roaming because , following pressure from the European Parliament , a satisfactory compromise was achieved for the benefit of European consumers .
Of course a great many steps still need to be taken in the direction of transparent charges and extending the scope of and further reducing the uncontrolled charges made by mobile telephone companies .
The procedure also needs to be speeded up before the Telecommunications Council , so that the regulation can be adopted as quickly as possible and consumers can benefit from the regulations already introduced this summer .
This regulation must set an example .
Regulatory frameworks need to be created in other sectors where the rules of the free market have proven to be inadequate and cartels reign supreme .
Current roaming prices penalise users travelling between different Member States and constitute an obstacle to a genuine single market .
In view of the cross-border nature of the contractual relations involved in these services , the Member States have shown they are scarcely capable of tackling this issue . Although the solution ought ideally to lie in the sector regulating itself , this again has proved impossible .
Europe 's consumers deserve fairer , more transparent treatment . A Europe-wide regulatory amendment is therefore called for , one that stops abuse , creates transparency , ensures balance in the market , enables greater ease of movement and communication , and fosters greater economic dynamism .
Although the limits on the price of calls fall well short of what Parliament initially called for , I feel this is a first step in the right direction . It also introduces the kind of clarity and predictability that the market has been missing .
I hope that the operators do not react to the loss of revenue with an unjustified increase in the price of national calls , but instead take the opportunity to raise revenue by increasing the number of customers and by improving the services they provide both nationally and internationally .
in writing . - ( FR ) By endorsing the regulation on mobile telephone roaming charges this lunchtime , the European Parliament has just adopted legislation that was awaited by millions of consumers : workers or tourists , exasperated by the exorbitant costs of cross-border calls made or received on the GSM and who have gained the support of the European Commission , as the author of this legislative proposal .
Furthermore , although my liberal philosophy does not sit well with interventionism on market prices , I am above all opposed to the laissez-faire , lax approach and to cartels being formed in a given economic sector .
This European law is a significant advance when it comes to protecting consumers , who are going to see their bills slashed by as much as 70 % .
A further advance is the freedom of choice given to operators to offer clients an option between the regulated tariff and a fixed tariff that will also cover SMSs and MMSs .
I have one regret , however : this reduction in roaming charges will not be operational for the summer season .
Europeans will find consolation in this desire clearly expressed by the three European institutions to try to win them back and to fulfil the first task : to make laws that change their everyday lives for the better .
in writing . ( SV ) I abstained from voting on the roaming issue today .
Anyone who has ever been abroad knows how expensive it is to make and receive calls , but there are dangers in the EU setting price ceilings .
I would have been able to accept regulation at wholesaler level governing , for example , the relationship between Telia and a company in Spain , but I do not approve of setting a ceiling on prices for the consumer .
It would not be a ceiling but a floor .
If the ceiling is set at 49 % , it is obviously that percentage that the companies will deduct .
Companies ' profits would decline as they would previously have had revenue that could be used for competing in the national arena .
If profits disappeared , this might lead to companies having to increase their national prices .
The EU would then , instead , have weakened the vulnerable consumer whom it had always maintained it wanted to protect .
The mobile market is a relatively new market . In Sweden , the market adjusted gradually and prices have fallen significantly .
If only the system had been made more transparent , better technical solutions sought and the information systems spoken of in the proposal introduced , these measures would presumably have been enough to force prices down .
Roaming prices have fallen substantially , and although this has certainly happened unevenly throughout Europe , it is still a sign that the market is regulating itself .
in writing . I voted in favour of this measure as so many European citizens are affected by higher than necessary roaming charges .
The reduction of costs for so many people and businesses is a very useful contribution to peoples ' private pockets , as well as business costs .
The function of the mobile telephony market is to allow the maximum efficiency of the industry , while striking the right balance in consumer interests .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the report on the proposal relating to the Regulation of the European Parliament and Council concerning roaming on public mobile telephone networks within the Community and amending Directive 2002 / 21 / EC on the common regulatory framework for electronic communications .
When we adopted the Lisbon Agenda , our aim was to turn the European Union into the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economy .
For that reason we must ensure that the market for mobile phone technology within the European Union is a dynamic market with no internal barriers .
Currently about 80 % of EU citizens have a mobile phone , but mobile phone roaming charges are so high that they limit demand for this service .
However , mobile telephony is not restricted to voice communication , but also includes other types of new-generation communication such as GPS , Wi-Fi and remote Internet access .
These are very advanced technologies , which are a particularly important element in helping to promote a knowledge-based economy .
For this reason we cannot afford to allow their usage and their development to be stifled by exorbitant price barriers .
in writing . UKIP MEPs , like all MEP 's in the Parliament , have a vested interest in reduced mobile roaming charges .
Therefore , UKIP MEPs will not vote on the Rubig report .
UKIP believes it is morally wrong for MEPs to vote on an issue which could lead to personal enrichment .
Moreover , we never approve of EU regulation .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages in 1992 was the start of attempts to coordinate taxes in the creation of a common market .
This was and is a complex process .
So far there has been partial success in managing to coordinate indirect taxes , setting a minimal level for alcohol , alcoholic beverages , tobacco and fuel .
However , in reality , taxation policy has remained under the jurisdiction of the Member States .
Increasing excise duty based on EU inflation indices for 1993-2006 is not logical .
Why does this rate of inflation have to be applied to countries that joined the EU after 2004 ?
Complete abolition of excises based on the fact that these are small incomes for Member States is also not justified .
Following the aim of the introduction of excise duties , analogically one ought also to abolish tobacco and fuel excise duties .
I support maintaining the status quo , not changing excises and allowing Member States , based on the principle of subsidiarity , to further set their own tax levels .
All the more so , because among the Member States themselves there is no common agreement on the abolition of excises .


( DE ) Mr President , I have done what the rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , actually wanted people to do , and voted against her report on the grounds that it seeks the increase of more taxes , this time reheating the old familiar argument that this is needed to prevent distortions of competition , although it now turns out that - as the experts had predicted - the minimum rates brought in in 1992 did no more than widen the gulf between the rates in the Member States , some of which increased their rates repeatedly and now want the others to be compelled to do likewise .

To act on this proposal would , I believe , be seen by the public as another outrage by Brussels .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats should ideally have liked to have seen Parliament being able to support the Commission 's original proposal for an increase in minimum taxes that took account of inflation since 1993 .
Since the vote was predicted to be very close , we chose to support the amendments aimed at increasing minimum taxes so that they took account of inflation since the 2004 enlargement .
We are pleased that the report has now been referred back to the committee and hope that the latter will this time come to the view that taxes on alcohol are needed in order to reduce the harm caused by alcohol in the EU .
It is a good thing that the majority in Parliament rejected this report .
We voted against imposing excise duties at supranational level , as this would have restricted tax sovereignty and the sovereignty of political decision-making by means of taxes and the budget .
The main purpose of excise duties , which are currently a significant proportion of the revenue of many Member States , is to moderate consumption , as in the case of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages , and in turn to protect public health .
In addition to the direct impact of excise on activities in the agricultural sector and a significant part of the industrial sector , this should , first and foremost , be a national decision based on consumer preference for traditional products , on varying social choice as regards the consumption of alcoholic beverages , and on how different countries use different tax instruments , as in the case of wine in Portugal , where it is important to maintain the current minimum zero euro rate , a move that has been accepted in plenary .
We are opposed , however , to the Commission 's proposal to increase minimum rates and the rapporteur 's ideas on having a maximum rate .
As the report itself notes , the 1992 directive on excise duties did not result in any approximation of these rates among the Member States , or even settled the so-called problems concerning a distortion of competition .
If it were consistent , the Commission , in line with its ' better lawmaking ' programme , ought itself to call for the abolition of this text .
The truth is that it is the responsibility of the Member States , and them alone , to set taxes , whether direct or indirect , on their territory , in accordance with their budgetary , economic and social requirements , and that the fiscal harmonisation sought by the Commission has in fact only an ideological aim .
I shall conclude by saying that it is more than a little paradoxical for those who campaign for the abolition of border controls , the free movement of persons , goods and services and free competition to be the first to complain when this abolition and this freedom of movement encourage Europeans to use competition to their advantage .
in writing . ( SV ) We have voted against this report because it does not address the conflicting aims that are central to the problem concerned .
What we are really concerned with here is , of course , the fact that the Member States ' right to decide on an issue as crucial as alcohol policy is in conflict both with the demand for a free internal market and the Member States ' right to make their own decisions about their tax systems .
Alcohol is not just any old product . The internal market is at the heart of the EU , and the right of taxation is one of the sovereign state 's most important assets .
The rapporteur has made no attempt at all to analyse and resolve these conflicting aims .
The issue should therefore be addressed seriously by experts and political representatives with a proper grasp of the subject before Parliament is faced with new proposals .
- ( SK ) I have voted in favour of the realistic approach presented in the Vergnaud report , since it is obvious that the decisions of the European Court of Justice defending the right of patients to be treated in a country other than their own where their health would otherwise be seriously at risk or where their life is at stake , interfere with the powers of national governments .
As we know , the Directive on Services in the Internal Market excluded healthcare from the competence of the European Union and left it under the exclusive purview of national states .
It is self-evident that patient mobility in Europe will increase .
Patients will naturally be demanding access to care including the latest forms of treatment .
This will not be confined to workers working in another country ; it may also involve patients seeking out high-quality treatments abroad which for objective reasons are not available in the home country , and then travelling abroad to obtain such treatments .
in writing . Believing that the provision of quality and universal health services is the sole competence of the Member States , I voted against the Vergnaud report and the attempt to re-introduce healthcare into the Services Directive .
in writing . ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against this report , partly because we believe that the Member States themselves should be able to decide for which health services prior notification can be required .
We believe that a system involving planned care in which , following a medical examination , prior notification could quickly be obtained would be to patients ' advantage . It would be a system that provided equal access to cross-border care services for everyone and not just for those who could afford to pay out of their own pockets and then wait to be reimbursed .
We have voted in favour of amendments that recommend political decisions rather than court decisions based on case law , even if we have reservations about all the political initiatives being subject to codecision by Parliament .
We have also voted in favour of wording that contains references to freedom of establishment , but we would emphasise that we do not believe that this necessarily means having access to public resources .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Vergnaud report .
The vote on this report in plenary has confirmed the specific nature of health services and hence their exclusion from the Services Directive .
This vote has meant that equal access to health care and the financial viability of social security system will not be called into question .
In my view , the discussions begun at Community level on health services must henceforth focus on the legal uncertainty resulting from the case-law of the CJEC and on the areas for which the European Union is liable to create added value .
As far as I am concerned , a directive on health services that is in keeping with the goal of a framework directive on services of general economic interest remains the only tool that will enable the European Union to provide its added value and to regain the trust of the people of Europe in an area that is the very essence of their lives .
In common with other Commission communications on healthcare , this own-initiative report is , to some extent , aimed at once again applying to health services the same approach as the internal market for services , which it does by tabling a fresh proposal for a separate health services directive .
We therefore voted against the report .
We welcome the fact , however , that the proposal to include health services in the directive on liberalising services was rejected .
Universal access to high-quality , universal health services is a fundamental right of all citizens , which must be provided by the existing national social protection systems in the EU .
Health services are a public good and the public authorities of each Member State have the crucial task of guaranteeing equal access to all high-quality health services , and of providing adequate public funding .
We therefore oppose the creation of a liberalised internal market for health services and the current trend of reducing or privatising health services or making them ever more dependent on internal market regulation or on competition rules .
Health services are services like no other .
Therefore , under no circumstances must they be subject to the European rules on competition , State aid , public contracts or the internal market .
Above all , their organisation and funding must be the responsibility of the Member States , and of them alone .
Despite the predictable rejection of the paragraph calling for services to be made subject to the Bolkestein Directive , we feel that the text of the report is still dangerous .
It proposes to encourage the mobility of health workers at the risk of creating shortages of those very workers , and thus treatment for all the citizens , in certain countries ; or to encourage , with no controls , patient mobility , which may undermine the quality of treatment , lead to the saturation of infrastructure and compromise the balance of the social protection systems .
The objective of access for all European citizens to high-quality and community-based health care cannot under any circumstances be achieved by a European directive based on the case-law of the European Court of Justice , ruling on a few contentious cross-border issues .
In actual fact , this objective can only be achieved if there is a guarantee that Brussels will never be able to legislate in this field .
in writing . I voted against this report , as amended , because I believe it still leaves our national health services at risk from creeping liberalisation and legal uncertainty .
I welcome Parliament maintaining its position to exclude health services from the scope of the Services Directive .
However , we are now apparently refusing to set boundaries on the role of the market in relation to the right of Member States to decide on the method , financing and scope of the health services they provide .
Unless we adopt a clear legislative framework , preferably backed by a Treaty change , we are actively encouraging the Court of Justice to decide what is , or is not , a medical treatment and whether or not it should be reimbursed or require prior authorisation .
As the Rapporteur on Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 on the coordination of social security systems , I wish to make it clear to some in this House that the reimbursement situation is not a new system : it has been in place for over 30 years and has proved invaluable to thousands of citizens but its scope and workings should be determined by Parliament and Government - not the Court , so I regret the adoption of amendment 24 from the Liberals .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report shows the will to bypass the content of the Services Directive , which legitimately excluded health services from its scope .
Health services are not commercial services but services vital to our ageing populations .
Health must escape the desires of the ultraliberal vultures and the European federalist ideology that is going to harmonise everything downwards .
The matter of excluding health services is the responsibility of the Member States and must remain so .
Next , it is worrying to note that this woolly Lisbon Strategy is still being referred to as a prerequisite when we have known for a long time that it is a symbol of ultra-European inefficiency .
Furthermore , in view of the differences between our countries , one might say that the universality of a so-called European social model is utopian .
Finally creating a legal framework in this area amounts to implementing a quasi-internal market in health services or at least to laying the foundations for one .
Our duty is to prevent the quality of health services from being jeopardised , to preserve medical ethics and to guarantee strict controls in relation to the authorising and reimbursement of treatment at national and ministerial level .
The report on the impact of the exclusion of health services from the Bolkenstein Directive , on the pretext of protecting patients and health professionals , promotes the commercialisation and further privatisation of a choice sector for capital , so that it can generate profits for it .
We MEPs of the Greek Communist Party clearly express our opposition to the Bolkenstein Directive and are fighting with the workers to get it repealed .
The report takes it as given that national health systems will be inadequate and that health services will not be free .
That is why it promotes the reduction of health services covered by insurance funds to the lowest common denominator , using the health card as the tool to do so .
Nomadic employment is proposed for workers and the need for rounded scientific knowledge based on training and the acquisition of skills is underestimated .
Professionals are also obliged to have indemnity insurance , thereby reducing the obligation of the state to provide medical and care services to a personal responsibility .
The patient 's choice of treatment is also reduced to a personal responsibility , through information networks which replace the state 's obligation .
That is why we MEPs of the Greek Communist Party voted against the report .
Health is a social commodity and the workers need to extend their fight against its commercialisation by demanding modern , free , national health services run exclusively by the state which meet the workers ' contemporary needs .
in writing . I voted for this report on the consequences of excluding health services from the Services Directive .
In particular I am pleased that the report asked the Commission to propose " an appropriate instrument " to codify the case law of the Court of Justice .
In spite of the controversy generated by this report , which has been sorted out in time , I feel that the report in its current form reaffirms existing rights and fosters patient mobility . This was precisely the intention .
Given the particular importance of this issue , the debate must encompass the broad range of different systems in the various EU Member States .
In any event , the most important thing is to make sure that the facilities opened up by patient mobility are clear and viable .
Health is one of the issues that the citizens hold most dear and it would be wrong to impose solutions on the Member States by means of Community legislation that would undermine rules on which the citizens and the politicians have agreed .
Nevertheless this does not stop rules from being introduced to facilitate the use of this facility in a free area such as the EU , where there is a tradition of mobility on various issues .
I therefore feel that the outcome is a positive one , and favourable to the citizens ' interests and rights .
European policy in the area of healthcare should not confine itself to regulating patient mobility or creating a unified market .
We must avoid a two-speed policy by means of which anyone who is financially secure can choose to travel to find the best care .
That undermines social and territorial cohesion and solidarity , and is therefore inappropriate .
Healthcare - just like other social services of general interest - often forms part of a national structure of social protection which ensures that the citizens ' fundamental rights are safeguarded .
It was for those reasons that this House , last year , decided to exclude health services from the Services Directive .
We should not undo this today !
The text that was approved a moment ago which examines the impact and implications of this exclusion , urges the Commission to develop a suitable instrument to codify jurisprudence in respect of the rights and duties of mobile patients as well as care providers .
I do not believe that this goes far enough .
If jurisdiction is taken as the only basis for policy , then this does not do justice to the importance of this area in a social Europe .
Health is a fundamental right .
Everyone is entitled to travel to a different country in order to receive the best care .
Every care provider , as well as the Member States involved , has the duty to place all patients on an equal footing .
At the time of the vote on the draft Vergnaud report within the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Members from the right supported an amendment aimed at reintroducing health services in the ' Services ' Directive .
By means of this vote , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats broke an earlier compromise with the Socialist Group in the European Parliament that protected health services by keeping them outside the scope of the ' Services ' Directive .
Fortunately , the members of the PPE-DE Group decided during the vote in plenary to abide by this compromise , and to respect health care by refusing to make health a commodity .
At the end of this vote , the will of the Socialists to protect accessible , high-quality and affordable health services for EU citizens triumphed .
in writing . I very much welcome the fact that , as of next year , agriculture will no longer be the biggest item of expenditure on the EU budget , but the various structural funds will .
This is a welcome reallocation of resources - provided , of course , that the reallocated money is well spent !
And here too , I would give a cautious welcome to the gradual shift within structural funding itself towards developing innovation and enterprise in our less prosperous regions .
Structural funding must be more than a simple transfer of resources from the more prosperous Member States to the less prosperous ones - if that were all it is , this could be done simply by adjusting budget contributions and rebates .
Structural funding must bring added value and be a genuine European policy in its own right , helping less prosperous regions rather than Member States , developing transnational linkages and helping ensure that all can benefit from the European single market .
Bearing in mind that the intention of the report is to contribute to the debate on the future of the EU 's cohesion policy , we must point out our disagreement with some significant aspects of the report , as follows :
the idea that the granting of funds as part of cohesion policy is conditional on compliance with economic performance criteria established at Community level , as a means of exerting extra pressure on the way in which Member States define their social and economic policies ;
the establishment of mandatory ceilings on the manner in which structural funds , either at Community level or in the Member States , are to be used , for example ' to earmark at least 20 % of the structural funds for promoting R + D + I ' ;
promoting the use of the structural funds for financing private investment by means of what are referred to as private-public partnerships ;
the use of new cohesion indicators , namely employment , the level of disparities in GDP between neighbouring regions , decentralisation and accessibility index , infrastructure and transport provision , the level of research / innovation , education and training activity and the diversity of production , without safeguarding the idea that GDP per capita must continue to be used as the base indicator of eligibility when it comes to EU cohesion policy .
in writing . ( PL ) This report rightly emphasises the key role of cohesion policy in supporting the internal market through the commercial and jobs exchange that has arisen through projects that have enjoyed cofinancing by the European Union .
We should also bear in mind the role played by cohesion policy in increasing the profile of the EU in the eyes of its citizens and growing support for it in regions which have benefited substantially from cohesion policy .
Encouraging the Commission and the Council to assess whether allocating at least 20 % of the structural funds to research , development and innovation is feasible deserves support .
The proposal to devolve the function of technological initiator to local and regional level also deserves attention , as access to European programmes and assistance will make it easier for enterprises to innovate .
In her call for greater exposure and publicity for projects supported by the structural funds , Francisca Pleguezuelos Aguilar wants to give our citizens greater awareness of the benefits of cohesion policy .
The idea of cohesion , which has been with us since the Treaty of Rome , is one of the cornerstones of the EU .
In a nutshell , the development of some is the development of all .
History has shown us that cohesion , a tried and trusted concept , is characterised by generosity and realism , both for the Member States that have just joined and for those that have been in the Union for longer .
I therefore feel , like the rapporteur and most European politicians , that cohesion , as a value , should be promoted and defended .
I also feel , though , that it needs to be brought up to date .
Objectives that ten or 15 years ago were excluded from cohesion , on account of more significant shortfalls and differences , are today issues that should definitely be included , in the context of a growing , more competitive economy .
That being the case , cohesion must promote enhanced competences regarding research and development , on the one hand , and support for the most competitive parts of each area , on the other .
Cohesion is not a one-size-fits-all solution ; it is , more than anything , about investing in deriving the maximum benefit from our differences and about ensuring that the investment is sustainable over a period of time , with a view to harmonious development .
Mr President , I was pleased to support this own-initiative report on the importance of Structural Funds to EU cohesion , as in Scotland we have vast experience of using the funds to develop our peripheral areas and regenerate our urban centres .
As the new funds roll out , we have an expertise we are now using across Europe to assist our new colleagues as they set up their programmes , and we of course retain a crucial interest in this topic so I am pleased to see this report gain the majority it has today .
I commend my colleague David Martin for his all too apposite report , which I will be supporting .
The EU has a responsibility to ensure that developing countries have the capacity to engage in and benefit from the global economy .
It is not just about a fairer , more open trading system .
Despite enormous advances in market access including the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative by the Commission , the Least Developed Countries ' share of world trade has halved over the last 40 years from 1.9 % to 1 % .
Aid for trade is necessary to create the conditions and infrastructure to trigger growth , but this aid must be under the control of the recipients themselves to fit within their own national development plans .
I am delighted that the UK is taking a lead in delivering its share of the EUR 2 billion annual aid for trade budget promised by EU Member States at Gleneagles by 2010 .
We can only eradicate Third World poverty by empowering businesses , particularly those engaged in fair trade , to provide the decent work so desperately needed .
As far as we are concerned , EU ' aid ' cannot , and must not , be considered as part of the ' liberalisation of trade ' , as the rapporteur would like to see . It must also not be used as ' one of the most effective drivers of economic growth ' of the poorest countries .
This is for two reasons . Firstly , aid is contingent on the appropriateness of these countries ' ' internal policies ' and a ' real improvement in the capacity for good governance ' , in the interests of the powerful multinationals in the EU and the USA .
In other words , conditions are placed on the ' aid ' -based development of these countries , which is tantamount to exploiting their inherent structural fragility , following a history of colonialism , for the benefit of EU capital .
They are forced to produce for export , in particular low added-value products with lower financial return , the price of which does not cover the production costs . This is true of many agricultural products , obliging them to erect customs barriers to block the entry of products from outside .
Secondly , this guideline establishes a hierarchy between countries , thus deepening still further the gap between the so-called rich and poor countries , with consequences at national level for the EU Member States , and in what are known as third countries ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . As rapporteur I gladly supported my report .
There were only a handful of amendments submitted to the plenary vote , some of which added to the report or positively changed the language , some however changed the emphasis of the report too much , meaning I was unable to support some of the amendments .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the objectives of finally getting the countries of the South out of poverty , we are all agreed - even if the real measures are still not being taken for Black Africa , and by that , I mean the sharing out of water , food , basic medicines and education .
As a tool for fighting poverty , international trade is necessary , but inadequate .
It may be adequate in the long term but , as Keynes said : ' in the long term we shall all be dead ' .
Momentum and innovation are therefore required , not least through the invention of a new customs technology of deductible customs duties in the form of a customs credit offered by importers to exporters , to be deducted upon purchase from the economy of the importing country and equal to the sum of the customs duty to which the credit is charged .
For the countries of the South , this customs credit would be subsidised , along the lines of matching credits and sparing credits , which already exist in international taxation .
In this way , poor countries would no longer lose the precious revenue from their customs duties .
As the report correctly says , ' opening up trade is one of the most effective drivers of economic growth , which is indispensable for reducing poverty and promoting pro-poor economic growth and employment and is also an important catalyst for sustainable development worldwide ' .
Of course , it does not follow - and nor is it my view - that all one has to do is open up trade and stable democracies will flourish in free and pluralistic societies .
That is not the case , as evidenced in the modern era , with China being just one such example .
Nevertheless , the fact is that there is no such thing as a free , pluralistic and democratic society that is not , in essence , open to trade .
It is this idea - and not a watered-down or totally illiberal version thereof - that should be at the forefront of the EU 's guidelines when it comes to aid for international trade .
Our undertaking on the world stage should be geared towards opening up the world more and more to trade , without this leading to vulnerable economies and markets being left unprotected .
In spite of its ' politically correct ' language , the report fails to hide the EU 's true intentions behind the current Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) , with African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries .
What the EU is seeking , with the EPAs , is to achieve as much as it can from the current WTO negotiations , on issues on which it has thus far failed , in other words , to try the back door having failed to get in through the front door .
It therefore calls for ' the pacing , timing and scope of liberalisation to be gradual and flexible . ' It ' highlights the development benefits that the Singapore issues may engender ' .
It ' believes ' that ' agreements on investment , competition and government procurement ... could contribute to shared aims of good governance and transparency , creating an environment that should enable greater private-public partnership . ' It ' recalls ' that ' sound regulatory frameworks are an essential part of any liberalisation process , ' as regards services and public services .
In other words , this is merely a sugar-coated version of the neoliberal agenda .
What is needed is an entirely different agenda , one that will promote effective cooperation , solidarity , independent development and social justice .
in writing . Economic Partnership Agreements have been highly divisive and controversial .
At times it has seemed as though development considerations have not been foremost in the Commission 's thinking on EPAs .
This Parliament report presents a very timely and balanced contribution to the debate and the Rapporteur Robert Sturdy is to be congratulated on his approach to the report .
Within the limited framework of the WTO rules , the Economic Partnership Agreements can still be - and they must be - an effective instrument for promoting trade and , most importantly , for supporting the creation of infrastructure conducive to trade .
Against this backdrop , this is a welcome report that sets out its principles clearly and that is underpinned by decent values .
As regards similar issues discussed in this plenary session , I wish to reaffirm my conviction that the promotion of free , open and fair trade sustains the democratisation of societies and encourages the plurality of social forces .
This is a further reason for the importance of the partnership agreements .
in writing . - ( FR ) The negotiations on the economic partnership agreements will enter a crucial phase , on 1 January 2008 , marking the expiry of the current agreements .
Due to the essential nature of these agreements , I voted in favour of the report , believing that these agreements will enable a new economic and commercial framework to be established that is conducive to the sustainable development of the ACP countries ' economies .
I would emphasise this development dimension : these agreements cannot be reduced to mere free trade agreements under the WTO and must be instruments serving economic and human development .
Therefore , the EPAs will also be as asymmetric and progressive as possible .
I voted in favour of Amendments 20 and 28 on the need for the negotiations to take account of the specific circumstances of the overseas regions and territories pursuant to Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
We should in fact examine the interests specific to these territories , consider market access differentiations and make the existing support methods more consistent with those of the ACP countries .
I should like also to qualify paragraph 13 of the report by pointing out the conclusions adopted by the Council that provide for transitional periods in the provision of EU market access for certain products that are particularly sensitive from the EU 's point of view .
To date , the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) has guaranteed the ACP countries preferential access to the EU market , with lower import tariffs at the EU 's borders and better market access .
This has enabled the developing countries to export their products to the richer European countries more easily .
This arrangement within the WTO forms a formal exception to the non-discrimination rule of the Most Favoured Nation principle .
According to the Cotonou Agreement of 2000 , this exception is to be lifted by no later than the end of 2007 , and to be replaced by individually-negotiated Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
If not , every WTO member would be able to report discrimination .
This report is right to strike a critical note .
It is of the essence that the Commission should negotiate the EPAs with due consideration for the level of development of the ACP countries .
The principle of total liberalisation of the market should not come into play here , because it forms a real threat to them , both socially and economically .
The report does not , however , take sufficient account of the circumstances on the ground .
Whether the EPAs will have a positive or negative impact remains to be seen .
It is hardly surprising , therefore , that the countries in question are not in a hurry to sign these agreements much before the end of 2007 .
If Parliament does not remove the time pressure and is not prepared to persevere with the GSP + system , I will be unable to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) In line with the Cotonou agreement , the EPAs are not mere free trade agreements under the WTO , but a genuine partnership enabling a new economic and commercial framework to be created in favour of the ACP countries .
Due to their geographical location , near many ACP countries , the overseas communities are at the heart of these preferential and reciprocal agreements with the ACP countries .
It is imperative that the particular circumstances of the outermost regions be taken into account in the context of these negotiations , in accordance with Article 299 of the Treaty .
Special attention must also be paid to the OCTs located near to the ACP countries , in accordance with the association agreements that already link them to the Union , under Article 229 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
We should examine the interests specific to the outermost regions and the OCTs without omitting to involve them as far upstream as possible in the negotiations , so that market access differentiations can be considered and their respective support arrangements coordinated , for the purposes of integrating them more into their regional environments .
I welcome the adoption of my amendment , which is designed to strike an intelligent balance between the regional integration of these overseas territories and the ties binding them to Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of this report on the grounds that the steps outlined in it need to be taken as a matter of absolute necessity if this European Union of ours is to be made a political union speaking with one voice to the outside world and hence capable of becoming a global player rather than a lame duck .
For this , the European Union needs in particular the further development of its own security and defence policy , with joint research , a joint procurement office , shared defence forces capable of acting autonomously , and joint operations funded from the EU 's Budget .
Such a thing is dependent , however , on our acquiring a new regulatory framework in the shape of a new Treaty , and I trust that Mrs Merkel 's presence in the chair of the Council , combined with Mr Sarkozy 's pragmatism , will make it possible for a decisive step to be taken in the right direction .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats do not think that Mr Brok 's report is the right forum in which to debate the Treaty and what it should and should not contain .
We think that cooperation on foreign policy should be increased , but we do not think it appropriate in this situation to commit ourselves irrevocably to having a common EU foreign minister .
We therefore chose to abstain on these points .
Among other issues , the report advocates the rejected ( ! ! ! )
' Constitutional Treaty ' . It makes strong calls for the Treaty 's ' full ratification ' ( ? ) and ' entry into force ' ( ? ) ' in order to ensure that the Union is ready to face up to the global responsibilities , threats and challenges of today 's world ' , by means of the common foreign and security policy and the European security and defence policy , so they say ...
This position adopted by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ( encompassing the Portuguese Social Democrats , Conservatives and Socialists ) is especially significant given that it is these very political forces that are negotiating the wording of a ' simplified ' Treaty , which they tell us is different in content from the ' European Constitution ' .
Let us make sure this is clear .
Ultimately , how can something be presented as being different when it reaffirms precisely what it is supposed to be different from ?
This is where the discrepancy lies ...
The true intention of the political forces and the economic and financial interests at the root of European capitalist integration is to speed up the militarisation of the EU , in a legal and constitutional framework - within the NATO framework , remember - and this would be established by the so-called ' European Constitution ' .
Hence the ' common ' foreign policy of interventionism , with its aggressive approach , in thrall to the ambitions and interests of the large economic and financial groups of the major powers , headed by Germany .
in writing . ( SV ) I have voted against Mr Brok 's report not only because the rapporteur had chosen to include the issue of the Constitution but also because he raises the issue of whether the EU should have a common foreign minister .
At present , we have no ministerial functions within the EU , and nor should we have .
All the Member States already have their own foreign ministers .
What can we expect next : a common minister for the environment and perhaps , in the end , a common prime minister ?
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports much of this resolution , in particular the high priority given to the consolidation of democracy , promotion of human rights and non-proliferation , and the important EU role in conflict prevention and building effective multilateralism .
However , the resolution focuses too much attention on internal procedural changes rather than foreign policy priorities .
The EPLP voted against paragraphs 1 , 5 and 11 , and abstained on 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 , as the references to the Constitutional Treaty and the detailed provisions within are inappropriate whilst its future is still being discussed .
In particular , the adoption of the Constitutional Treaty should not be seen as a prerequisite for future enlargement .
The EPLP also abstained on paragraph 8 ( g ) , as the added value of an EU diplomatic academy has yet to be proven , and on paragraph 8 ( h ) - whilst agreeing that there is certainly a need for external delegations to be strengthened , these will not be EU ' embassies ' .
The EPLP fully supports reform of the UN Security Council and also supports improvements in the way that the EU speaks at the UN - however it is inappropriate to talk of a single EU seat , as in paragraph 10 .
in writing . ( CS ) Mr Brok 's report exposes the threadbare nature of the EU 's common foreign and security policy .
On the one hand , it calls for the EU to be more closely involved in the conflicts in the Caucasus and Transnistria , and therefore opposes the emergence of states in these areas and international recognition for them .
On the other hand , it attempts to breach the incomplete Resolution 1244 and to declare the ' controlled independence of Kosovo ' .
The author , alongside Mrs Beer from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has accordingly chosen to reopen the can of worms of territorial change in Europe .
I am curious to know when the call will go up for Catalonia , the Basque country or even Galicia to be separated from Spain and when the voices of the separatists in Slovakia , Romania and Serbia will be heard .
What indeed will we do about the demand to break up Macedonia ( or should that still be FYROM ) ?
Has an example been set for the relatively compact Muslim communities in some parts of southern France , or perhaps for the migrants concentrated in the large cities of Western Europe ?
Similarly counterproductive is the fear expressed in Article 25 concerning the first trials of an anti-satellite defence mechanism in China .
We do not have similar fears about the United States .
Unfortunately there are so many similarly unacceptable parts of this report that neither I nor my parliamentary group will be supporting it in the final vote .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of Elmar Brok 's report on the Council Annual Report to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices facing the CFSP , including the financial repercussions on the overall budget of the European Communities for 2005 ( paragraph 40 ( H ) of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 ) .
Mr Brok 's report rightly underlines that without a constitutional treaty , the European Union will not be in a position to face the main challenges that the common foreign and security policy currently poses .
Appointing a Foreign Minister who is also a member of the Commission and who also heads the Council of Foreign Ministers will allow the EU to act more effectively and robustly in the international sphere .
The sum of EUR 1 740 million allocated for common foreign and security policy for 2007-2013 is inadequate for the EU 's ambitions to be an international player .
The report correctly notes the need to bolster the role of the European Parliament in the common foreign and security policy and the Council should not be limited to simply informing Parliament but primarily to fully involve it in the main choices and activities of the common foreign and security policy .
in writing . I voted for this report and in particular am pleased that it emphasises the need for internal setting of external priorities , for example the fight against poverty , in order to have a common European voice in international affairs .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , Elmar Brok 's report on the main aspects and fundamental choices facing the CFSP highlights the merits of the case well .
Without a constitutional treaty , it will be impossible to speak of a common foreign and security policy that is capable of meeting the challenges faced by the European community .
In addition , the report correctly defines the areas of interest for the EU on which we need to concentrate , including the fight against terrorism , immigration , energy security and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
The report is balanced and all the accents are in the right places , which is why I fully support its adoption .
The annual report proposes strengthening the military and political sector of the CFSP to the tune of EUR 1.8 million , which is three times the expenditure for the period 2007-2013 , in order to step up the EU 's aggressive policy , so that it can claim a greater share of the spoils for the Euro-unifying monopolies from the imperialist interventions under way against the peoples .
It restores the adoption of the European Constitution , which is ' dead ' following the referenda in France and the Netherlands , as the necessary tool for promoting the CFSP .
In order to implement the imperialist views and remove possible obstacles , it proposes abolishing unanimity and the application of qualified majority voting , so that the ruling imperialist powers can further their plans .
In order to prepare and implement new interventions in the name of combating terrorism , of ' restoring democracy ' and other pretexts , it promotes further militarisation , the completion of the formation of battle groups and the preparation of military occupying forces in Kosovo to replace the NATO forces .
There is no reference to ballistic-missile defence , which indirectly but clearly proves it is being accepted through  and the U itself .
It proposes increased funding , basically calling on European workers to pay for the EU 's aggressive policy .
We voted against the report on the CFSP .


( DE ) Mr President , I endorse the demands made in this report , particularly for the introduction of a minimum wage in all the Member States , which will be a safety net and is particularly calculated to protect those who are in work from exploitation and poverty , while also , at the same time , safeguarding competitiveness and preventing the loss of jobs in countries like Austria , which have higher standards of social protection .

I am also in favour of the introduction of a quality mark for products from third countries that are manufactured under proper conditions and without the use of child labour ; it would be an invitation to consumers to ensure , by purchasing such products , that humane and fair working conditions prevail in third countries and that jobs here are not wiped out by the import of cheap goods .
( MT ) Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I wished to explain that when it comes to work , and to decent work in particular , our Constitution is wholly based on work .
I also wanted to make it clear that , throughout the years , Labour governments have always sought to improve conditions in the workplace for our country 's labour force .
It is important to note that whenever there has been a case where an employee has improved the quality of his job conditions , this was down to the initiative of Labour governments .
I would also like to praise the unions in Malta , especially the General Workers ' Union , for their hard work and efforts in the interests of Maltese workers .
Thank you .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour of the report .
The report is a good one , and we unreservedly support the EU 's commitment to decent work .
It is important for us to be able to guarantee people productive work , done under free , fair and safe conditions , both within the EU and internationally .
We wish , however , to offer a number of clarifications .
It is important to point out that a tax on financial and currency transactions must be international because a European tax would place countries outside the euro zone at a disadvantage .
We are opposed to common standard definitions of the concepts of forced labour and abuse of vulnerability .
The International Labour Organisation 's definitions should be taken as basic , and further definitions should be left to the Member States .
The report calls on the Member States to consider minimum wages .
That is something we have already done in Sweden , and we have actively chosen a solution in which the matter is left to the social partners .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report by the European Parliament is a step in the right direction .
It makes decent work a tool of European development policy , firstly by cofinancing , with the ILO , a development programme for decent work , and secondly by creating a European label and a blacklist of companies that violate fundamental labour standards , and lastly by implementing trade sanctions against countries that seriously infringe fundamental social rights .
It brings about progress for decent work in Europe , where much also remains to be done : by urging the Member States to ratify the ILO conventions on the health and safety of workers , maternity protection and migrant workers ; by calling for the introduction of a minimum wage as a safety net to prevent workers from being exploited in any way ; by improving access to lifelong learning and by calling for greater harmonisation of pension schemes .
These are the foundations of this social Europe that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament wants to build .
I shall therefore vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report on promoting decent work for all .
The notion of ' decent work ' seems to be a reference to the terms of multilateral declarations and agreements , but policies , for their part , are still far removed from the concept .
Presentations and declarations are one thing ; the everyday political actions and decisions of international institutions are quite something else .
Indeed , the world is marked by a ' deficit ' in decent work : in many unproductive and low-quality jobs that involve dangerous work for a precarious income , rights are flouted and inequality between the sexes prevails .
Faced with this situation , the WTO and the ILO have adopted international labour standards .
However , the IMF and the World Bank do not support any initiatives designed to ensure that the fundamental rights of workers are respected .
If decent work is to become a reality worldwide , priority must be given to it by all the international institutions , which will have to work together to make this happen .
Decent work must be a universal objective for all the international institutions .
It is imperative that these fundamentals - quality employment , workers ' rights , protection and social dialogue - determine all economic and social policies at international level .
( The explanation of vote was abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I voted in favour of the Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou report on promoting decent work for all , because productive labour in conditions of freedom , equality , security and dignity should lie at the heart of EU trade relations .
I feel we should demand that our partners comply with the International Labour Organisation 's conventions on workers ' rights , with regard to fair salaries and adequate social protection .
I should also like to highlight the need for multinational companies to assume their social responsibility , either in Europe or anywhere else in the world .
What happened in the vote on this report was disgraceful .
The majority in Parliament blocked the adoption of some of the best paragraphs adopted in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the theme of ' Promoting decent work for all - The EU contribution to the implementation of the decent work agenda in the world ' .
This position needs to be highlighted because it is clear that it is intrinsically linked with the increasing emphasis on so-called flexicurity .
As we know , between 2000 and 2005 unemployment rose by one million in the EU , alongside a massive increase in unstable work : more than 4.7 million workers were on fixed-term contracts and at least 1.1 million found themselves working part time .
The high number of workers who , despite earning a salary , are living below the poverty line , is also unacceptable .
The promotion of decent work for all entails ensuring compliance with a progressive labour law , ensuring the dignity of those who work , guaranteeing decent living and working conditions , without any discrimination and inequality .
This must not be restricted to mere good intentions - it must be matched by practical action .
in writing . I will be voting for this report despite the Conservatives and Liberals gutting it of its most vital elements , for example deleting ' binding initiatives in corporate social responsibility ' , the need to introduce a ' fair and innovative tax policy ' and investigating / listing companies violating core labour standards .
I am appalled at their anti-labour movement attitudes .
in writing . UK Conservatives fully support the ILO principle of decent work .
We agree upon the importance of providing lifelong learning opportunities , the need to be proactive on increasing women 's participation in the labour market , and the need to do so much more to resolve the challenges of reconciling work and family life .
However , we disagree with the idea that the European Parliament should take up its time issuing pronouncements on this subject , however worthy or well-intentioned .
Parliament does not have the competence to instruct Member States on what to do in this area .
It is for Member State Governments to decide , and rightly so .
So , while we have taken part in the debate , and also in the vote to curb the interventionist excesses of the Left , Conservative MEPs abstained on the final vote .
in writing . I voted for this report and against the Liberal and EPP Amendments which sought to delete the references to binding initiatives on corporate social responsibility .
CSR should be at the core of European businesses activities both internally within the EU and externally and I was highly disappointed that these two groups did not support the steps outlined in the report .
in writing . I do not want EU policies to be imposed on national labour market policies .
The EU proposal and the report debated in plenary of the European Parliament with the misleading title of ' decent work ' ( COM - 2006 - 0249 ) are the new reactionary , anti-grassroots framework of the U for achieving the objectives of the ' Lisbon Strategy ' , minimising the price of labour and striking at the workers ' fundamental rights , in order to increase the profits of the Euro-unifying monopoly business groups .
The basis of the capitalist restructurings processed and formulated in the EU and in the international imperialist organisations and the plutocracy and its political spokesmen on the subject of so-called ' decent work ' are being integrated into the anti-grassroots policy of the U . They include the following :
lifelong learning , extending flexible forms of employment , striking at collective labour agreements , exacerbating the terms of insurance and retirement and further privatising education , health and public services for the common benefit in general ;
setting a minimum wage for workers , a poverty-level safety net , in order to prevent reaction from the workers and grass roots , while the plutocracy reaps huge profits from its exploitation of the working class .
That is why the parliamentary group of the Greek Communist Party voted against this EU proposal .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.10 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Debate on the future of Europe ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the future of Europe , in which we are joined by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Member of the European Council , Mr Jan Peter Balkenende , whom I welcome most warmly to this House .
( Applause )
Mr Balkenende , it is a great pleasure for me to be able to welcome you , the Prime Minister of the Netherlands , to the European Parliament today in order to discuss the future of the European Union .
Prime Minister , Mr Balkenende , the Kingdom of the Netherlands was not only among the founding members of the European Union , but also , in the course of the past 50 years , played a leading role on repeated occasions , on which it showed a great deal of determination , among those who themselves sought - and supported others who tried - to drive forward the history of our continent and make it an incomparable success story .
Significant treaties and agreements within the European Union bear the names of cities in the Netherlands ; there is the Treaty of Maastricht , whereby the European Union was founded , and the Treaty of Amsterdam , which accorded this House extensive rights of codecision .
It was , then , all the more a painful experience for us when the citizens of the Netherlands , in a referendum , rejected the draft constitution that contained such significant answers to the questions about Europe 's future .
However , like my fellow Members of this Parliament , and like you , Prime Minister , I am persuaded that the citizens of the Netherlands were not , by this decision , saying ' no ' to the European Union itself , or to its worth or to its values .
This European Parliament very much values your willingness , Prime Minister , to participate in today 's debate , above all in view of the fact that now , the cooperation of all 27 Member States is needed to put in place a renewed basis for the European Union , one that will stand the tests that the future will bring .
The German Presidency of the Council , and the Federal Chancellor , Angela Merkel , in particular , is currently engaged in devoting all its energies to finding a solution on which all can agree and which will satisfy everyone , not only those countries that have not ratified the Treaty , but also those 18 Member States , and hence the majority by population of the European Union , which have already done so .
The European Parliament supports the substance of the Constitutional Treaty , and we want it to become a reality .
That will involve necessary reforms and will enshrine our common values .
This House will not under any circumstances be satisfied with a result that is not in the interests of the European Union and of its citizens .

We are aware , Prime Minister , that the people of the Netherlands , too , have a great interest in making the European Union fit to face the challenges of the future , and in making it possible for shared European solutions to global tasks to be found , and I am convinced that , with good will , we will be able , in the course of the negotiations over the coming weeks and months , not only to reach an accommodation with one another , but also to produce something that will make the European Union democratic , transparent , and effective in action .
Prime Minister , I now ask you to take the floor and address us .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , Commissioner Wallstrm , Commissioner Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , thank you kindly for your invitation to join in your debate on the future of Europe .
I would also like to express my gratitude for the very useful visit by your President , Mr Poettering , to the Netherlands on 12 April last .
( DE ) Mr President , thank you very much for coming to The Hague .
We very much valued your presence and your contribution to the debate . It was an important visit , and thank you very much again for coming .

( NL ) Mr President , it feels good to be back in your Parliament and I have good memories of our meeting during the Dutch Presidency in 2004 .
We held stimulating debates , which were a great source of inspiration to me at the time .
Today , however , I am here in a different capacity , as a representative of a Member State - the Netherlands , which is a pro-European country , a country where the overall support for European cooperation has always been - and still is - above the average .
At the end of 2006 , 75 % of the people were in favour of EU membership .
It is a country with an open economy that owes much of its prosperity and employment to the opportunities offered by the internal market .
A country that wants to play an active role in the world , as is evident from our involvement in development missions in Afghanistan and elsewhere in the world , in which respect , the Netherlands relies on cooperation .
The Netherlands , however , is also one of the two Member States where a clear majority of the people said ' no ' to the Constitutional Treaty in 2005 , something to which you , Mr President , have made reference .

I know that a large majority in your Parliament were in favour of the Constitutional Treaty , and I respect that , but whatever verdict one passes on the Constitution , what is now called for is a joint solution , one that is acceptable to us all .
A solution that does justice to public concerns which came to the surface in the Netherlands and in France in a very visible way ; to concerns that are also felt elsewhere : both in countries that have already ratified the Constitution and countries where no decisions have been taken to date .
I am persuaded , Mr President , that obstacles can be overcome , because , in terms of future prospects , there is much more that unites us than divides us , and also because we have a firm foundation of shared values and shared interests .
I would like to start my statement about how I see Europe 's future with the idea that the Union is a rare and successful project .
There is every reason to be proud of what we in Europe have achieved in a combined venture .
The Europe that was torn apart by huge wars and sharp social contrasts now boasts a model of cooperation and integration that is second to none in the world .
A model that is typified by balance : a balance between economic dynamism and social harmony ; a balance between unity and diversity .
The European decision-making model does justice to the equality of the Member States , as well as to that of its citizens .
Europe is a respected world player , and an example to the world .
What makes it that is our unique form of cooperation , our focus on solidarity , and our capacity for commitment , united by values and dialogue rather than by battle .
Europe has been renewed in the space of 50 years , which , in terms of world history , is a short period of time .
Europe is a young , but adult structure , with a bright future ahead .
Step by step , we are facing new challenges , building on our achievements , but always with a keen eye on the public 's expectations and concerns .
One of the main objectives of the new Dutch Cabinet is to further reinforce the support base for European cooperation .
If we are to do this , we have to find out exactly why nearly 62 % of our population rejected the Constitutional Treaty , and to find the right response to that .
I would first of all like to sketch the background to the Dutch ' no ' before I go into the detail of what the Netherlands expect of the negotiations for a new Treaty .
Much has changed in the 50 years that separate the Treaty of Rome and the Declaration of Berlin .
The Union of today is not only many times bigger than the Community of the Six in those days ; it also has a much larger sphere of activity .
The enlargement is a historic success .
It was the right decision .
We have to realise , though , that following the recent major enlargement , the public need time to adjust .
It all went very quickly - for some , too quickly .
The feeling of reciprocal affinity has to grow .
In addition to considerable growth , the Union has also experienced an enormous deepening in the past 15 years : the completion of the internal market , open borders , the euro , many new policies in important areas such as the environment , security and law .
These are all positive developments in their own right , and have also brought with them a number of new realities that have become commonplace for the public , but not without any resistance , though .
For example , the presence of European legislation in many areas is often misunderstood .
At a time when citizens had not taken on board the enlargement and deepening , we asked the citizens their opinions about the Constitution .
The question ' Do you agree with the Constitution for Europe ' was understood by many as ' Would you like Europe to assume the character of a state ? ' or even ' Would you like Europe to eventually take the place of the Dutch national government ? ' , which was , of course , a bridge too far .
The term ' constitution ' has different meanings in different Member States .
To some , it is symbolic of democracy , of the curbing of authority .
It is that , of course .
Elsewhere , however - in the Netherlands at any rate - the word ' constitution ' has a totally different connotation or meaning still .
A constitution belongs to a national state .
A constitution says something about national identity - hence the Dutch suggestion of a new Treaty not being a constitution .
The symbolism of a constitution was a major factor in the Dutch saying ' no ' .
There was a sense of loss of control , a fear that our own identity would be lost , but a recognisable and accessible government is precisely what people want .
People feel there is a limit to what Europe should do . People want control over the areas which we have to tackle jointly in Europe .
Needless to say , there were other reasons why people voted ' no ' .
There are those according to whom Europe produces too many rules , or does too many things that should be regulated nationally , while others find the administration in Brussels is too lacking in transparency , and concerns about the Dutch financial contribution also played a part .
There was too little appreciation of the specific added value of European cooperation .
If you think this through , these issues can , to some extent , be resolved in a new Treaty .
To another extent , we must be aware of these concerns that very many citizens in the Union have in our day-to-day policy decisions .
We have made a good start on this in the past two years .
Subsidiarity and less legislation are at the top of the agenda , not least in Brussels .
There is more transparency .
We have a budget that enables us to do what we have to do until 2013 .
We also have the right policy priorities , including climate change and energy policy .
This , Mr President , honourable Members , we owe to your Parliament , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , and the presidents of the European Council , namely , and in chronological order , Mr Blair , Mr Schssel , Mr Vanhanen and now Mrs Merkel .
It shows that Europe is prepared to prioritise matters that occupy the minds of the citizens .
Before I turn to the things that the Netherlands hopes to find in a new Treaty , I should like to make a point .
A referendum was held in four Member States , which produced two yes 's and two no 's .
In total , 18 Member States approved the Constitutional Treaty via their own democratic process .
The Constitutional Treaty was widely supported in your Parliament .
There is no two ways about it .
I hope , though , that we will be able to concentrate on what unites us , rather than on what divides us .
The Dutch Cabinet seeks to find a joint solution in a constructive manner .
This is , with a view to Europe 's future , very much called for .
The points on which the Netherlands focuses are directly related to public concerns that have surfaced over the past two years .
No more , no less .
This is to gather the necessary support for ratification of the new Treaty .
In this light there are , I think , irrespective of the specific requirements of institutions and Member States , two major joint ambitions regarding the new Treaty .
In the first instance , we want to improve Europe 's democratic functioning .
Secondly , we seek to enhance Europe 's decisiveness .
Europe 's challenge has always been to set up the institutions in such a way as to ensure that as much justice as possible is done to both - at times - conflicting objectives .
The institutional balance which the Convention and the previous IGC worked out offers improvements , both in terms of democratic content and power .
The Netherlands is keen to retain these improvements , provided that agreement on this can go hand in hand with a credible way of dealing with the citizens ' areas of concern .
I will outline what the Netherlands faces in order to reach a solution jointly in four points .
First of all , the successful method of changing the Treaty must be continued : improving Europe step by step , with a view to striking a balance .
As I said earlier , the symbolism of a constitution plays an important role in the ' no ' , and this is why the Netherlands has argued in favour of a change to the treaty , as was the case with Amsterdam and Nice .
This is following in the footsteps of the Monnet method : small steps forward , with concrete meaning .
It turns the spotlight to the improvements , the democratic guarantees and increased decisiveness .
This is how we can have a positive debate , and move forward from under the shadow of the rejected Constitution .
In short : the name , the form , as well as the content that determine the image of a constitution require reconsideration .
Secondly , the Netherlands sets great store by improving the Union 's democratic functioning .
A very important lesson we need to take away from the referendum is that the Dutch want to be certain that they have a say in the decision-making process .
They want their voice heard in Europe .
The institutional proposals of the Constitutional Treaty are a step in the right direction .
The rule that the European Parliament always codecides when the Council takes decisions by majority is a case in point .
Improvements are possible , though .
In the case of the subsidiarity test for European legislative proposals , national parliaments should be accorded a more important role .
If national parliaments pass a negative verdict by majority , this should have consequences .
More involvement of the national parliaments should not be at the expense of the European Parliament .
This test is done in the very first phase of decision-making .
A verdict on subsidiarity is very much something for national parliaments to pass .
The European Parliament retains its full role in the codecision procedure .
The Commission 's right to initiative is infringed upon .
As you , Mr President , told me recently , the European Parliament and the national parliaments complement each other .
Like democratic partners .
This brings me to my third point : in addition to becoming more democratic , Europe must , and indeed can , become more decisive .
I am referring to today 's important topics that concern the public , when I say this : climate change , energy policy , the fight against terrorism and migration require a pro-active , joint approach .
The Constitutional Treaty contains valuable improvements , with more majority decision-making .
We cannot get around the fact , though , that people are reluctant to give up vetoes , and are frightened about a creeping increase in powers .
This is why we must be quite clear .
There is no power without support .
Where necessary , we must , therefore , dare take the step towards majority decision-making .
And I am prepared to stand up for those choices , provided that the transfer of sovereignty is a conscious choice , safeguarded by proper guarantees .
The Union 's powers must be clearly defined .
Only then can we ease the hesitation surrounding the transfer of sovereignty .
The Netherlands will be tabling proposals to this effect .
A particular point that is related to this has also been the subject of intense debate in your Parliament .
I am talking about the relationship between the internal market on the one hand and the freedom of movement on the part of the Member States when shaping their public services on the other .
More clarity can be injected there as well , without taking anything away from the internal market .
I am in favour of a strong internal market , as the citizens of all Member States stand to benefit from it .
In matters such as the pension system , social security and education , however , the Member States seek to tailor these to the national situation .
Europe should allow for this , for example , by laying down a number of criteria for services of general interest .
This brings me to my fourth and final point .
I think it is a good thing that the enlargement criteria are included in the new Treaty .
We have had the collective wisdom to enlarge the Union and I stand four-square behind that decision .
It says something about Europe 's future and the change following the divided Europe dating back to after the Second World War .
Nobody can deny the fact , though , that there is also doubt about the enlargement among the public .
In the Netherlands , there is the perception that the Union does not take its own rules seriously , or not seriously enough .
We may have the criteria , but these are not strictly followed in the eyes of the Dutch people .
As this is something that affects public support for Europe , it is necessary to include the criteria in the new Treaty .
Mr President , honourable Members , Europe has come a long way in 50 years .
Expectations are running high .
Together , we can set the tone when tackling climate change , the fight against poverty and insecurity in the world .
Together , we can use Europe 's economic potential in an ever more integrated world economy .
Together , we must commit to a reliable supply of energy and raw materials .
Together , we must fight the degrading spread of illegal migration , which is why we need a strong and decisive European Union , a Union that enjoys the trust of those who live in it .

In the Netherlands , I will not hesitate to stand up for a treaty that comprises the four elements that I have just outlined - because I believe that the time is right for this , because I have great confidence in the Presidencies of Mrs Merkel and Mr Socrates after her , and because I believe that together we can take the next step , but above all , because this Treaty is needed to face up to today 's challenges together .
I recently came across the words of Robert Schuman , one of our visionary founding fathers , and I was once again struck by how wise and true they were .
In his declaration of 9 May 1950 , he said - and I quote - ' Europe will not be made all at once , or according to a single plan .
It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity ' .
I think that Mr Schuman 's words are as current as ever , and can be guiding in our joint task to develop Europe further .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Mr Balkenende , I would like to thank you for your speech and , most of all , for what we hope is your firm determination that we should , together arrive at a good solution .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , I should like to thank you , Prime Minister Balkenende , for the perspective on Europe that you have given us today , a perspective that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats very much shares .
( Protests )
I see that those who are interrupting me have a very good perspective and that they listened carefully to Mr Prodi yesterday : he was ready to part with the flag , you have brought us yours today ...
This is a very good image and a very good example !
Europe means , of course , a currency , a great market , the opening up of borders and student exchanges , but , above all , Europe is the ideals , principles and values that are the envy of the entire world .
Europe is traditions , a civilisation , but it is also the adaptation to new realities ; it is a certain idea of globalisation , of the reforms aimed at creating a fairer society .
Europe is not about maintaining the status quo ; it is about movement and progress .
Mr Balkenende , you are the Prime Minister of the country that is perhaps most open to the European spirit , I am not afraid to say , a country in which tolerance and solidarity are the driving force of social cohesion .
Seventy-two per cent of your fellow citizens have come out in favour of European integration , when the European average is around 53 % .
However , the people of the Netherlands , like the people of France , rejected the Treaty in 2005 .
This certainly means that , as far as the great majority of them are concerned , Europe is not legitimate enough , not credible enough , and not effective enough .
It certainly means that they regard the actions of the European Union as being too far removed from their everyday lives .
We must learn lessons from these judgments , even if we do not share this opinion , which is often too critical .
I shall not go back over the merits of European integration , as we are very clear about them .
However , we must convince Europeans that our common project is not only beneficial , but also absolutely crucial .
The draft treaty contained most of the answers to our fellow citizens ' questions and dissatisfactions .
We therefore need to take up the best parts of this treaty , namely parts 1 and 2 .
What Europeans are expecting from us is a better life , is Europe affirming its values in the world , as it has just done in Moscow , and as it must do more in the Middle East , and in Darfur .
By putting ourselves in a position to make decisions , both democratic and effective ones , we are satisfying Europeans because we will be able to tackle the real fundamental problems .
Let us cure Europe of its paralysis , let us provide ourselves with the resources for our political ambitions : the sooner the better , and the 2009 European elections is the most opportune time .
Let us work relentlessly along these lines .
Prime Minister , you have had the courage to carry out ambitious , long-term reforms in your country .
You have not given in to the easiest options or to demagogy , and the results are there to see .
You have carried out these reforms by respecting values , solidarity , open-mindedness and responsibility .
That is the path that my group calls on Europe , as a whole , to take .
You mentioned the role of the national parliaments and the need for a clearer division of responsibilities between the Member States and the European Union .
On that point , too , we can only support you .
If the national elected representatives of our countries do not take hold of European affairs - which no longer come under foreign affairs , but national affairs - if our national fellow Members do not seize the European dimension of our major issues , then the road will be even longer and more difficult .
Who does what ?
Who is responsible for which policy ?
The citizens want to know !
Such clarification will prevent the ministers from putting the blame on Brussels , and we will deprive ourselves of an overly facile national alibi .
You also raised the issue of European enlargement , Mr Balkenende .
On this point , too , we must be clear .
Europe can no longer let in new members until it has resolved its internal problems .
Ladies and gentlemen , our immediate priority , and that of our governments , must be to reach an agreement among the 27 , as quickly as possible , on the institutions .
Mrs Merkel has created the necessary dynamic and , in spite of the dramatic gestures , both sides ' positions are coming into line with each other .
Let us seize this opportunity and let us reach an agreement among the 27 on the key issues , namely Europeans ' rights and the decision-making process .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I shall begin by commenting on something we have just heard .
You said , Prime Minister , that your government is in favour of a legal framework for services .
Thank you very much for that ; now perhaps you can say that to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to whom you have close links , who , this morning , rejected that very idea .
I would like , Prime Minister , to refer to two of the observations you made , and which I see as the most important things you said in your speech .
' I hope that we can concentrate on what unites us and not on what divides us . '
That was an encouraging thing to say .
Until then , we had been under the impression that the Netherlands was focusing on what divides us rather than on what unites us .
If that is meant to be an announcement to the effect that you and your government are willing to make compromises rather than insisting that the Dutch ' no ' must result in fundamental change in Europe , if it is meant to mean that the Dutch ' no ' means that the Constitution will not enter into force in its present form , but instead in some other , with some other comprehensive reform that will make the European Union more efficient , and that you , to that end , are prepared to make compromises and then defend them at home , then that , Mr Balkenende , was a good speech .
( Applause )
By it , then , we will judge you , for I was in Rome , where we met , and where I saw you sign the Constitution with a golden pen .
As you know , I keep a watchful eye on Dutch domestic politics .
Compared with the other battles you have had to endure in the Netherlands , the battle for the constitution was - if I may put it that way - a rather restrained one .
Nobody will regret it if you land more punches in future .
Europe must learn to land more punches , but it will not do that on the basis on Nice or of ' Nice minus ' ; that will not make Europe a better fighter , but rather less able to take the action that needs to be taken in such situations as that in the Middle East , where , it is worth remembering , 13 000 European troops are stationed on the border between Lebanon and Israel in pursuance of the UNIFIL mandate , and I ask you also to think of the Gaza Strip in Palestine , where we are in the thick of the chaos , and where the place is getting like Somalia .

Why is Europe not represented there by a foreign minister who could get something done ?
It is because of the unanimity rule in the Council , which is preventing Europe from taking action .

( Applause )
I have nothing against Calvinistic self-denial .
I gather that you want no more flags , no anthem , and no foreign minister .
Good : Beethoven 's symphonies have survived revolutions and wars ; they will outlive the European Constitution too .
( Applause )
( NL ) As the President of our Parliament introduced this debate in Dutch , I , too , Prime Minister , should like speak a few words in it .
If , in future , the Foreign Affairs Minister is called the High Representative of Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands , then I have no problem with that , provided that he does his job .
( DE ) What is crucial is not what he is called , but rather what he is meant to do .
( Applause )
I am a great admirer of the Dutch people ; the Netherlands is a wonderful country with a great tradition , a country with a tradition of seafaring , and seafarers have always been courageous people .
It was Dutch people who first sailed round Cape Horn and gave it its name .
I , for one , get the feeling that they have today embarked on a ship and set the sails .
Mr Goebbels has already pulled the flag down to half mast .
I am less sceptical ; I get the impression that you , today , have hoisted the flag halfway up again , so I urge you to hoist it all the way up , and I can promise you that this House will put wind in your sails , so that then , Mr Balkenende , you will be sailing towards a compromise .


Yesterday saw Mr Prodi expressing his own willingness to compromise ; he is completely in favour of the Constitution .
If you want half a constitution and you and he can meet one another halfway , we will end up with three-quarters of it , and a 75 % constitution would be the Constitution without the anthem , without the flag and with a foreign minister called by another title .
It would be a good result .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , yesterday , in this Chamber , one of Europe 's great champions sketched his vision of a Union fit for the 21st century - a Union that is democratic , transparent and , above all , effective .
However , crossing that Rubicon requires firm leadership , Mr Balkenende .
The German Presidency has shown its strength by uniting Member States under the banner of the Berlin Declaration .
It must pull them together again in the weeks before the European Council and the Intergovernmental Conference which follows if we are to win the war of public opinion and unite around a revised Treaty .
The stakes are high .
Your Foreign Minister , Mr Verhagen , said : ' In today 's globalised world people are afraid of losing their jobs , their social security , their quality of life ' .
Yet that is not an argument for less Europe , indeed , it may well be an argument for more Europe .
( Applause )
Europe cannot secure its energy supply , combat climate change or tackle terrorism with a retreat into unilateralism .
You , of all people , should know that , Mr Balkenende .
For history teaches us that the Netherlands ' golden years - as the wealthiest nation in the 17th-century world - came from uniting the seven provinces , not dividing them .
You must convince your citizens that unity and prosperity are inseparable ; that inability to make progress on political integration means Europe will lose its place as a global standard-setter and end up at the mercy of powers like Russia with its belligerent energy policy .
To take key decisions on jobs , security and quality of life , the Union needs an end to unscrupulous use of national vetoes .
To address the democratic deficit , it needs greater democratic accountability .
To maintain its international prestige and internal effectiveness , its institutions must change with the times .
None of this is possible without the substance of what was agreed in the European Convention , and that substance must be maintained , whatever cosmetic surgery you try to effect on the surface .
We are not just talking about ideology here : we are talking about people 's jobs , their quality of life and their long-term prospects .
It is time that you , and others like you , retook the initiative and brought Europe back to their people .
Nobody here is seeking a European superstate - diversity of customs , history and language will ensure that .
However , we are seeking a European ' superpeople ' , a united people .
Too often our heads of government have taken the advice of the English Conservative Prime Minister Arthur Bonar Law when he exclaimed : ' I must follow them ; I am their leader ' .
But populism cannot move Europe forward , nor cement our quality of life , international influence or economic strength - only solidarity can do that .
When concerns over the so-called symbols of a superstate - like flags or anthems -supersede debate on real issues , then it is time for a change of strategy .
( Applause )
Your public demands energy security ; it demands a European environment policy ; it demands common action on migration .
From the new Treaty , they will get it , for the tools are already in the text .
So sell that to your people , instead of sidestepping the issues .
Stop letting the tail wag the dog , and lead the Netherlands back to the heart of European decision-making , as befits the founder status of your country in our Union .
In conclusion , Prime Minister , I would say , do as your countryman Justus Lipsius advised : be stoical in adversity , embrace necessity and be constant in your faith in Europe .
For your people 's peace , prosperity and security depend upon it .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his presentation today .
I was struck by the ideals of compromise and consensus contained within his speech .
Particularly when we look forward to Europe 's future , it is a Europe that has to be based on consensus , because , as Mr Daul said earlier on , if Europe means anything , Europe means equality .
Europe means equality between nations , between peoples , between cultures .
Europe means equality between all people within the European Union .
That means that you cannot drive a coach-and-four and force everybody down the same path .
It makes it more difficult to find agreement , yes , but it is still the best way of finding agreement .
What we heard yesterday from Mr Prodi was not the new way forward , it was a threat : a threat that we will create a two-speed Europe for those who are with us and those who are against us , words more reminiscent of George W. Bush than of a European statesman .
I am convinced that the future development of European policy and European ideals will not come from telling people to look at the great opportunities they have lost , to look at the things that they have thrown away .
It will come by us convincing people that this is the best way forward , that this is the best path to follow .
Many here have mentioned issues such as climate change , pension security , energy security and others .
Yes , Europe can play a role and Europe can do things that are positive .
Likewise , with regard to immigration and our own internal security , we can do things in a cooperative and consensual way that can achieve good .
We have already done that , but there are still things that are best left to Member States , things that require unanimous agreement in the Council , not qualified majority all of the time .
I think it is wrong , and I use this opportunity to point this out again .
Commissioner Kovcs and others are coming forward with proposals for harmonisation of taxes that they do not have the power to implement under the present Treaties and which the new Treaty would not give them the power to implement , and yet they continue to do it .
Why ?
Because it is ideologically driven .
It is a political move and one that is driving people further and further away .
If officialdom can ignore the rules , why should we not ignore them too ?
George Bernard Shaw once said that some men see things as they are , and wonder , ' Why ? ' .
We should dream things as they should be , and say , ' Why not ? ' .
Consensus , compromise , cooperation - yes , that is the way forward , but most importantly of all , we must convince the people that it is the right way forward .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my group would also like to extend a warm welcome to Prime Minister Balkenende and thank him for accepting the invitation .
In the Netherlands , the new Cabinet has just spent 100 days talking with the public , but it was 500 days ago that we last heard anything said about Europe .
Just as well that this came to an end .
The question is , of course , whether people have actually been listened to .
You seem to have been shopping selectively .
With regard to your interpretation of the ' no ' , you only mention those objections to the Constitution that lead to a less ambitious Treaty , in other words , to fewer changes .
This is a very bizarre way of thinking .
Do you really believe that people have voted against the European Treaty because they are so satisfied with the current European Union ?
Do you also think that the flag and the national anthem really are the biggest problem ?
According to 80 % , not least of the ' no ' voters in the Netherlands , the negotiations should be seized as an opportunity to carry out more thorough reforms and to continue the democratisation process in Europe .
Sixty-eight percent of the people also want a real European foreign and security policy .
There is no mention of this more far-reaching democratic ambition anywhere in your proposals , though .
You also want to scrap the Foreign Affairs Minister .
You only want less , and you present this as an inevitable development .
This situation is comparable to that of an unsatisfied customer who goes back to the bicycle shop and says ' fine , you can swap the bike , but only for a scooter ' .
I will not settle for a scooter , though ; all I want is a better bike .
One with brakes , that would do .
After all , not all decisions should be taken in Brussels , and it is a good thing to demarcate national and European powers better .
Brakes only make sense , though , if there are pedals .
You claim that people want more control , but this seems to be in conflict with your commitment to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
You did not make reference to it on this occasion , but I have a hard copy somewhere of the debate in the Dutch national parliament , when you said : ' In the case of the Treaty being changed without any constitutional pretensions , the text of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights should not need to be included in its entirety ' .
Surely this is a bizarre interpretation of the ' no ' !
There will not be many people who have voted against the constitution because this would have entitled them to more rights .
( Applause )
Unlike the ECHR , the European Charter of Fundamental Rights also contains social fundamental rights , which can put up a barrier against anti-social interventions from Brussels in the welfare state .
Now that would be a brake that I would think worth having on my bicycle .
Finally , your real reason to remove the flag , the constitution , the Charter of fundamental rights and the anthems , is purely domestic .
If the Treaty no longer shows any signs of a constitution , then you will be able to avoid a referendum in the Netherlands .
We might be able to agree to disagree then .
My party is quite happy to abandon the idea of a national referendum if you fear that in future , you will end up feeling isolated again .
Perhaps we might get a European referendum instead , though , in which case you would not be isolated , but would instead , be doing what twenty-first century democracy requires of you .
I would welcome your comments on this .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , yesterday , the Italian Prime Minister , Mr Prodi , urged the Members of this Parliament to defend in their countries the old draft for a European Constitution and said that this draft already contains so many compromises that it is virtually impossible that there should be any more of them .
This sort of talk goes down well here , for this is a place where democracy is mainly seen on a large scale and from up above .
It has transpired that this can really clash with a small-scale democracy from the bottom up , in which many more people feel involved .
In 2005 , the parliaments of the Member States were in favour of this constitution by large majorities .
In the Netherlands , this figure was even as high as 85 % , and in the Netherlands , unlike in France , where only the president decides on such things , it is parliament that decides on the subject of a referendum .
The referendum was held at the proposal of three parties that were in favour of the constitution and that really believed that the voters thought the same way .
Despite a high turn-out , 62 % voted ' no ' .
It is highly likely that a majority of the voters in Belgium , Germany , the United Kingdom , Sweden and Denmark would have equally said ' no ' had they been given the opportunity .
Today , the Dutch Prime Minister Mr Balkenende is struggling more than his Italian counterpart did yesterday .
Earlier this year , the following agreement was reached in the government agreement on behalf of his coalition and at the behest of the voters - and I quote ' attempts are being made to change , and possibly combine , the existing EU treaties in which subsidiarity and democratic control are safeguarded and in which content , size and title are significantly different from the previously rejected Constitutional Treaty ' .
The Dutch Government was right to point out that in the European Union , the national parliaments must be given more voting power and that national decisions on public services should not be distorted .
This is different from the constitutional text that calls for an ever more far-reaching liberalisation of services and free , unadulterated competition .
This Parliament , which backed my proposal on 10 May to give the Member States , their regions and their municipalities more freedom in the way in which they organise their public transport should recognise the value of this .
I would say the following to Prime Minister Balkenende and his government .
If you receive insufficient support in this Parliament today , this does not mean that you are cut off from Europe .
You have the difficult task of realising your government agreement .
There is no reason why you should let others who still hold onto the old constitutional project dictate to you .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , as a Dutch MEP , I am particularly delighted to see you visiting us here .
In this House , since the ' no ' to the European Constitution in our country , we have talked too much about the Netherlands instead of with the Netherlands .
Let it be clear that I largely share the Dutch Government 's view , yet , even so , I should like to make a few recommendations leading up to the European Council of 21 and 22 June .
First of all , I appreciate your efforts in respect of the Constitution 's aspirations to do such things as introduce the position of a permanent president ; such a person would soon develop into a European President , and so I would propose a rota system for three presidencies , each lasting one and a half years , made up of one large , one medium-sized and one small Member State .

This will avoid the unnecessary concentration of power surrounding one permanent president , and all Member States will retain the prospect of a place in the presidency on an equal basis .
Prime Minister , I support your wish to include the Copenhagen criteria in the new Treaty .
It is , however , just as necessary , in this new Treaty , to define once and for all the borders of the European Union , for this is something to which the European Union 's citizens , and its neighbours , are entitled .
I am specifically thinking of offering countries like Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus a prospect of EU membership in the long-term , this in combination with a powerful neighbourhood policy in order to help these countries overcome structural problems .
I noticed there was some hesitation when you tabled your proposal to give national parliaments the power to veto legislative proposals from the Commission .
I think it is better to give the European Parliament the power to refuse a proposal from the Commission , in which respect national parliaments can make their concerns known to the European Parliament .
This route strikes me as purer institutionally and at the same time , it strengthens interparliamentary cooperation between the EP and national parliaments .
Prime Minister , I should like to hear your thoughts on the points I made .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , the Dutch electorate rejected the European constitution by a large margin .
I can only hope that your government will continue to strive for a new Treaty rather than a constitution .
I also hope that the voters will be given the opportunity to speak out on this , not only in the Netherlands , but in all Member States .
This debate is not only about the institutional issue , though .
It is about the future of Europe , thus including the fundamental question about the EU 's borders , the question as to whether a non-European country such as Turkey could join .
When you took over the EU presidency in 2004 and came to the European Parliament for the first time , you said that you would make sure that Turkey met all the Copenhagen criteria .
Can you , Prime Minister , three years down the line , declare , hand on heart , that you have kept that promise ?
The Turkish-Armenian publisher Hrant Dink was murdered after he was condemned by the Turkish courts as a criminal .
Orhan Pamuk , a winner of the Nobel Prize for literature , fled the country after he , too , received threats .
In Turkish criminal law , it is a crime to insult what is termed ' Turkish identity ' .
Freedom to express opinions is therefore absent .
I am not even talking about the murder of three Christian publishers and a Catholic priest .
I could also mention the fact that Turkey still refuses to recognise one of the EU 's Member States or fulfil its duty to open up its ports and airports .
Moreover , the trial of strength that is going on between the Islamists on the one hand and those in favour of the secular state on the other , should cause concern in Europe , but the European Union persists with the negotiations as if nothing was wrong .
They completely ignore the large majority of the people who are against the accession .
And whether they like it or not , this arrogance and this detachment from the world are the biggest threat to the EU 's continued existence .
( Applause )
- Mr President , one has to ask how much energy has now been wasted on chasing the moonbeam of an EU Constitution .
In the rarefied atmosphere of this House , an EU Constitution may seem important , but frankly , most of our citizens have moved on and care more about things like good education , a good health service and rising house prices - things a constitution will not change .
Part of the reason that the EU institutions are stuck in this rut is because of the refusal to take a democratic ' no ' for an answer .
These debates are dominated by siren demands for what is unobtainable and with demands for stratagems to avoid letting the citizens have their say .
Hence the ploys of a change of title , a slimmed-down text and a total aversion to referenda .
But rejig it as you might , that which imposes the apparatus of statehood on the EU , with a president and a foreign minister , and that which further savages national sovereignty by promoting even more qualified majority voting , is the same old tired , tarnished product that has already been rejected , and upon which citizens must have their say .
Desperate as my own government is to welsh on the pledge of a referendum in the United Kingdom , I say the people of each nation-state have a right to have their say .
Only those lacking in confidence in their own case or with a knavish design to thwart public opinion run away from letting the people decide .
Prime Minister , you were brought here today - as I am sure you realise - so that the Euro-fanatics of this House could try to pressurise you to depart from the democratic decision made in your own country .
I trust you will not be so foolish as to allow that to happen .
Mr President , I am very much obliged to those Members of Parliament who have spoken for their inspiring contributions .
What I sense in this House - and I would not have expected it to be any other way - is an atmosphere of inspiration , one in which the European ideals are considered in the context of the Europe of the 21st century .

This is why I was so moved by what Mr Daul said - and this may well be what matters more than anything - about the values that have made Europe what it is today , the values which Europe stands for and the values for which we shoulder responsibility worldwide : peace , security , democracy , human rights and solidarity .
These have made Europe strong , and that is what we need at the moment .
This is perhaps where I should like pick up on what Mr Schulz said earlier .
( DE ) It really is very good that we should meet again ; I well remember our previous meetings .
It was really great to discuss things with you , it is so still today , and for that I am very grateful .
( NL ) He spoke about the international aspects , the foreign aspects of the European Union , and I can do no other than endorse what he said .
We live in a world in which changes are on the way - in China , India and the United States .
We see changes in the areas of security , the fight against terrorism , the climate issue and energy .
Europe can do better , work more effectively and speak more with one voice in all these areas .
Discussion of what the High Representative is to be called can wait until later , but what is important is the content and the message of the values Mr Daul mentioned .
Let us propagate these , and let us do it together .
These are issues that say something about our ideals involving the Europe of the future , not only here and on our own continent , but worldwide .
Mr Daul made a plea for this , which strikes me as appropriate and necessary .
This brings me to the point Mr Watson made , namely that of energy .
I should like to repeat what he said in this connection : we cannot do without one another .
If Europe does not speak with one voice , we will face big problems .
Energy is not just a matter of its presence , energy is also related to stability .
Stability involving the supply of energy has an economic , social and ecological dimension .
We need each other on this level too .
Listening carefully to what Mr Watson said , which is what I did , I can see a connection between the European ideals , the way in which Europe presents itself to the outside world , foreign policy , and the way in which it tackles specific issues which we advocate , such as the energy issue to which he referred .
If you think about this long and hard , then Europe faces a huge task .
I liked the comparison that Mr Watson drew with the Netherlands of the 17th century , the Golden Century .
An era in which the Netherlands did extremely well worldwide .
Did all of this come out of nothing ?
No , it did not .
In order to achieve this , we had to take action .
We needed to sail the seven seas and have a sound administrative structure in place .
Did this happen overnight ?
No , indeed not ; it took time .
What we did have , though , is determination in terms of wanting to achieve certain things together .
If this is what you refer to , then you have touched a soft spot in me , because it brings up the question : how do we give shape to the Europe of the 21st century ?
How can we ensure that Europe can perform in the areas of economy , energy and global relations ?
The key question today is : are the existing relations adequate ?
No , they are not .
The Treaty of Nice is not enough to meet the requirements of the 21st century .
( Applause )
This , of course , begs the question : what is the best way ?
Then you face the problem that we in Europe have Member States that have approved the constitution , those that have said ' no ' and countries that have not yet taken a decision .
This is the reality .
The last few years - the time of reflection - have not been in vain .
I think that we have given answers to the citizens .
We have said , let us work on the concrete projects in Europe .
Make it clear to the people how important Europe is , so that Europe can return to people 's minds and hearts .
We have spoken about the process of enlargement .
Let us turn this into a credible project .
Let us carefully consider the criteria that have already been tightened up .
That too is a question of the European project being credible .
We have said , let us tackle those topics that are so critical to the people in Europe .
Namely energy and the climate .
This is also why , together with Tony Blair , I have written a letter to my colleagues to say that we want the topics of climate and energy high on the European agenda .
They are also matters of concern to you .
We cannot do without one another .
Let Europe prove what it can do .
That is when the period of reflection will come into its own .
It should not be the case though , and I would like to make this quite clear , that at the end of the period of reflection , we end up with a climate in which one group is pitted against the other , in which the group of the 18 ratifying countries is pitted against those that said ' no ' .
If we were to do this , then we will not resolve the situation .
It is my sincere conviction that it is possible to find solutions .
Let us do this in a way with which we can all identify .
This is , as I see it , the method of constitutional amendment , as we have done before , a viable route , because it is possible to embrace the sound elements from the Constitutional Treaty .
Because those elements of an institutional compromise should play a key role .
Because we cannot leave things the way they are .
Needless to say , we have to look at the various sections .
Mrs Buitenweg made a comment on the Charter of fundamental rights , which is very sensitive here , and I can see why .
If you talk about the Charter , then you can join our camp , because we are equally persuaded of the importance of fundamental rights .
Except , what do we see ?
The question is whether all of this should be included in such a Constitution , or if it would be possible to refer to it using different means .
This is the point .
So let us discuss the significance of fundamental rights , whilst considering the limitations of a Constitution .
This is a debate that I should like to enter into with you .
It is my sincere conviction that we must make haste .
My dream and ideal is that in June , we will be able to say that we will draw up a well-defined time table to resolve the issues .
We would like to resolve them within a few years , and that is possible only if we join forces .
I have made suggestions to this effect in my presentation .
I argued against a Constitution , but in favour of an amending treaty instead , taking into account the role of the national parliaments without impinging on the role of the European Parliament , because your role is indispensable in Europe .
I have mentioned these elements , and we must be able to act in unison , to consider what unites us rather than what divides us ; that is where Mr Schulz is quite right , and we have to want to strike compromises .

This applies to us all .
If we manage to pull it off , then we can make progress ; that is my plan .
I am also doing this with the feeling and conviction that we must make sure we only talk about a ' no ' of two countries , because feelings among citizens and concerns are a reality .
We must answer the questions that are around today .
If we do this from a position that we want to find a common solution , draw short-term conclusions , check what is needed for this , and I have made a contribution to this , then it is possible to find solutions .
Indeed , what is unacceptable in a time of further globalisation , of social issues , is that we would be unable to find answers , because the division that was would simply carry on .
I think we owe it to the founding fathers of the European Union , Adenauer , Schuman , de Gasperi , Monnet and all the others , to hold steadfast to the ideals , and , as Mr Daul said , to keep the value of Europe , the European dream in mind at all times - not to overlook public concerns , but do what has to be done .
If we draw these conclusions in June , then we will have achieved a great deal .
For this , we need each other , and I also think that we owe it to the ideals that we seek to achieve .
Mr President , I was inspired by what you said .
I will take your words to the Netherlands , and then we shall all have the task of finding solutions quickly , taking into consideration each other 's positions , but always considering what we need to keep at the forefront of our minds , namely working on a European dream in the 21st century .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , I should first of all like to thank you for coming to Strasbourg .
The drafting of a new Treaty is in the interests of all of us .
Now that France and the Netherlands have voted against the draft Constitution , we need , as has already been said , to look for another document , one with which all 27 countries can identify .
It goes without saying that the Netherlands has a particular responsibility for making a huge effort in this respect .
This is why it is useful that you have reminded us of the sensitivities surrounding this issue in the Netherlands , and that you have indicated the direction from which solutions are expected to arrive there .
Whilst the Netherlands is one of Europe 's co-founders and it is still pro-Europe , as is evident from any study , it does not want too much of Europe ; it does not want Europe as a super state , or a constitutional set-up .


The Netherlands likes to see things progress step by step , with due respect for subsidiarity of the Member States , a Europe that is more democratic and more decisive , and can therefore take majority decisions in more areas , and would like to see the enlargement criteria included in the Treaty .

It is also important to be reminded of the sensitivities and requirements of the other Member States .
After all , 18 countries have already spoken out in favour of the draft document and value the progress that could have been made by means of the text that was available at the time .
What matters now , is that we all come up with a fresh treaty document in a short space of time , which is in the interest of us all .
I was reminded of Paul-Henri Spaak 's words ; he said : ' Europe still consists solely of small countries .
The only relevant distinction that remains is that some countries understand this , while others still refuse to acknowledge it . '
He said that in the 1950s .
If this was the case back then , how much more relevant is it now , at a time of globalisation and internationalisation and with huge international issues , for example in the areas of immigration , energy , the environment and the fight against terrorism ?
You described Europe as a rare and successful project .
Indeed , it benefits the countries and the people .
What we could do better together , we should .
Anything that can be better regulated at national level should continue to be done at national level .
The discussion is therefore not whether we are for or against Europe , it is about how we , in the short term , and involving all 27 Member States , can put the firmest possible foundation in place for a decisive , transparent Europe .
The newspaper headlines read : Europe high on Prime Minister 's agenda .
Congratulations on your level of commitment in this matter , both at home and in Europe .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , I bid Prime Minister Balkenende welcome to the European Parliament .
Just as , of course , the ' no ' in the Netherlands was relatively firm , no less so , too , was the ' yes ' from the European Parliament .
I should like to give you credit for the fact that in your contribution and also in your responses , you tried to venture beyond the ' yes ' and ' no ' to see how we could come up with a Treaty .
Not a Treaty of a kind that , I agree with you , has been stripped naked , but a Treaty that gives answers to a number of key issues that we are facing .
Sometimes , this means that more is needed than what was set down in the original constitution , sometimes less or different .
I should like to try to move this debate to the next level with a number of very specific questions .
You said that you support the idea of criteria being put in place for services of general interest , so that countries will be able to regulate their own public housing , health care or other areas more .
Are you prepared , via a protocol or in the Treaty , to include a basis for this of some kind , so that a legal basis of some kind is in place ?
Secondly , you said something about the Charter .
If I understand correctly , you say you and your colleagues in the Dutch Government agree with the content of the Charter , and would like to see it become binding , but it need not be included in its entirety , as long as there is a document in the new Treaty that safeguards this binding character .
What I would like to know is whether you have a formula that can make this happen , for , if you do , I share your way of thinking .
Thirdly , subsidiarity .
Your plea in the field of subsidiarity is to create more room , to keep at a local level what can be done at a local level .
Do you have a formula to tighten up subsidiarity , and if so , what is it , compared to the formula included in the draft Constitution ?
Are you prepared , in this connection , to give the regions more room to experiment ?
Fourthly , you stated that you would like to abolish a host of vetoes , which will give us in this House an undoubted right of codecision , although that is not what we want in certain areas .
Are you mainly referring to criminal law ?
Perhaps you would not mind clarifying again what your formula would be in that respect .
You also said that ' Foreign Affairs Minister ' is not the title we use .
So what are we supposed to call him ?
Finally , if the Netherlands opts for a Treaty , and a sound one at that , then I hope that the Prime Minister will blaze a trail in his own country , along with leaders of the other coalition parties , to inform the Dutch people and also get them onboard in good time , so that a real debate can underpin positive support for Europe .
( Applause )
Mr President , Prime Minister , three elements puzzled and concerned me in your speech .
Firstly , your determination to keep the three-pillar structure will contribute neither to simplifying nor to making more transparent the system of the Union , nor will it strengthen the capacity of the Union to act effectively .
Secondly , I was quite unable to understand what you were saying on the issue of clarifying competences and the transfer of sovereignty .
As we all know , sovereignty cannot be transferred and competences cannot be conferred without the full agreement of 27 Member States .
Thirdly , your demand that national parliaments should be able to block the Union 's legislative process seems to me to be a severe assault not only upon the right of initiative of the Commission , but also upon the legislative prerogatives of the Council and Parliament .
The setting-up of an effective third legislative chamber would be quite the opposite of simplifying , it would be an abuse of the principle of the separation of powers and it would certainly confuse the public .
I would be grateful for a single example of where the Tweede Kamer [ the Dutch House of Representatives ] so far could have raised a complaint about a draft proposal breaching the principle of subsidiarity .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr Prime Minister , Mr President .
The future of Europe is safe .
The development opportunities of the new countries , accelerated economic growth in old Europe , and ultimately emancipation in international relations are just some examples of the success of integration .
The European Union works .
That is why I warn against the hysterical cries of a European Union crisis coming as a result of the problems of the reform of the treaty .
The ' constitutional treaty or death ' approach propounded by Romano Prodi yesterday is a serious mistake , and will bring nothing but tension .
But even the supporters of this inflexible position are jointly responsible for slowing down negotiations today .
Dressing up the old treaty in new clothes , or separating it into smaller chunks is a rather cheap ploy .
I am confident that as the prime minister of a country that rejected the old constitutional treaty , you will be more pragmatic on matters of substantive amendments to the new draft treaty .
I listened to your speech with Jan Zahradil , the Czech negotiator .
I would therefore like to say that pragmatism is expected from you not just in Poland , but also in the Czech Republic .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , on the television a few days ago , a young Dutchman said , on being asked about the European Constitution , ' What do we need a Constitution for ?
This is an economic area . '
I found myself wondering how it is possible for a young man in the Netherlands today , in a country that was a founding member of the European Community , was one of the first to embrace the idea of creating a politically united Europe , and had undertaken to overcome nationalism - how it is possible for such a young man not to know that this is a political union ?
To that question , you have today provided me with the answer ; a government that seeks to remove a symbol , to remove a flag , seeks to do away with an idea , to hide it away , to make it disappear .
Take away the rhetorical flourishes and polite formularies , and your speech today is an ice-cold , nationalist , declaration of war on the idea that that flag symbolises .

Let us consider the various points in it , the primacy of European law , for one .
It appears to me from the utterances of your foreign minister that the primacy of European law is no longer to feature in the Treaty , although , at the same time , he does emphasise that the primacy of European law is not to be tampered with , which means that he and you are deceiving your own people and lying to them by not having the Treaty state what the actual nature of this Union is .
You are trying to conceal it , for the primacy of European law will remain intact , and well you know it .
You want to go back to regulations rather than laws , but I ask you , Prime Minister , what does that title signify ?
Law has nothing to do with the nation state ; republics have had laws , and laws have been in existence for as long as human beings have .
It is laws that , when enacted through parliaments , serve as a guarantee to the citizen of democratic legitimacy .
Prime Minister , having listened to your demands and understood your thinking , I was grateful that you were , firstly , willing to talk to us , and , secondly , did not also want to do away with this House or rename it , for this House embodies supranational democracy in the shape of the federal and political Europe ; by its very existence it assures people that they are living as citizens of a political community rather than in an economic organisation or an association of states .

A constitution has nothing to do with being a nation state ; it is the basic law of a political community .
Not least in the Treaty that we will soon have , there are such things as European citizens , and European citizenship is a real thing ; we are here in the parliament of a supranational democracy and of a European citizenry .
If you take the Charter out of the Treaty , while making it explicitly binding in law , what are you thereby doing ?
You are engaging in the same old deception , hiding it away from the people , while leaving it effective in law , which means that you accept the reality of Europe where you have to , while nevertheless denying it .
I have to tell you , Prime Minister , that neither the twenty-first century , nor Europe itself , are going to be won over by a lie .
( Applause )
Mr Voggenhuber , whatever sympathy one might have with your remarks , you ought to be rather more cautious about using words like ' nationalism ' and ' lie ' .


( DE ) Mr President , your government , Mr Prime Minister , wants the European Constitution to dispense with the symbols of the European Union , with Article I-8 being deleted on the supposed grounds that the blue flag with the twelve golden stars and Beethoven 's ' Ode to Joy ' are expressions of an identity as a state .
Is that meant to mean , Mr Prime Minister , that any and every local association may adopt a banner and make it binding under its own articles , but that the EU , with its 500 million people , may not ?
I hope you will not mind me saying this , but that sort of thinking is both prehistoric and idiotic .
European integration is an historic project like no other ; it is not a state , let alone a superstate , and so it is not least for that reason that it is astonishing that such a dubious idea should originate from a founding member of the Community .
Let me tell you that those who deny the validity , 50 years on from the signing of the Treaties of Rome , of the universally recognised and familiar symbols of the EU are - symbolically , adding grist to the mills of those who , questioning European integration as such , wish to turn their backs on it and return to their own identities as nation states .
Surely it is not to be denied that the anthem and the flag bind our states and peoples together ; it is because they foster an identity that they need official recognition .
So , Mr Prime Minister , please do not take the people of Europe for a ride , not even those in your own country who voted ' no ' , for they , together with the people of my own country and in others , do not want a dispute about banners ; what they want is a social and democratic Europe .


They want an answer to the question as to whether the EU exists to protect people or markets ; they want something done about dumping - wage dumping , social dumping and tax dumping , and that is what you should be picking up on , for that is where forward-looking solutions are wanted , so stop shadow-boxing with the symbols of European integration .
( Applause )
( DA ) Mr President , Prime Minister , you can be proud of the Dutch people .
Sixty-two per cent of them voted ' no ' - contrary to the advice of the majority of politicians .
You are now , however , being put under pressure by Germany , where at least 70 % of people would vote against the Constitution if they were allowed to vote on it .
That is , of course , a statement that the Germans are welcome to disprove .
As an itinerant critic of the Constitution , however , I have not been in any country with more opposition to it .
People want less interference by the EU and they want the proximity principle genuinely to be applied .
Even the former German President , Roman Herzog , now warns against over-centralisation and the dismantling of democracy .
Eighty-four per cent of German laws come from Brussels .
In Brussels there is , emphatically , no democracy .
Mr Herzog says that it is doubtful whether the Federal Republic can be called a parliamentary democracy .
It is that Germany that is now threatening its French and Dutch neighbours and saying : your people were mistaken ; you should dress the Constitution up in new clothes and abolish referendums .
Why do you accept that , Mr Balkenende ?
Why do you not insist that Germany too consult its electorate before making war on the voters in neighbouring countries ?
The Dutch negotiators now want the Constitution to be presented a second time - ' presented ' being the operative word - so that a referendum can be avoided .
However , you are not proposing any real and substantial changes to the rejected text , and two years have now gone by without the approval of 80 % of the Member States yet being obtained .
The Constitution is legally dead .
We should start afresh with new negotiations and a referendum throughout the EU .
It will then be possible to discuss matters with the German Government .
( DE ) Mr President , like millions of people the length and breadth of Europe , I am astonished by the creativity with which repeated attempts are made to resuscitate the EU constitution , which was formerly believed to be - and indeed pronounced to be - dead .
In order to secure Brussels a licence to satisfy its evidently insatiable need for more powers , the spectre is conjured up of a European Union that is impotent and increasingly insignificant , but I do not believe that the object and point of the European Union , or indeed of European integration , can be to constantly undermine the Member States ' scope for sovereign decision-making .
Cooperation between governments is surely no less indispensable than the unanimity principle in the core areas of national sovereignty , particularly in foreign , security and defence policy .
Our people have no need of an EU constitution negotiated secretively in backrooms , endowed with a revised dustjacket and small cosmetic adjustments , ratified by an aloof EU elite and sold as a new product .
I do not expect the public , across Europe , to fall for that sort of trick with a change of labels .
What we have to do is to abandon any new EU constitution in favour of a foundational treaty on the cooperation , as equals , of states and peoples secure in their own identities , relying , I believe , on the principle of maximising strength in our dealings with the outside world and freedom at home , as well as laying down a demarcation of powers between the European Union and the Member States that is not susceptible to misinterpretation .
In all these areas , it will be necessary to let people have their say through the holding of referendums , for there is no doubting the need for weighty conventions such as this sort of foundational treaty to be made subject to a referendum by the people of the EU in the various Member States .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the Prime Minister and congratulate him on his election success earlier this year .
As he said , the June Summit will be an important one , and we know that the German Presidency is keen to reach an outline agreement then .
Agreement will not be easy .
The stated positions of the Member States continue to vary quite substantially and in these circumstances I believe it would be counterproductive to try to force through the wrong sort of agreement in Brussels .
You said recently at your bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister that any new amending treaty should not have the characteristics of a constitution .
I wholeheartedly agree with this view and I believe that this is the view of many millions of people across our continent .
You also said that you were keen to see the role of national parliaments strengthened .
I strongly agree with this view too and I hope you will pursue this at the Summit .
I believe that our citizens need to have assurances that their national parliaments will also play a greater role in scrutinising draft European legislation .
There remains a tangible disconnection between the European institutions and the people at this time .
I have often said that I am not hostile to the idea of some solution that would improve the workings of the institutions in dealing with enlargement and which address the alienation people feel about the institutions themselves .
However , I do not believe this solution is a constitution .
We should not be seeking greater powers for the centre . Instead , we should be concentrating on policy delivery .
As you have said , and my party leader David Cameron has also said , there is an urgent need for a greater emphasis on making Europe more competitive , tackling global poverty and dealing with the serious issues of climate change .
These issues are what people want us to tackle and Member States can do much more to cooperate in these fields .
I therefore urge the Prime Minister and his fellow heads of government not to get bogged down in institutional and constitutional debate in Brussels .
Instead , let us begin responding to what people are asking us to do : reforming our economies , tackling global warming and alleviating the crushing poverty that we are seeing now in the developing world .
( Applause )

Mr President , unlike some here I am actually quite encouraged by what Mr Balkenende has said .
Mr Balkenende , you could , after all , have come here and done what some over on that side of the House are urging you to do , and say , ' We said " no  , end of story .
Forget it .
No new Treaty .
No reform ' .
But you are not .
You are coming here and saying , ' We said " no  , but we recognise that 18 countries have said " yes  , that an overwhelming majority of the European Union wants to go ahead and reform our Union in the way outlined in the Constitutional Treaty ' .
You are saying yes , we will sit down and negotiate a compromise acceptable to all 27 countries , and on top of that you are saying that you want to salvage some of those useful key reforms that are contained in the Constitutional Treaty .
You do not want to throw away everything in that Treaty , you want to drop some things which gave cause for concern , much of it to do with the presentation and the vocabulary of that draft Treaty , but the substance you are willing to negotiate on and to save .
I think that is a lesson to the doomsayers , and I am encouraged that a compromise is possible .
( Applause )
( NL ) Prime Minister Balkenende , you have shown courage to walk into the lion 's den in order to clarify the Dutch position .
I think you came across convincingly - certainly in your first response just now - as you underlined the European calling of the Netherlands .
With this , a new Treaty is moving closer , and this is important , because we need one , for things are just not going well enough at the moment .
We need more transparency , more democracy , hence more powers for the European Parliament and , as you quite rightly stated , for the national parliaments .
Things have to be done more effectively , so that we can really address issues such as climate change , energy policy , immigration and reinforcing Europe 's role in the world .
I can understand the principles and your main issues in those discussions .
What is called for , in the final analysis , is a pragmatic attitude , for it is in the European and national interest that we find a way out of this impasse .
Having , as I do , some background knowledge of you as a person , I can say , in response to what was said earlier , that I have every confidence in your ability to do this .
You are not a nationalist and I also know that you are not lying .
By way of final comment , you claim that you support the internal market .
I am pleased that you do , but then you should also put your money where your mouth is .
If all 27 Member States make exceptions to the internal market , and it is looking this way in the Netherlands , as is evident from the discussions there , then we will be left with no internal market , which would be detrimental to the European consumer and the European economy alike .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I have no doubt that both those who support a European Constitution and those who oppose it want to see a stronger Europe .
The differences lie in opinions as to how to achieve this .
Just like the majority of people in this Chamber , I believe in the idea of the European Union , but lack of support from society weakens our attempts to turn this idea into a reality .
We must therefore ask whether adopting the Constitution will help us to obtain the public 's support .
As one of the participants in the European Convention for the drafting of the Constitution , I am not convinced of it .
We are far from even remotely exploiting the possibilities offered by the existing treaties .
Prime Minister , the European services market you mentioned can be seen as an example of this .
And extending the use of the qualified majority voting principle would not have assisted the liberalisation of the services sector - quite the reverse .
At this period in history it is absolutely vital to achieve mutual comprehension between the Member States and an increased wish for cooperation , based on common values and the idea of the Union , so that the interests of large and small , rich and poor , new and old Member States can be given equal value .
I admit that this is a difficult task , but without it it will be impossible for the Member States to regain steady support from the public .
Without this the Union cannot become closer .
The draft Constitution does not address these challenges .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard many noble ideas about the future of Europe , as well as some that have been less than noble .
An overhaul of the constitutional framework , particularly in the interests of making it more operable , is certainly needed .
We should , however , be clear about what it is that we are now offering to the citizens of the Union .
In this regard , I should like to point out that there are a number of people here in this Chamber who are not interested in the debate on the need for an EU foreign minister .
They are more interested in why it is that people from other , so-called new Member States still cannot travel freely in the Schengen area even after three years .
They are amazed that in the much-vaunted Europe of equal rights they are unable to access the labour market in some countries , whilst at the same time capital flows freely in and out of my country .
Why is it that the bigger Member States have more favourable conditions in certain sectors than the newer , smaller Member States ?
Why , unlike the citizens of some Member States , can we not travel to the USA without visas ?
We want to extend the competence of the Union to areas where it is not needed and where , for various reasons , it makes sense to maintain distinctions on the playing field based on the relative strength of the different players .
It is no wonder that many Europeans often cannot understand our profound debates on the future of Europe .
( SV ) In the summer of 1787 , a number of people in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania sat down and devised a Constitution for what became the United States of America .
They were at the pinnacle of their era 's knowledge of political science , philosophy and democracy .
They put forward a proposal openly and honestly and obtained popular support and support from the various constituent states .
How different is the process that is now under way to force a Constitution onto the EU countries !
The EU 's powerful political elite knows that it lacks popular support for its plans for a United States of Europe .
The negotiations are taking place in secret .
There is no question of the European project having a democratic basis . Rather , it is designed to blind people with science .
Angela Merkel asks , for example , whether it might be a good idea to alter the terminology of the draft Constitution without changing the legal substance .
Its proposals concerning the flag and the anthem would be removed .
The whole plan is designed to enable the political elite to push through a United States of Europe without being forced to win the peoples ' confidence in the project .
That is deceitful .
( NL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , as a resident of the Benelux countries , I have been somewhat frustrated lately .
Indeed , we were used to being on the front line for the European project , but ever since the negative referendum in the Netherlands , I get the impression that the Dutch leaders , where Europe is concerned , have been suffering from cold feet to some extent .
This was evident , inter alia , from the way in which you spoke about extending majority decision-making , while surely you know that this is one of the key elements in order to keep the momentum going in an enlarged Europe .
I do however , appreciate the difficult position that you are in at the moment .
You , Prime Minister , probably remain convinced that the text that you approved at the IGC does indeed adequately meet the challenge we are facing , but should take the verdict of your people into consideration .
I therefore value your efforts to come up with solutions and to look for a compromise , in which respect you clearly recognise that due account must be given to those who approved the text as it was .
I hope that this can lead to a compromise .
I am , however , really concerned about what you said about the involvement of the national parliaments .
You explicitly plead in favour of the red card , which I do not think of as the right way forward .
What you are actually doing is turning the national parliaments into a new EU institution of some kind , and that is not exactly something we are waiting for .
You need to convince your national parliament that their role is to monitor the ministers in relation to their role in the Council .
This is the role of the national parliaments , and the national parliaments who have done this have not experienced any problems .
Another reservation I have about what you said , and to which you perhaps ought to give some thought , is that when you seek to include the criteria for enlargement in the Treaty , like the Commission , you have to bear in mind that you would then subject the enlargement to the Court 's legal control , while this is , in the final analysis , about political decision-making .
I would advise you to give this some thought .
( Applause )

( ES ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , we are concluding a stage that began in Maastricht , followed - and I remember this as President - by the Dutch proposal , the Lubbers-Kok proposal , which was too federalist .
You have now come along with an entirely opposite position .
These things happen in families and we are prepared to build bridges .
You have imposed four conditions .
With regard to codecision and the national parliaments , I agree with Jean-Luc Dehaene : the national parliaments should show the red card to the governments , not to the European institutions .
We are prepared to improve our cooperation .
With regard to the new issues that are being added , paragraph 12 of our motion for a resolution contains them .
We agree on that .
With regard to the issue of public services , convince your political family .
There is a fundamental problem however : splitting the Treaty open , considering amendments rather than its structure , means dismantling everything and it goes against transparency and understanding on the part of the citizens .
One more thing , Mr President , regarding the anthem : the other day , in my constituency , I explained to my fellow countrymen that the Dutch national anthem , the ' Wilhelmus ' , pays homage to the King of Spain .
They said , ' how nice the Dutch are ! '
When I then said to them , ' and they talk about the cruel Spaniard ' , they said , ' that is a football problem ' .
So I would say one thing : this anthem business is very complicated , and I shall stick to the Ode to Joy .

( NL ) Mr President , it has just struck me that , in the debate , most of the support for Mr Balkenende came from the SP , the Vlaams Belang , the Party of Haider , the Polish League of Families and the Eurosceptics from Sweden and Denmark .
I just thought that worth mentioning .
The Cabinet 's efforts bear witness to a depressing void and lack of any sense of responsibility in terms of Europe 's future .
After all , the consequence of a mini-Treaty will be reduced democracy , minimal involvement for the public and reduced decisiveness in terms of climate change and terrorism .
A mini-Treaty will make Europe a political dwarf .
The fundamental rights must be legally enforceable .
Is the Dutch Labour Party in this Cabinet really prepared to sacrifice the fundamental rights to avoid a referendum ?
The national parliaments should indeed be involved more , but rather than introduce paralysing red-card procedures , they should finally develop active interest and knowledge .
They can do this now , but just do not bother .
Finally , there is a lot of demagogic twaddle about a superstate .
We should stop this , because I did not hear your party discuss this either when you campaigned in favour of the constitution prior to the referendum .
Measures in the area of security against terrorism , for example , should , of course , be taken at European level , not as it is being done at the moment , though , in back rooms , but rather out in the open , democratically and with majority decision-making .
This is not a superstate , this is democracy .
Prime Minister Balkenende , the Netherlands can contribute so much more to Europe .
Please let this be seen .
- ( PL ) Mr President , one condition for a successful future for a united Europe is developing a European consciousness .
This is defined by everything that we Europeans have in common - a Christian history and culture , and the understanding that our only future is together .
We must remember that we cannot force people to adopt a European identity .
No amount of legislation , even when it is adopted in an atmosphere of success , let alone a climate of unwillingness , can create it .
The fact is that it is not constitutions that create communities , but communities create constitutions .
For that reason , a constitutional treaty for Europe will not lead to a new growth in European identity , and there is no point in waging wars to defend it , particularly if it creates unneeded divisions .
We must , however , make sure that our common history is punctuated by more events like the recent Samara summit .
We need the world to see us as a united entity more often .
We must speak in a single voice , because that is the only way we can rise to the challenges facing us .
It is my sincere belief that we can succeed in this , precisely thanks to our common identity , and that is something that no legislation can guarantee .
Mr President , I should like to say to the Prime Minister that the Constitutional Treaty is not about losing identity but about organising solidarity in a just , effective and sustainable way .
Those who oppose it on grounds of identity are not in fact afraid of citizens losing control over the State but of the State losing control over citizens .
In a world where the market , crime and poverty are globalised , the European Union must be political and coherent .
We therefore need the double legitimacy of the European Union as a union of states and citizens and double majority voting .
You will agree that the European Union is simply unable to exist without legal personality and is unable to decide whether the single-country veto is its decision-making rule .
While accepting that subsidiarity should be an important principle of the Union , we should also accept the precedence of European legislation over national legislation .
We cannot expect European citizens to be loyal to the European institutions if their fundamental rights are not legally binding .
Likewise , without a social dimension , the European dream simply will not take off .
However , a social Europe is not sustainable without a harmonised tax policy and European Union funds .
Ultimately it is not possible to imagine a Europe which is economically and socially effective without a common foreign and security policy .
By considering this aspect in a positive way you will certainly bridge the wishes of your citizens and the aspirations of other Europeans .
Mr President , I am very much indebted to the Members of Parliament for their comments further to what was said on the subject earlier .
I should like to start by clearing up a serious misunderstanding .
I have heard a number of speakers , including Mrs Kaufmann and Mr Voggenhuber , talk about things such as the national anthem , the title of Foreign Affairs Minister and the flag , as if these were Dutch issues .
This is not the case at all .
I have indicated to you that the question is whether these symbols - that are wonderful in their own right and I have nothing against them - should be enshrined in a constitution .
They are merely examples of the question whether we want to work on a constitution or would prefer to change the treaty .
This is what this is about .
Let us simply treasure our symbols , the question is only whether they should be included or not .
What I meant went a lot deeper , as I indicated .
I have tried to give answers to concerns that are around .
In my contribution , I indicated that we must think in terms of a treaty amendment , a test of subsidiarity by the national parliaments .
I will say more about this in a moment .
The kind of things that matter to us are majority decision-making in relation to the powers of Europe and the inclusion of the enlargement criteria .
Seeing things only in terms of symbols would turn the Netherlands ' vision into a caricature .
I also paid close attention when the comment about nationalism was made .
It was one that I did not understand .
During the debates which we held in the Dutch Lower Chamber and after the ' no ' , I made it quite clear that our future is in Europe .
A positive message about the meaning of Europe in everyone 's life .
We cannot do without Europe .
This has always been my message , and I have no desire , therefore , to be associated with purely nationalistic trends .
There was also the assertion that Europe is about nothing but economics. to which , you , Mr President , of course referred .
Everyone says certain things .
You referred to the actions of a young media person .
I should like to remind you once again that when we held the presidency of the European Union , I repeatedly said that Europe is much more than a market and currency .
Do you remember that I took the initiative to organise conferences on values in Europe ?
I then raised the question : what makes us Europeans ?
What are our common motives ?
What makes Europe this continent ?
It is my dear wish that the debate on European values be continued .
We cannot do without this debate .
So do not try to tell me that this is just about economics .
When we consider Europe 's future , we face the question as to what the challenge is we are facing .
Mrs Martens from the Netherlands made a pertinent comment in this connection .
What is actually the ideal situation ?
What are we trying to achieve together ?
This subsequently leads to a host of concrete questions which have also been raised on this platform .
I cannot address all of them .
There are simply too many and we are also limited in time .
Allow me to single out a few issues , though .
One of the points that was made was the issue of powers and of subsidiarity .
It is my firm belief that we must spell out what we mean .
Mr Duff made no bones about the fact that the Union has only those powers that the Member States grant it .
We should lay this down in very specific terms .
When these powers are implemented , this is when the issues of subsidiarity and proportionality come into play .
Of course , the national parliaments have their part to play in this .
This is also true of the Netherlands .
The Upper and Lower Chambers , and the Joint Committee , have reflected on the question as to what Europe should and should not do .
This is extremely beneficial for involvement .
Indeed , for too long , the debates were avoided and postponed .
This is also the method by means of which we would like to say that national parliaments should be fully involved in what is happening in Europe .
If there are points of criticism , they should be made .
We , for example , commented on the harmonisation of criminal law in the fight against counterfeit goods , something with which Commissioner Frattini has concerned himself .
This is the sort of thing that should be open to discussion .
This is how national parliaments can operate .
In a wider sense , it is also a good thing that the question of subsidiarity is also addressed in national parliaments .
We should avoid a situation in which national parliaments and the European Parliament are pitted against one another .
You have different powers and you play your own role in democracy .
We should not see this as a sign of weakness , but rather as one of strength .
I should now like to turn to the criteria of services of general interest , a subject that Mr Van den Berg raised , along with other questions .
It is my firm belief that we need clarification .
We can discuss the way in which this is done .
At the same time I can see Mr Maaten - we know each other well from the days when we both sat on the town council of Amstelveen , a town near Amsterdam - we go back a long time .
I can understand very well what you are saying about the internal market .
Of course , we must consider this consequence , but I , in turn , would say , if we discuss pension systems , pension funds , schools , let us closely examine how the principles of the internal market work there .
We need clarification on this and we can obviously discuss the way this should be brought about in greater detail .
I understood very well that you talked about the importance of the Charter of fundamental rights .
With good reason , because these fundamental rights belong to the values which Mr Daul mentioned .
The question is only - and I would like to ask the same question - whether this should be included in a Constitution or if other methods could be applied .
We need to find a solution for this .
I have listened carefully to what you said and heard how important the topic is considered here .
It was a pleasure to hear Mr Dehaene speak .
I value him for his involvement in bringing about the Constitutional Treaty and the Convention at the time , and we have found ourselves thrashing things out on many occasions .
I am pleased that you feel for the position that we are in , when people say ' no ' in a referendum .
You have also indicated what is needed to resolve this situation .
I would respond to that by saying that we must be a little more pragmatic , as Mr Maaten indicated , but obviously whilst retaining the ideals we all share .
If we can reach this solution , we will need to be mindful of the positions on either side .
It is for precisely this reason that I repeat today that it is necessary that we look beyond the existing positions , that we should not take sides in Europe and that this , as I see it , can be done by means of an amending Treaty .
I think it is possible to find solutions swiftly .
Many comments have been made , which I find difficult to address , although I have taken note of them all for personal use .
I listened carefully to Mr Barn Crespo , who mentioned - and I should like to finish with this remark - national anthems .
You referred to the Dutch Wilhelmus , our anthem which , it is true , contains the sentence : ' de koning van Hispanje heb ik altijd geerd ' .
The fact , though , that our anthem includes the line ' I have always respected the King of Spain ' was related to the fact that Spain was involved in totally different things in the Netherlands , which culminated in a fight for independence and an 80-year war .
This is now such a great time , a time in which we , for the first time in Europe 's history , are experiencing peace and security so that we can discuss things here in friendship .
I remember very well when I was in Madrid and visited the monastery where Philip II stayed .
It was interesting , alongside our version of history , to hear the Spanish version .
This is what is so good about Europe , that we can be different .
Europe is a continent of diversity , but we also need unity .
What is so special about Europe is that we boast this culture and religious pluriformity .
This is what has made Europe strong .
If we are talking about the ideals which we stand for , then I would say : let us use what has made Europe strong : human rights , democracy and working on security .
Let us remain keenly aware that this should be a combined effort .
Let us recognise the powers of national parliaments , let us get the European Parliament to do what needs to be done without any restrictions .
I always find it extremely stimulating to be here , because the European Parliament is the symbol of a united Europe .
I believe it is a good thing that national politicians enter into debate with you .
I experienced the debate with you today as extremely stimulating .
Of course we do not need to see eye to eye on everything , and of course I can take criticism , but there is more that unites us than divides us .
If we are guided by the European dream , then we will undoubtedly be able to find solutions for the problems that have arisen .
Together we can make a difference ; together we can work on this solution .
( Applause )
We in this House believe that there is no longer any basis for nationalism , and so the term ought not to have been used today .
I would like to thank you sincerely on behalf of all our Members for being here , and will wish you success in your policy in order that we may find a way to preserve the substance of the constitution , in the shape of the necessary reforms and the values we seek to embody .
My thanks also go to the Vice-President of the Commission , Commissioner Frattini , and to Mr Gloser , the Minister of State .
The debate is closed .
Situation in Nigeria ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Nigeria .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , the situation in Nigeria is of great significance for the stability of West Africa and , ultimately for that of the continent as a whole .


The latest elections in Nigeria turned out very disappointingly , as the Council indicated in its statement of 27 April ; there were numerous irregularities and acts of violence , with up to 200 people being killed and many more than that injured or intimidated , and the Council expects the persons responsible for these acts of violence to be called to account for their actions .
It is fortunate , at any rate , that there was no evidence in these elections of religious or ethnic conflicts .
The elections took place within an improved legal framework , with substantial funds being made available , and all this led us to expect that the 2007 elections would pass off better than those held in 2003 .
While we are still awaiting the final report from the EU 's election observation mission , initial assessments give credence to the suspicion that the 2007 elections were an even more badly run affair than their predecessors in 2003 .
The main problems were in the lack of organisation exemplified in particular by the late opening of polling stations , the lack of ballot slips and the lack of secrecy around the voting process .
What was even more serious was that , in addition to widespread irregularities , there was visible evidence of considerable electoral fraud .

Another major problem with the elections was that failure to publish detailed results from them , with , moreover , those results that were available not being calculated in comprehensible ways , and we should now ask the Nigerian authorities to publish the results with the figures broken down according to the polling stations where the votes were cast , for this is the only way in which the election system can be guaranteed to be transparent .

The Council did , however , find positive encouragement in the indications of greater independence on the part of the judicial system during the election campaign , and we hope that this tendency will continue in the post-election period .

The lively debates in the privately-owned media before and after the election were also encouraging , and the Council has been impressed not least by the commitment of the Nigerians themselves to the democratic process , in consequence of which the involvement of civil society organisation is , and will continue to be , of very great importance .
The Council has appealed to all the political actors to use peaceful means and to demonstrate an attitude of responsibility by having consistent recourse to the legal channels in order not to disappoint the Nigerian people .
We hope that the independent national election commission and other bodies will make haste in producing the evidence that the electoral tribunals require in order to complete their work with the minimum delay possible .
The Council also hopes that the Nigerian state authorities will be sympathetic to the idea of repeating the election process in instances where there is irrefutable evidence of grave electoral fraud .


This is not , however , the time to turn our back on Nigeria - on the contrary ; Nigeria 's stability and development matter not only to its own people , but also to Africa as a whole , and , if the Millennium Development Goals are not achieved in Nigeria , we are not going to be able to achieve them in Africa at all .
Nigeria 's future government will have numerous challenges to face ; one fundamental area of concern will be the need to monitor efficiently the resources allocated to the federal states , and another will be the continuing insecurity in the Niger Delta .

The EU should support Nigeria as it faces these challenges , stepping up its efforts to strengthen responsible governance and democracy and promoting respect for human rights in Nigeria .
It must involve itself in these areas in cooperation with Nigeria and on the basis of that country 's government 's unequivocal consent .
The Presidency will therefore continue to keep a watchful eye on developments in Nigeria .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , as we have just heard , Nigeria has recently held important elections that will determine the transfer of power from one civilian president to another .
On the invitation of the Nigerian authorities , the Commission fielded a large independent election observation mission ( EOM ) , which performed well and cooperated closely with other international and domestic observer groups .
I appointed Mr van den Berg - who had also observed the elections in 2003 - chief observer for those elections , and he will shortly give us his report .
The mission concluded that the 2007 state and federal elections fell short of basic international and regional standards for democratic elections , pointing out that they were marred by poor organisation - as has already been cited , a lack of essential transparency and safeguards , widespread irregularities , significant evidence of fraud and disenfranchisement of voters .
Sadly , at least 200 deaths from election-related violence were also reported .
Other international observers - including those fielded by the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) and the US National Democratic Institute , led by Madeleine Albright - were also very critical , as were domestic observation groups .
The EU Presidency expressed disappointment at these elections not having marked progress in relation to 2003 , which has now been reiterated by our president , at the irregularities and at the high toll of victims .
The reactions and the messages from the international community had been consistent in urging Nigerians who have complaints about the process to use the legal provisions outlined in the Constitution and in the Electoral Act , commending the independence shown by the judiciary and the engagement of civil society and praising the commitment of poll workers and voters .
Disappointment at this missed opportunity is widespread in the international community , as Nigeria - one of the major powers in Africa - could have set an example of successful consolidation of the democratic process , which would have had a tremendous positive impact on the African continent .
This is even more regrettable as the elections were held in an improved atmosphere in which the freedoms of assembly and expression were at least broadly respected .
The elections have highlighted the many problems and shortcomings of the Nigerian democratic process , and the Commission is aware that many challenges and misgivings need now to be addressed and overcome .
In the short term , pressure should be placed on Nigeria 's Independent National Electoral Commission to publish a complete breakdown of the polling station results , which is a basic requirement of transparency , and the judiciary should also be encouraged to act swiftly and responsibly with the election petitions .
If redress is not provided , this could have serious implications for the future .
While the lessons learned will have to be taken into account in our future relations with Nigeria , entrenching positions should be avoided .
I think the political dialogue has to restart , but future relations will have to include a deeper engagement at federal , state and Community level with a wider range of players in civil society and government .
The topic of the elections must be a key feature of the political dialogue with Nigeria , based on the recommendations of the EOM .
Our readiness to engage Nigeria in a political dialogue and the commitment to promote the strengthening of governments and democracy in the country , particularly together with ECOWAS , is highlighted in the joint EU-ECOWAS communiqu issued on 24 April at the 11th EU-ECOWAS ministerial meeting .

While the main instrument for political dialogue will remain Articles 8 and 9 of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement , the programming of the development cooperation to be financed by the 10th European Development Fund will also provide a crucial avenue for dialogue and the opportunity to take into account lessons learnt from the elections and the outcome of the discussions with the new Government , civil society and other key players .
Madam President , both the Nigerians and the international community had great hopes for the Nigerian elections for a number of reasons .
Firstly , Nigeria is the most populated country in Africa and as the Commissioner said , a successful democratic process in Nigeria could set a good example that other African countries would wish to replicate .
Secondly , these were the first Nigerian elections where one civilian government would take over another , which is very important in a country with a history of military dictatorships .
And thirdly , there is broad freedom of speech in Nigeria , and the judiciary is independent .
Unfortunately these hopes of a positive example have been dashed .
The resolution we are discussing is very critical , and justifiably so .
Poor organisation , numerous mistakes and procedural irregularities , as well as electoral fraud have meant that the latest Nigerian elections cannot be regarded as credible , free or fair .
The elections met neither international standards nor the regional standards defined by ECOWAS .
Worse still , the elections were marred by violence resulting in the deaths of at least 200 people .
Questions about the significance of this violence by discussing the death toll showed that most Nigerian politicians were unaware of the problem .
It appears that long-term education in citizenship is very important in the case of Nigeria .
Sending election observers is not enough , we need to invest in education and building a civil society .
It is my belief that the Nigerians must not be subjected to blackmail based on threats that any questioning of the election results would be tantamount to inviting the military to stage a coup again .
This philosophy of ' the lesser of two evils ' undermines democracy and justifies and feeds anti-democratic tendencies .
The 64 million registered Nigerian voters have a right to election results that reflect their real will , and the European Union must strive to make this happen .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I should like to say something on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , rather than as head of the Election Observation Mission , because that is a different role .
The European Election Observation Mission has had to conclude that the elections in Nigeria were not credible .
This is unfortunate , because despite the improved atmosphere in which the freedom of expression of opinion was respected during the campaign and despite the positive and independent role played by the law courts , the election process , and subsequently the results , cannot be seen as credible .
The Council has confirmed , as has the Commissioner , that this is indeed the case .
The Nigerian elections were badly organised and intransparent ; there were far-reaching procedural irregularities and there was clear evidence of fraud .
The process fell well short of the measure of international and regional standards for democratic elections .
The point which the Council made a moment ago , namely failure to publish the results either in polling stations or at higher levels , and hence the complete lack of proof and transparency is , and remains , in fact , the most serious problem , because as a result , nothing can be proven or refuted , and this takes all the credibility out of the electoral result as such .
This is simply , as we have established , one of the toughest verdicts which we as Election Observation Mission have passed in the different countries .
This was particularly painful , because after 2003 , there was real hope among the people that actual improvements would follow .
The people were committed .
When many people have made the necessary efforts and have shown commitment , then something like this will hit them particularly hard .
If you compare 14 April to 21 April : at the governor 's elections on 14 April , there was still a great deal of hope , whereas the situation on the 21 April was simply demoralising .
This also explains the low turn-out , despite the upbeat figures that were published afterwards .
What conclusion are we Europeans to draw from this ?
That we should , emphatically , remain committed , and this is where I agree with the Council and the Commission in their conclusions .
It is , after all , the Nigerian people we are talking about , and they deserve a better future and serious elections .
This means , therefore , that in our diplomatic relations , we cannot pretend that the government that has just been appointed has been elected in a democratic manner at all .
This is , of course , a very tricky business .
We could do business as usual , provided we remain involved and active .
Business as usual would affect not only the credibility of our European Election Observation Missions , but also - and to a far greater extent - our own values for which we stand when we act in the world and in a country such as this .
We should therefore come clean and conclude that we have a democratic crisis on our hands at the moment .
This crisis has partly become evident before the courts , where a number of people have objected and tried to prove that certain things are simply wrong .
It has also become evident , and can become evident , via working parties of the Senate and the House of Representatives , who are launching investigations of their own and are trying to table fresh proposals .
And we have to wait and see , of course , how people in Nigeria come to table their own proposals on the question as to how credible elections can be held .
I have said before that it is not up to us to work this out in detail , but this is the essence and it would be good if in this respect , our resources could be put in place , preferably not with the federal government and with the state , but with all those players in society who can promote governance and democracy in this way .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the analyses of the elections in Nigeria by international observers are , as I see it , strikingly similar : disappointment about the election process that is typified by poor organisation , large-scale fraud , intimidation and violence .
These elections do not in any way meet international standards .
This is the conclusion of the EU Observation Mission , under the leadership of Mr van den Berg , who has done sterling work under difficult circumstances .
The reaction of certain Member States who would have preferred a slightly less outspokenly negative statement from the European observers has rather surprised me , and all the more so because the Member States in question are constantly banging on about the need for more democratisation in Africa .
Diverse interests sometimes lead to diverse reactions - history is repeating itself .
The EU Election Observation Mission was right not to be seduced into adopting a political stance .
After all , as Mr van den Berg stated a moment ago , it is now up to the political class and civil society in Nigeria to do their bit .
The judgment by the High Court on the Vice-President 's participation in the elections demonstrates that this should not be utopia .
Irregularities should now be reported to the election tribunals and the courts .
Our role is more of a structural one .
Accordingly , by means of dialogue , as the Commissioner pointed out with good reason , we must spell out that an independent election committee must be put in place that is capable of organising truly independent elections , and the newly elected Nigerian parliament can play an important role in this .
In summary , following promising developments in countries such as Mali , Benin and Liberia , it is a crying shame that a regional superpower such as Nigeria has missed a great opportunity .
Madam President , as we all know , the development of Nigeria is crucially important for the African continent .
Nigeria is one of the largest countries in Africa and , just as it has done in the Democratic Republic of Congo , the European Union has put effort into organising elections and observing elections there .
That being said , the chaotic and violent situation that reigns in Nigeria , especially in the delta region , must open our eyes to a number of issues - obvious and outstanding issues .
As in Congo , the issue of the exploitation of raw materials and oil plays an extremely important role in the destabilisation of this country , in the atmosphere of violence and civil war that has come about there .
On this point , I believe that we should be very pro-active in supporting the civil society and the democrats , who are fighting to obtain information and transparency on the exploitation of the resources and who are also seeking to preserve their resources .
The delta region is totally devastated and plagued by murderous conflicts , and the manuvres of the Nigerian army in this area sometimes do more harm than good .
I also believe that the European Union should be far stricter in making the development aid that it provides conditional on the fight against corruption and on the very clear inclusion in the State budget of the profits made from oil and minerals , because it is all the same absolutely scandalous that the people of Nigeria , who live in a state of great poverty , do not see any benefits whatsoever from these mineral and oil profits !
At a time when the price of a barrel of oil has increased , the resources should be considerable .
It is therefore most unusual that this issue has not been dealt with .

Finally , progress needs to be made , too , concerning the social and environmental responsibility of large companies - Shell , in particular , has a major presence in this country , but it is not the only one - and we should also act together on these major issues , and not just on the matter of organising elections .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened with great interest to the reports by the Council and the Commission , and as a member of the delegation of parliamentary observers at the presidential elections , I can fully confirm everything that has been said so far .
The elections were definitely not conducted in compliance with international standards , since the standards laid down at international level were not reached , nor even the standards of the African states themselves .
There was even a postponement in the opening time of polling stations that was decided on and notified only the day before , so that the majority of the population was unaware of it .
Most of the polling stations closed early .
There was an absence of any kind of secret ballot - and I could go on indefinitely , mentioning , for example , an electoral commission that was independent solely in name , but in fact was closely linked to the government .
I would also like to mention the intimidating atmosphere .
Hauwa Ibrahim , holder of the 2005 Sakharov prize , was supposed to meet our delegation in a public place but requested a change in the location of the appointment because she did not feel sufficiently safe .
I would like to move the debate on to what can be done in the future .
We absolutely must call for investigations into the electoral irregularities , call for an independent electoral commission , call for the Court of Appeal to be truly independent in dealing with electoral appeals and verify this , and state that new elections are necessary .
We cannot , however , stop at just this , and I already see in the background the risk that the political choices of the Council are tending in the direction of continuing as if nothing was the matter .
Let us not conceal the reason - some people may think that what matters is to have a government that is more or less legitimised , but in a country from which we can continue to buy oil .
This cannot be the solution .
I would like to ask what the intentions are with regard to using some instruments that the European Union possesses . For example , there is the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Are we able to verify that the Nigerian Government remains uninvolved in the selection and implementation of projects that are financed by this instrument ?
I would like to ask the Commissioner , as I have already done on other occasions , what is happening with the democratic clause on rights , which was adopted by a very large majority within this Parliament , but never accepted by the Commission or the Council . It has never been transformed into the powerful tool that it could be , and in this case it could be extremely useful to place trade with Europe in the scales too , from the viewpoint of democratic progress .
Last , but not least , there is the issue of what role Europe intends to play regarding events in the Niger delta .
It does not seem adequate to me that individual States should do their utmost and be prepared to pay ransoms when someone is seized .
We must call for a start in talks , relations and meetings between the Nigerian Government and the representatives of local people , putting pressure not only on the government but also on the large European companies operating in that region without any respect for human rights or environmental rights .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Demokratie als Farce was the headline on 30 April of the weekly Das Parlement - the President of the Council may have noticed how I am quite German-minded .
Above the headline , there is a big picture of two coyly smiling Nigerian boys brandishing their ballot papers .
Any comment would be superfluous .
The two elections in the most populous country in April have ended in human and political disaster , with more than 200 people killed , and fraud on a large scale - things about which the present joint resolution does not mince words .
Where do we go from here in Nigeria ?
I am very struck by a page-long article and interview with Nigeria 's current President Obasanjo , who spells out quite clearly that Nigeria 's future lies with its relationship with China .
Cheap loans , infrastructure , marvellous , but the European Union is out of the game .
What , I ask of the Council and the Commission , is the EU 's response to this ?
Do you , in light of these statements and this position , have a strategy , both tangible and intangible , for Nigeria , in fact , for the entire African continent ?
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , if a country is trying for the first time , in the aftermath of civil war and military dictatorships , to organise a peaceful handover of power , it follows that not everything is going to run ideally and perfectly smoothly .

We all agree , though , that the elections laid on were a farce , for what has become of democracy when a party rejoices in its own victory even before the votes have been counted , or what of the free choice of the voters when threats are made as the voting papers are counted out , when ballot slips are completed many times over , and when there seem , in rural districts , to have been scarcely any elections at all ?
What sort of message is it supposed to send out when ballot papers and election material arrive too late or not at all ? How , then , are the people of Nigeria supposed to feel that they are being taken seriously ?





The election process was meant to have brought the region stability and pointed people to a viable way into the future , but those hopes have proved illusory , leaving behind them a disillusioned people whose experience of elections is , at best , of a symbolic act , and an opposition whose threat to contest the election result will probably avail it but little , for the winning party is hardly likely to agree to new elections , so what we are left to consider is to what degree the European Union can and may exert pressure when power is handed over on 29 May , for the European Union itself has hardly been always the best of examples ; it , too , has seen the repetition of referendums until the desired result was achieved , something that is highly dubious in democratic political terms .
Madam President , it was my first visit to Nigeria and my first African election , and I was disappointed : I had expected to see a free and fair election , and it was anything but that .
I will not bore the House with my conclusions , because they are the same as those of the leader of the Commission 's delegation and of the leader of the delegation I belong to , and they can be seen on YouTube , in a short video I made , under the headline ' Nigeria 's rigged elections ' .
I should just like to address some lessons for the European Union from this election in the largest country in Africa .
It seems to me that the Chinese influence , referred to by Mr Belder , might be a little deeper than we perceive .
We know that China is involved in the democracy backlash around the world : working with Russia as a dirty duet , all over Africa , with Belarus , Venezuela , Zimbabwe and Egypt .
There is a process under way that the European Union has to respond to , and I believe that the Commissioner is committed to making the most use of the instrument that she and I are very committed to - the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Let me just make some specific points .
I was one of three Members of the European Parliament on this delegation , and that was not enough .
I believe we have to reconsider as a House the use of former Members of the European Parliament in such delegations .
For example , we will send a delegation to Sierra Leone in August ; I will not be surprised if there are very few takers .
Secondly , concerning the independence of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , we heard that the EU mission in Nigeria is involved with the Government in approving projects .
This must not happen : this instrument is supposed to be independent of host-country control .
Then there is the question of follow-up for this election .
I know that the final report has not yet been published , but I believe that the European Union has a commitment to the pursuit of democracy in those countries and the follow-up to the process of a bad election .
Finally , the use of the United Nations as an agent for organising these very effective missions is an expensive luxury and needs to be reconsidered .
( CS ) Last month I went to Nigeria as a European Parliament election observer and I saw there many interesting , often unpleasant and sometimes appalling incidents .
On the one hand , Nigerian voters often travel many miles in great discomfort to reach the polling booths .
On the other hand , those manning Nigerian polling stations do everything they can to stop these people from accessing the ballot box .
On the one hand , people cast their vote enthusiastically with a view to a better , fairer , more decent life .
On the other hand , those manning the polling stations falsify people 's votes with the aim of preventing political and economic change .
Ladies and gentlemen , I feel there can be no doubt about where the European Parliament and the Union stand .
We are on the side of justice , democracy , and free and fair elections .
We are on the side of the millions of Nigerians who believe in democratic elections in the hope that democracy is the key to resolving political , economic and social problems .
Last month Nigeria had a historic opportunity to prove to itself , to Africa and to the rest of the world that it is equal to that task , that it is capable of making the democratic , peaceful transition from one government to another .
Unfortunately , it has squandered that historic opportunity .
Madam President , I would like to pay tribute to Mr van den Berg for all his excellent work as chief observer in Nigeria in very difficult circumstances .
I believe that the standing of the EU Election Observation Missions in general was enhanced by the fact that the EOM to Nigeria did not fudge but came out with a clear message that the elections had been irregular .
The great value of EU Election Observation Missions is that they are independent and completely neutral .
They are at arm 's length from EU foreign policy .
The one point on which I am unhappy with the motion for a resolution is that in recital V and paragraph 15 a confusion has entered the text .
There is an association of election observation and foreign policy , whereas they need to be kept quite separate .
I hope that a way can be found around this through a normal amendment to get over the problem , but otherwise I am afraid that the ALDE Group will have to vote against both recital V and paragraph 15 .
( PL ) Madam President , despite its rich natural resources , Nigeria is a corrupt and backward country , where the profits from these resources , in particular its oil wealth , do not go towards economic development or improving the life of society .
Influential pressure groups who want to maintain chaos in Nigeria are stoking up antagonism between Muslims and Christians , despite the separation of state and religion , and the fact that the constitution should guarantee citizens their rights .
It seems to me , however , that the debate in this House before any pronouncement by the electoral commissions is somewhat premature .
I would , however , like to use this heated debate and the dramatic situation in that African country as an occasion to remember here , in the European Parliament , the words of the greatest authority of the 20th and 21st century , Pope John Paul II , that a state 's raison d 'etre is the sovereignty of society and the people , and a condition of international peace and cooperation is respect for the right of a nation to have its existence , freedom and culture .
- ( PL ) Madam President , over 200 people died during the recent elections in Nigeria .
The way the elections were conducted had nothing to do with democratic procedures .
The head of the EU observers Max van den Berg stressed that they did not justify the hopes and expectations of Nigerians , and cannot be regarded as credible .
Nigeria is a country riddled by social conflict based on religious and ethnic differences , especially between Muslims and Christians .
At the same time , the country has vast resources of oil and other minerals and is the ninth largest country in the world in terms of population .
Political killings , torture , and summary justice meted out by the army are commonplace .
Freedom of speech and of assembly are restricted .
Cases of repression of the Christian minority are becoming increasingly worrying .
Since its establishment , the European Union was built on the basis of respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms and citizens ' freedoms .
On many occasions in its history the European Community - and later the European Union - has spoken out when democracy and freedom were under threat .
The examples of Georgia and Ukraine also show that only decisive action brings results .
In Ukraine , this kind of action led to a re-run of the falsified second round of the presidential elections . This was the result not just of the resilient attitude of the Ukrainians , but also of the loud and clear signals sent by the European Union .
In my view , the European Union 's delayed reaction to the events in Nigeria is also cause for concern .
Where fundamental standards are breached , instant reactions should follow .
Exactly one month has passed since the disturbances and elections in Nigeria , and we should immediately suspend all financial aid from the European Union to government structures in Nigeria , as well as aid for democracy and human rights if there is a danger that this money may go into the pockets of corrupt government structures .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , democracy has lost ground in Nigeria .
The elections of Saturday 21 April , which were marked by fraud , violence and deaths , will not have been free or fair .
All the international observers , as you said , have confirmed this .
These elections were meant to be a test .
For the first time since the country gained independence , in 1960 , a democratically-elected president could have hoped to succeed another .
This is a missed opportunity !
It does not bode at all well for Nigeria , at a time when the country , rich though it is , needs stability if it hopes to escape poverty .
Since the elections , the violence has increased : the international community has a duty to intervene .
I should like to remind you that , last year , the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to Mrs Hauwa Ibrahim , a Nigerian lawyer who courageously defended two women who had been sentenced to death by stoning for having committed adultery , for the Sharia is still observed in that country .
On 28 and 29 May , a coalition of opposition parties , civil society and trade union organisations , including the Nigerian lawyers ' union , will organise a two-day movement to protest against the staging of these elections .
The European Parliament must support this democratic movement . It is by doing so that we will defend Nigerians and Nigeria , a large and important African country .
Madam President , the election observation mission in Nigeria was the first one that I took part in .
I have one thought that I would like to share with you in relation to that .
The European Union was one of the biggest donors for carrying out elections in Nigeria .
Therefore we must hold a certain degree of responsibility that the aid given most efficiently serves its purpose .
The whole organisational burden for conducting the elections was carried by the Independent National Electoral Commission , INEC .
In Nigeria , INEC was not able to meet the organisational and logistical challenges it faced in order to carry out truly democratic elections .
The shortcomings also constitute the most comprehensive part of the resolution .
I guess you must share INEC 's responsibility by , for example , educating the approximately 500 000 INEC grassroots-level organisers so that more credible independent and democratic elections in Nigeria could take place next time .
( PT ) Regardless of the election result - and there is good reason to doubt the validity of that result - the most worrying aspect of the Nigerian election was the electoral process , on which the opinion of the other international observers left no room for doubt : it was disorganised and fraud took place .
The report on the subject from our fellow Members who were there as observers is revealing .
The conclusion can thus be drawn that the election was used to secure a degree of legitimacy that the observers do not recognise and that is not acceptable to democracies .
The result had more to do with intimidation , fraud and violence than the will of the people .
Unfortunately , this is not an isolated case on the African continent ; far from it , in fact .
Despite the progress made in recent decades , much of the most persistent violence still goes on and some of the most corrupt regimes are still very much in place .
There is nothing in the geography of Africa or in the genetic make-up of African people that stops them living in a democracy , but the international community needs to be determined and resolute in the process of the democratisation of African countries .
This is not only for all the usual reasons , but also because China has become a global player , and one that does not demand democratisation in return for cooperation ; quite the contrary , in fact .
Ahead of the EU-Africa summit due to take place in the second half of the year , the EU is now expected to play a genuinely effective role and not be reduced to mere rhetoric .
Not all global players behave in the same fashion but we need to work in tandem with our allies .
This is firstly for reasons both of values and principles , and of interests .
In free and stable democracies it is possible to pursue international trade that is predictable and that is of benefit to all but those who seek to fan the flames of corruption and dictatorship .
We must be tough , therefore , at the forthcoming summit , which is to take place during the Portuguese Presidency .
We do not want statements of good intent or mere recognition of the mistakes of the past ; what we want is political truth and true politics .
The EU must remain the biggest provider of international aid and must actively promote cooperation . At the same time , though , it must succeed in bringing about reform , democratisation and freedom in these countries .
Otherwise , the EU will be giving out fish rather than helping people to fish .

( DE ) Madam President , having been preceded by such tense expectation , Nigeria 's electoral marathon is over , and a new President , new provincial parliaments , and a new federal parliament have been elected .
The result was a certainty even before the election was held ; while an overpowering victory by the governing party had been reckoned with , none of the election observers had expected the degree of electoral fraud , of falsified results , the logistical chaos and the widespread violence associated with this election .
Not only the European Union 's electoral observation commission but also - and this is a new thing - that officially appointed by the West African Economic Union , were merciless in denouncing the serious defects present in this election , which have been documented in a long list to which reference has already been made in this debate .
I wish to join with my fellow Members in urging the authorities of the Nigerian state to subject the irregularities in this election to thorough and transparent investigation .

I should also like the Commission to tell us what options are afforded us by the democracy and human rights instrument for taking the necessary steps both in our dialogue with Nigeria and in our cooperation with it ; as we know , it is not just Chinese businesses that are disregarding human rights and social inequalities , for their Western counterparts have always turned a blind eye to them in the quest for oil .
( HU ) As vice-president of the delegation of observers from the International Republican Institute , I had the opportunity personally to take part , as an observer , in the recent Nigerian elections .
Based on my experiences , I have to say that the coordination of the work between numerous international observer delegations was an exemplary success .
As to the election itself , I can only confirm my colleagues ' statement that Nigeria 's elections can be considered neither fair nor free .
They have satisfied neither international standards nor the local norms set by the government of Abuja .
We witnessed serious shortcomings in the system of voter lists and in keeping the public informed .
In many instances , local polling stations opened late and had no ballot forms .
The murky process of compiling the results even raises the suspicion of fraud .
It is quite telling that the results of some voting districts have not been disclosed .
What is more , the elections were marred by violence .
As we have already heard , some 200 citizens lost their lives in clashes linked to the voting .
These massive irregularities are even more distressing in the light of previous Nigerian elections that took place in a much more orderly fashion .
This time we witnessed with sadness that the voting public 's allegiance to democracy - this is very important - was not accompanied by the intent of government bodies to keep the voting within legal bounds .
We who were there saw how committed Nigerian citizens are to democratic values .
Amidst often chaotic conditions they waited with dignity for the moment to exercise their democratic right .
It is in Europe 's interest too to see the consolidation of democracy in Nigeria so that it may become a model for the African continent .
For that reason , it is important for the EU to remain an active observer of that process .

( PL ) Madam President , I apologise for re-scheduling my speech , as we were holding a very important vote to elect the president of EUROLAT .
Nigeria failed to make use of the opportunity the elections presented .
Our observers clearly confirmed that the elections were neither free nor fair .
This was because of corruption and very poor organisation .
The Nigerian Government is entirely to blame for this .
The elections were overshadowed by terror , in which 50 people died , most of them in the Niger Delta .
At times they were nothing but a caricature of elections , where some polling stations failed to open , while in others bandits destroyed the ballot boxes .
Europe should be especially meticulous in observing elections in this country , which is the largest in Africa and for many other African countries is a point of reference economically and politically .
Elections in a country of 110 million , of which 64 million are of voting age , should focus the attention of public opinion .
Unfortunately these elections did not boost , but have effectively weakened , Nigeria 's position in the international arena .
In the run-up to the elections we noted a number of activities and tendencies not related to the election process that are cause for concern .
For example , in Muslim-governed areas , girls going to Christian schools were forced to wear veils as symbols of Islamic tradition .
This is a clear breach of religious rights and tolerance , but such practices are on the increase , and such discrimination may become even more widespread when Muslims take more power in Nigeria .
As the European Parliament , we cannot pass over this matter in silence , particularly as it is an imposition on the minds of children .
Tomorrow will be an opportunity to take a stand on this matter in the voting , and there will be voting in an amendment on this very issue .
But what will happen next , after the elections ?
We should do more than just criticise , for which we have just grounds .
What we also need is a clear plan on how to force the observance of democratic rules of play in a country which plays a key role on a continent which is practically our neighbour .
In other words we have to force the Nigerian authorities to reflect democracy and free elections or - to be frank - turn off the tap of financial aid .
This aid must not be channelled towards state and federal structures .
Instead it can and should be forwarded to non-governmental and social organisations .
We must also put pressure on the Nigerian Government to act more effectively against corruption , the use of force and the sense of impunity that local authorities , which are practically states within a state , have .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to extend warm thanks to the honourable Members of this House for the interest they have shown and also for their support , and my particular thanks go to those who have performed the task of monitoring elections on the ground and who can therefore give very powerful and truthful descriptions of what happened there .
In his speech , Mr Kaczmarek gave it as his opinion that an opportunity had been missed , and to that I want to add that it was not a case of the overwhelming majority of Nigerians missing an opportunity , but rather of there having been people who would not allow the holding of free and independent elections with secret ballots that might have had a significant impact .
The question has been asked from various quarters as to what we can do about this .
In your own speech , Mr van den Berg , you also said , that we cannot stint in our commitment to Nigeria and to its civil society in particular .
It is very important that we should now , rather than backtracking on this commitment , clarify how the commitment made by us in the European Union can directly benefit the interested parties , not least civil society .
One opportunity to once again spell out what we Europeans think about how elections should be conducted , and about the ways in which they are manipulated , will be the G8 summit in Heiligendamm , at which the President of Nigeria , among others , is expected .
This first impression of what has been going on in Nigeria must not , however , exercise a generally negative influence on Africa 's image in our eyes .
Some of you have already mentioned the positive examples that are to be found on the African continent .
Mauretania may not be a large country , but we have recently seen how it managed to organise a transition , and also , from its example , what sort of support is needed in order to do that .
Another consideration , bearing in mind the prospect of the Africa Summit between the EU and the African Union being held in November , is the need for it to be made clear for which values the European Union stands , and to what it is committed , in its dealings with its African partners .
We must also , at the same time , make clear where we stand in our dialogue with China , for it is not acceptable that China should have only a very limited economic interest in the continent of Africa , whilst the European Union is left to do much else in such areas as responsible action by the state and the development of civil society .
I was struck , a few weeks ago , when I attended a joint meeting between the EU and ECOWAS , to hear the participating countries say that , for many small shoots that had sprouted in them and which they hoped would grow still further , this amounted to a retrograde step .
There are also many countries in Africa that are enjoying economic growth and that are well governed .
I am glad to see that many of the public media are currently , in preparation for the Africa summit , taking note of that as they take a look at Africa , and that was another reason why it was important that the European Union and some of its Member States should show their colours while securing the elections in Congo , for there are , quite apart from Congo , a number of countries where development is progressing well .
So , then , I want to say thank you again for that .
I hope that we will , together with the Commission , and with your House 's support , find ways of coming to terms with what has happened in Nigeria ; I hope that there will be changes , and that we will be able to give our continued support to those in Nigeria who want that land to change and become a democratic country .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , we all agree that , unfortunately , these elections were a real disappointment , but I hope that democracy in Nigeria will become a force in the future , and not a farce .
We have a lot of work to do .
I agree that it is not possible or advisable to continue with business as usual , and certainly we will not do that .
As has been said by , I believe , a majority here , we have to engage with members of civil society in Nigeria who are willing to change the situation and the election process .
This must be part of the dialogue that we have to follow up , based especially on the recommendations of the EOM .
On the other hand , political engagement and dialogue with the Government are also needed .
Such a dialogue has to be regular ; it has to be structured ; it has to be held at troika , or local or even higher level , and must be extended to national and regional organisations , as was done between the EU and ECOWAS , as was just mentioned , as well as to representatives of civil society .
As regards the Electoral Commission , according to the observers , there were irregularities and fraud , but INEC in particular failed to act independently as it is required to do .
It is clear , therefore , that INEC , tarnished as it is by serious doubts over its impartiality , cannot continue to be a beneficiary of EDF support .
Issues concerning INEC 's independence , mandate , structure and leadership must therefore be addressed before any decision about the continuation of our support can be taken .
As regards the Niger Delta , which has already been mentioned by some of you , the Human Rights Watch report entitled ' Chop Fine ' on Rivers State is emblematic of a situation widespread in the Niger Delta , where large financial resources are made available , but very little reaches the people and even less the communities in remote areas of the Delta .
People there have been deprived of their voices and land resources , and they are not given anything in return by the Government .
The threats and challenges presented by this area are left unaddressed and will , sooner or later , have serious repercussions at national and regional level .
The ambassadors of the EU Member States have twice submitted clear and simple recommendations .
Before the financial resources allocated to the Niger Delta are increased , total transparency should be ensured and dialogue between all the stakeholders established .
Articles 8 and 9 of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement have also been mentioned . They contain all the ingredients needed to ensure the most effective dialogue not only with the Government but also with civil society and the regional African organisations , as has been said .
I consider it absolutely paramount that more coherent , more regular and more systematic action by the EU as a group vis--vis Nigeria is the only possible way of addressing the questions highlighted by these elections .
This should be a very strong thrust of our policy .
On the other hand , we have to be careful not to push Nigeria into the hands of religious extremists , including Muslim extremists .
China has been mentioned .
When I was in China in January , I made it clear that we want to have a dialogue on Africa with China .
It is not so easy to do , but it is very important and , therefore , it is important that Nigeria is being invited to the G8 Summit in order to give them these messages directly , because we have to tell Nigeria that we want our values and interests to be respected and it cannot only be a question of pure economic matters .
I shall just repeat that the EIDHR provides an opportunity to work with civil society .
It can work without the approval of the Government , but we normally have contact with the Government .
Finally , it is also important to see what our financial funding means there .
It is a mere 0.2 % of the oil revenue and the total international aid to Nigeria .
Therefore this makes the consequences of aid suspension negligible from a financial viewpoint and potentially counterproductive , as it would further impair political dialogue with the Government .
But , on the whole , 25 % of funding is promoting good governance .
Therefore , we should use this part in particular in order to work with civil society , as I think we would all agree .
To wind up the debate , a motion for resolution signed by seven groups has been tabled under Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ( debate )
The next item is a debate on
the oral question by Miroslav Ouzk , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Council : Key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) to be held in The Hague on 3-15 June 2007 ( B6-0020 / 2007 ) and
the oral question by Miroslav Ouzk , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Council : Key objectives for the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) to be held in The Hague on 3-15 June 2007 ( B6-0121 / 2007 ) .
substitute author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , the reports follow each other but are not alike , since we are at present going to deal with biodiversity .
Minister , this week will have been marked by the desire shown by the European Parliament to fight against the loss of biodiversity .
On Monday , the report by our fellow Member , Mr Amadou , and the report on Life + were debated and , today , we are examining two oral questions tabled ahead of the next meeting of the Conference of the parties to the Convention on international trade in endangered species of wild flora and fauna , the CITES .
Our Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , whose chairman I excuse for not being able to be here with us , questions the Member States ' negotiating method and asks the European Council what key objectives the Union will uphold during the fourteenth meeting of the Conference of the parties to the CITES Convention , which will be held , as you said , Madam President , in the Hague on 14 and 15 June 2007 .
The CITES Convention is one of the oldest multilateral environmental protection instruments .
It was adopted in 1973 , in Washington , by States that were already anxious to go beyond the national regulatory frameworks .
The aim was to preserve wild plants and animals from commercial overexploitation .
The significance of this Convention compared with the other multilateral agreements on the environment is its great power of adaptation .
It directly influences trade through supply , which it restricts .
In very practical terms , it influences around 500 000 transactions - that is no small amount , 500 000 commercial transactions ! - thereby restricting the overexploitation of biodiversity .
With the coming on board of the various institutional partners , nearly 170 States , including our 27 Member States , of scientists and NGOs , the CITES Convention will have made it possible to prevent the removal of particularly endangered species and to save species such as the Siberian tiger , the blue whale and African elephants .
Of course , the challenges facing the Convention are many . On the one hand , they are structural .
The Convention struggles , in fact , to find funding to match its ambitions .
It has to deal with the over-consumption of natural species , some of which are not always listed .
On the other hand , the Convention must take account of new data , including , of course , climate change .
It must incorporate the ineffectiveness of certain instruments , such as the action plan for forest law enforcement , governance and trade , or FLEGT , with which everyone in this House is familiar .
It must review also the decisions that have had a negative impact on certain species : for example , during the twelfth Conference of the parties , the permits for the sale of ivory originating from Botswana , Namibia and South Africa resulted in almost 20 000 elephants being decimated , according to estimates .
As part of the fight against the loss of species , the European Union must at all costs speak with one voice during the conferences of the parties to the Convention .
In this connection , I should like to point out , Minister , that the European Union often abstains when decisions are taken because our Member States do not manage to come to an agreement , with the result that 27 votes are lost , and 27 votes is not a negligible amount ; it is even often a large amount .
Therefore , Minister , we ask that the Council take account of Parliament 's resolution , which reflects the interests of the European people and conveys that which our citizens want us to defend within the context of this CITES Convention . Firstly , because the resolution points out certain requirements to the negotiators .
Thus , the precautionary principle must be applied with the same rigour as that imposed by the European Union in other international negotiations on the environment .
Equally , the Union must demand transparency in the voting process and reject secret ballots , a practice that really exists , especially when it comes to listing species in annexes .
In fact , the point is to modernise this slightly antiquated procedure , which no longer in any way meets the requirements of the citizens , who must be able to exercise their right to inspect the decisions that are taken on their behalf .
We know that the NGOs criticise the EU Member States at every turn for not disclosing their votes and for voting in secret ballots on certain species .
We consider this to be totally unacceptable and we call for transparency , because this Convention is special and because the Member States , as we know , have specific interests where some subjects are concerned .
The questions included in the agenda of the Conference must be submitted to the European Parliament .
We do not expect anything less .
Each time a Conference of the parties to the CITES Convention is announced , we put the same questions to the Council : we do not understand why we have not been consulted earlier , so that we know what positions the Council plans to uphold during the Conference .
I should also like to ask the Commission and the Council to involve our parliamentary delegation in the work of the Conferences so that we are not forced , as we usually are , to skulk around the corridors in the hope of gleaning some information from them , and that is when the Council and the Commission see fit to invite us !
I therefore thank you for involving the European Parliament delegation in the work done on the Convention .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , including those who have spoken on behalf of your colleague Mr Ouzk , I would like to make a statement on behalf of the presidency .
As at previous meetings of the conference of the contracting parties to the Washington convention on the protection of species , the EU Member States will , together , put forward the position agreed by the Community .
The Council will shortly set down this position on the basis of the latest proposal from the Commission , and will , of course , inform Parliament of the position thus arrived at .
The Community 's position will incorporate three overarching goals :

One is that the Convention shall become as efficient as possible , and the first thing to be done with this end in mind will be to reduce unnecessary administrative burdens ; practicable and working solutions to problems of implementation need to be found , and it needs to be ensured that the contracting parties ' resources are targeted where there is a real need for preservation .
Greater synergies must be established between the Convention on the Protection of Species and other instruments and processes relating to biological diversity ; in particular , the resolutions of the fourteenth conference should help to bring about , by 2010 , a marked deceleration of the worldwide loss of biological diversity , and to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
Furthermore , the European Union also wants to ensure at the conference that the planned amendments to the annexes to the Washington Convention actually do improve the preservation of the species in question , and it will , in this respect , be particularly important to ensure that monitoring is carried out , for it is only in this way that poaching and illegal trading can be curbed and the sustainability of the international trade in species guaranteed .

Elephants and whales are again the individual species on which this conference focuses .
To summarise , the Community is not prepared to give its consent to a resumption of commercial trading in ivory until such time as appropriate mechanisms are in place to prevent the more widespread illegal killing of elephants , and it thus calls on all range states of elephants to engage in constructive dialogue and to cooperate in maintaining stocks of elephants and in their sustainable management .

Since it is the International Whaling Commission that is primarily responsible for whale issues , no new resolutions should be framed in the course of our negotiations that would alter the current preservation status of whales under the Convention , and it follows that a review of whale stocks with a view to the possible downgrading of their preservation status under CITES should be considered only after mechanisms for checks on their management have been introduced and considered suitable by the International Whaling Commission .
I would like to conclude by expressing my thanks to the author of the question and to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their interest in this important issue .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , the 14th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora in the Hague is indeed the first CITES conference to be held in the European Union since CITES was put in place in 1973 .
Therefore I think it will provide a very good opportunity to highlight our strong commitment to the implementation of this Convention and to raise political and public awareness .
I believe it will be the first time that a ministerial conference will address key issues regarding the future of the Convention .
Therefore the following key strategic objectives for the Conference of the Parties known as COP 14 have been defined . The COP should reconfirm the important contribution that CITES made , or can make , to reaching the 2010 target of significantly reducing the rate of biodiversity loss .
The Community fully supports the contribution of CITES to this global target by regulating international trade in wildlife and wildlife products in order to ensure that this is sustainable .
The new strategic vision for CITES for 2008 to 2013 will determine how CITES can ensure that conservation , sustainable use and poverty reduction can also be mutually supportive and are therefore crucial for the continued importance and relevance of CITES .
The draft strategic vision also advocates that CITES should pay greater attention to the international trade in commercially exploited timber and fish species .
Given the strain on natural resources and continued over-exploitation , the Community believes that CITES could focus more on ensuring sustainable trade in such species .
We the Community have submitted proposals for listing several marine and timber species on CITES , so I think this will be a very important discussion .
Finally , a key issue for CITES COP 14 will of course be elephant ivory .
Diverging proposals are on the table from Elephant Range States in Africa .
We continue to hold the view that commercial trade in government-owned ivory stocks should not be resumed until we are satisfied that all mechanisms are in place to ensure that trade will not result in the increased illegal killing of elephants .
These mechanisms are currently being put in place and should hopefully be operational before we take a final position on this matter .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , yesterday the newspapers had some good news .
It was about the hatching of some rare Egyptian tortoise eggs .
The problem was , they were hatched in Rome .
They should not have been in Rome .
They should not have been smuggled from Libya to Rome along with 275 other rare tortoises , because they are in the highest protection category under the CITES Convention .
Even worse , this is happening inside our European Union .
We know that the European Union is one of the world 's largest and most diverse importers and markets for wildlife products , with demands for pets , for fashion products , ornaments and medicines .
That is why Europe has a particular responsibility to do something about it .
In my country , some 570 illegal wildlife items are seized every day by Her Majesty 's Customs .
One wonders how many are not detected .
We know that the illegal trade in wildlife is the second biggest direct threat to species after habitat destruction .
We know that a quarter of the trade is illegal .
We know that billions of euros annually are made out of this , third only to the trafficking in drugs and arms .
We know , of course , that we have to take account of the local populations and their traditions and needs , and that is in this resolution .
We know there are differences of views between NGOs and between scientists , but this motion for a resolution , I believe , is a balanced one .
Lastly , I very much welcome what the Minister and the Commissioner said about the elephant , so will you please support the resolution from Kenya and Mali for a 20-year moratorium on the ivory trade .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , President of the Council , Commissioner , as has already been stated , this CITES Conference will be the first to be held in Europe , and this offers an opportunity to bring the protection of wild animals and plants to the attention of the public at large , more so than before .
Even though CITES is one of the most effective and concrete instruments to protect the international environment , the decline in biodiversity is alarming .
For example , a large number of fish species are in a bad way due to overexploitation , among other causes .
Demand for fish is enormous and still rising .
This has the depressing consequence that even at this stage , many deep-sea fish species are critically endangered , and that in many developing countries , the sea has also been emptied by Europe , or by European boats at any rate .
Unfortunately , the same is true to some extent of tropical forests .
Demand for tropical wood , despite all campaigns , remains high .
Added to that is the fact that demand for agricultural land is also rising due to the need for food and increasing demand for biofuels , and it is age-old forests that pay the price for this .
Europe 's initiative to include a large number of fish species on the list of protected species deserves our unqualified support , as does the initiative to include a number of tree species on the list .
We should , however , ask ourselves how we can improve on things .
Pressure on nature is rising worldwide .
Increased prosperity goes some way to explaining this , while in a number of developing countries , it is poverty that is the motive .
We should , therefore , take a different course and realise that the protection of nature also creates prosperity and jobs .
We must take steps to guarantee that trade is truly sustainable and that the illegal trade is actually tackled and discontinued .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , there is a strong case for supporting the proposal for a 20-year moratorium on the ivory trade .
Contrary to what some southern African range States say - that they have too many elephants - estimates by the African Elephant Status Report put the population at between 10 and 20 % of what it was in the 1930s and 1940s .
The major cause of the decline is the ivory trade .
Ivory prices increased more than seven times over in China and Japan in the late 1990s .
A 20-year moratorium will send a clear signal that international trade is banned , it would suppress demand , lower prices and remove incentives for buying and stockpiling ivory .
Commissioner , could you be more precise as regards to what extent the Commission intends to take into consideration the pro-moratorium position expressed by the delegation of Western and Central African States who visited us at the European Parliament ?

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I should like first of all to thank Mr Gloser and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner for what I was almost tempted to call their reassuring words .
However , I received no answer regarding the transparency of votes : I believe that it is crucial for us to know who votes for what within the European Union during this CITES conference .
I should like to begin by also expressing my satisfaction with the proposal made by Germany to include two species of shark - the dogfish and the mackeral shark - in Annex II to the CITES , a proposal that has also been endorsed by many associations working to protect these species .
In our view , this is a proposal that must gain full support because these two species , which are included in the IUCN Red Book of endangered species , require special attention .
However , above and beyond the specific case of these species , we should also give greater consideration to the status of the other species of shark in the waters bordering the countries of the EU , in the Mediterranean , for example , so that , on this issue , the European Union is affected as much as the neighbourhood policy .
In general , it must be recognised that the Mediterranean is an endangered sea : the indiscriminate withdrawal of fishery stocks over the last few decades , with the use of drift nets in particular , has resulted in a significant depletion of species .
The case of bluefin tuna is one such example , which has been highly publicised recently by Greenpeace .
Yet , what do we know , for example , about the sharks in the Mediterranean ?
What we know overall about sharks is that , throughout the world , they are totally endangered , overfished and that they are suffering from the deteriorating marine balance .
That being said , does the European Union have any information or studies enabling it to assess the situation of the sharks in the Mediterranean ?
That is the question .
If it does not have these , can it envisage serious studies being carried out so that , in the long term , it will be in a position to make concrete proposals , on the CITES in particular ?
Furthermore , we also think it crucial that red coral , which is also overfished in the Mediterranean , be included in Annex II to the CITES .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the CITES Conference that is to be held in The Hague next month is of huge importance if we want to take measures against the international trade in endangered animal and plant species .
It is for that reason that I wholeheartedly support the resolution .
There is , however , one issue that I should like to single out and that came up several times this afternoon , namely that of the elephants in Botswana and Namibia .
Three quarters of the 400 000 elephants in Africa live in this region , thus resulting in inevitable risks for the people and the environment , and being detrimental to biodiversity .
This is why these countries have tabled their own proposals in order to maintain the elephant population and to reduce the risks .
The resolution , unfortunately , rejects these proposals .
Whilst it is understandable that people are keen to stop the trade in elephant products , a view which I share , it is equally important to face up to the situation in Botswana and Namibia , that boasts such an enormous expansion in the number of elephants .
We must give this matter some more thought .
After all , we cannot afford to reject solutions without replacing them with alternatives .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Isler Bguin has , in fact , already presented the substance of this oral question , which has particularly to do with what the Council is aiming to achieve through the negotiations , but also with the methods of negotiation and the way in which this House 's delegation is involved in the work on the ground .
Like many other Members , I would like to return to the subject of the trade in ivory , which the Convention has prohibited since 1989 , while allowing since 1997 the sale of individual items of stock .
Understandable though it is that the countries in which the trade goes on have an interest in this , the problem is that it has not so far been possible to distinguish between legal and illegal ivory , and hence there is a great danger that the legal trade will contribute to a revival of poaching .
A greater incidence of poaching putting those engaged in the protection of wildlife and the natural protection authorities under increasing pressure , and effective protection of pachyderms , which are important in terms of many countries ' incomes from tourism , makes increasing demands on resources that are generally scarce ; the only long-term protection for ivory is an absolute ban on the trade in it , for it is estimated that some 20 000 elephants a year are killed in Africa for their tusks .


Our resolution , then , endorses the proposal made by Kenya and Mali , and their demand for a 20-year moratorium on any kind of trade in ivory .
We hope that the Commission and the Member States will , in the course of the negotiations , give this demand their backing .
( IT ) Madam President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to summarise very quickly the sense of my amendment , which is backed by the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I have called for the deletion of the seventh indent of Article 10 in the proposal for a resolution on the CITES Convention .
There is no scientific justification for transferring coral to Appendix II , since a panel of highly-respected experts working for the FAO has stated that the requirements for including the species in the genus corallium in the CITES Appendix II are not met - and this is a direct quote .
Coral can be properly preserved through a system of rotating the protected areas between producer countries .
Maintaining the current wording would strike a severe blow to the jewellery and craft sectors , as well as to the local economy and employment in various EU countries - Italy , Spain , France , Greece and Malta - and countries outside Europe such as China and Japan .
I therefore call on you to support my amendment , which is acceptable from a political viewpoint and backed up by scientific thinking .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , on the subject of elephants we are currently sceptical of supporting any of the proposals on the table , because the African Elephant Range States will be meeting directly before the conference .
We encourage them - and I think this would be the best solution - to engage in a real dialogue and thus seek an agreement on a common approach .
I have received a motion for a resolution to wind up the debate tabled under Rule 108 ( 5 ) .
The vote will be held on Thursday at 12.00 .
Council Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0018 / 2007 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Political crisis in Turkey and prospects of accession
In the last few days , in connection with the appointment of the President of the Republic , Turkey has fallen into a deep political crisis which gives rise to serious doubts about the functioning of its democratic institutions .
The country 's Constitutional Court has annulled the first round of the elections , a decision vigorously contested by the government .
The Prime Minister has stated that the parliamentary system has been brought to a halt and he is calling for early elections , while the General Army Staff has issued a warning that it will intervene to prevent the election of the Islamist , Abdullah Gl , to the office of President .
What are the Council 's views on this situation in a candidate country for accession to the EU ?
Does it share the opinion of the Commissioner responsible for enlargement , Mr Olli Rehn , that the armed forces should respect the independent role of the democratic process , that the EU is based on the principles of freedom , democracy , the rule of law and the sovereignty of political forces vis--vis the military , and his insistence that any country seeking accession to the EU must respect those principles , which are the key elements of the Copenhagen criteria ?
What impact does it believe such interventions by the military could have on the country 's accession procedure ?
Does the Council have direct contacts with leading political figures in Turkey and what is their reaction ?
Madam President , we are following developments in Turkey with close attention , and I would also like to remind the House of the Presidency 's statement on 28 April of this year , in which we emphasised the need for the presidential elections to be conducted in line with the principles of democracy and the rule of law laid down in the constitution .
Generally speaking , it is worthy of note that negotiations were commenced with Turkey in 2005 on the basis that Turkey would meet sufficiently the political criteria laid down by the 1993 European Council in Copenhagen , on which membership of the EU is conditional , and one of which is that a country should demonstrate institutional stability as a guarantee for democratic order and the rule of law , for the safeguarding of human rights and for respect for , and the protection of , minorities .
Over and above these , and in accordance with the framework for negotiations adopted by the Council in October 2005 , the European Union expects Turkey to press on with its reform process and work towards making further improvements as regards respect for the principles of freedom , democracy and the rule of law , together with that for human rights and fundamental freedoms , including European court rulings on the subject .
The Council noted on 11 September 2006 that further considerable efforts would be needed in order to develop free expression of opinion , freedom of religion , the rights of women , minorities and trades unions , together with civilian control over the armed forces .
These issues are discussed on a regular basis as part of the political dialogue with Turkey , and , since the Council expects the principles I have mentioned of the rule of law and the civilian control of the armed forces to be fully complied with in the current situation , the presidency will continue to keep a watchful eye on the progress of the Turkish elections .
( EL ) Thank you very much , Minister , for setting out the preconditions laid down by the European Union for the integration of Turkey .
However , I referred to the recent crisis , which could not have happened either in the countries of the European Union or in the candidate countries .
We are not accustomed to such crises in the candidate countries and I think that for us to simply - as you said - ' monitor ' the situation is not enough .
We too must account to the citizens of Europe for what we do in order to address the situation and we need to rattle Turkey 's cage so that it finally follows the preconditions imposed in order for it to progress towards the European Union .
We are calling for a bit more than simple ' monitoring ' , Minister .
Are you doing more ?
In its talks with Turkey , the European Union has , I do believe , always acted with reference to the list of criteria to which I have just referred , and it also , on earlier occasions , highlighted ways in which the country might be given support and in which developments to that end might be set in motion within it .
I do believe that the European Union must be able to expect compliance with the framework requisite for accession and that , ultimately , the actors in Turkey become aware that decisions on such matters rest primarily with politicians rather than with the armed forces .
One important point - and one of which you will be aware - is that , in the course of this dispute , an appeal has been lodged with the Turkish constitutional court , and this - as the European Union has indeed stated - is the way down which the country must go .
I do not believe that more can be done at the present time .

( DE ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , while your statements imply that a whole array of positions have been put on record by the Council and by the European Union , the reality is , however , that Cyprus , as a candidate for accession , failed to comply with these criteria in at least an equal number of instances .
While I am on the subject of Cyprus , would it not be possible for the European Union or the Council to become involved in ways more active than those you have announced .
We are keeping a close eye on what is going on there .
( DE ) While the AKP does describe itself as being in favour of the separation of religion and state set down in the Turkish constitution , it is nonetheless known to have taken initiatives that give cause to doubt the truth of that claim ; for example , it has campaigned for the abolition of the ban on the headscarf and for more extensive Islamic instruction .
To what degree does the Council share the concern expressed by critics of the creeping Islamicisation threatened by this party , and in what ways is this threat being considered in the course of the accession negotiations ?
I would refer the honourable Member to the explanations given to him in response to an oral question in the April question session , and would like to reiterate that the Presidency attaches great importance to the constant improvement of integrated border control at the external borders of the European Union and , in particular , to the reinforcement of the maritime external borders to the south .
Further to this , the Council has already stressed , in its conclusions on the reinforcement of the southern sea frontier on 5 and 6 October 2006 , that Frontex has to be built up by means of additional personnel and increased budgetary resources .
In order to improve Frontex ' immediate response capability in emergency situations , the Commission put forward , in 2006 , a proposal for the formation of rapid reaction border intervention teams .
The Council has had fruitful discussions with your House on this proposal , and your House voted on the text of the proposal on 26 April this year , so that the Council can adopt it at first reading .
The Presidency 's ambition is that the text should be able to be adopted by the Council over the next few weeks , so that the instrument can be applied over the coming summer period .
In accordance with its working programme for 2007 , Frontex will , as well as completing the European Patrol Network , be carrying out a number of joint operations on the maritime borders , the number and location of which will be determined by its management board .
Finally , the Council wishes to stress that the Commission , in accordance with the Hague Programme , which the European Council adopted on 4 November 2004 , will , before the end of this year , be submitting an evaluation report on the agency .
( ES ) The President mentioned my question of last April .
The FRONTEX system is effective , but the big problem is the interruption .
A quick interruption of a couple of weeks has led to the arrival over recent weeks of over a thousand immigrants in the Canary Islands , with the whole dramatic situation that that implies .
Our concern is that that system should be permanent and I hope that , by means of the measures announced by the President-in-Office of the Council , that system will really be permanent , since each day or week without it may mean the deaths of hundreds of people in the waters of the Atlantic .

I can assure Mr Medina Ortega that I am well aware of the problem , for we too get to see these things in the media , and the people on the ground , too , are aware of what this means for the refugees and for those who have to look after them .
I said back in April , in response to a question , that the protection of the external border is in the first instance a task for the Member State in question , while assistance may be sought from Frontex in a particular situation , in which case immediate response teams can also be formed .
This all depends on the interaction between the relevant Member States and the Frontex agency itself .
The question was about the Atlantic , but I would like to bring to your attention the human tragedy , which is taking place as we speak , in the Mediterranean , where last weekend just one person survived from a boat carrying 29 people 75 nautical miles to the south of Malta .
Yesterday 24 people were saved at sea and one person remained unaccounted for after a boat capsized .
Also yesterday , another boat with 53 people on board went missing .
It simply disappeared and could not be traced .
My question is : why have the Frontex patrols not started already in the Mediterranean ?
When will they be started ?
And what is the Presidency doing about this ?
( FR ) Minister , I was head of the election observation mission in Mauritania .
I can tell you that not a week goes by without a boat arriving , running aground , and requesting assistance , during its voyage to the Canaries .
These poor souls must be accommodated , and , as may sometimes be the case , they must be accommodated in the Mediterranean waters .
I should therefore like to know what resources the European Union - this European Union that uses up so many resources on protecting its borders - is making available to neighbouring countries , that is to say , to Mauritania , which is a transit country - these countries are not migrant countries , but merely transit countries and host countries - and what resources the European Union is putting in place to help these countries to manage this issue .

I am sure that Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou is aware that we would all like to have the opportunity or the freedom to travel in ways other than we are , but , measures have been taken in the European Union in the form of the Regulation that the Commission adopted in October 2006 , in order that a certain standard of safety should be guaranteed .
The adoption of this regulation is a matter for the Commission , which has been supported in this by the Civil Aviation Safety Committee , which is composed of representatives from the Member States and was acting in accordance with its own rules .
Since the Commission has undertaken to have these measures reviewed six months following their adoption , questions pertaining to this regulation should be addressed directly to the Commission , which is responsible for such a review .
I would remind the honourable Member and the House that the Council 's functions as regards air safety is limited to the examination of legislative proposals on the framework conditions for the relevant safety measures , further to which the Council and your House are currently discussing the Commission 's proposal for a Regulation of the Council and Parliament to lay down common rules for safety in civil aviation , which it is intended should replace the Regulation currently in force .

( EL ) Thank you , Minister , for your reply .
My question was whether citizens have any facility for filing complaints which could then be taken into account by the Commission and , if you , as the Council , could not propose the free distribution of water , even if just for short trips , and if you are seeing to an environmental evaluation of waste from this measure .
Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , I do believe that it is in everyone 's interests , particularly of the travellers themselves , that they should be able to fly with the maximum of safety .
None of this was done on the spur of the moment , and there were concrete reasons why security under these conditions had to be guaranteed .
It is certainly important that the persons involved be asked just what all this achieved .
It is unfortunate that there are at present no other mechanisms for examining things in a more transparent manner and perhaps as simply as was formerly the case , but none of the members of the public who are happy to avail themselves of their freedom of movement and their freedom to travel would understand persons responsible for their safety and freedom not themselves guaranteeing the highest possible standard of security .
If new technical developments make it possible to do this in new ways without such hindrances , then all parties will surely be happy to accept them .
Further to the points that you have made , despite all the information provided as to all the things that may no longer be taken through the checkpoints , there are still far too many members of the public taking their own bottles of mineral water and fruit juice or other items with them .
If people were to take some responsibility for themselves , then , it might well help reduce the amount of rubbish .
I can advise the honourable Member that there is a hearing on that tomorrow .
Picking up on what the President-in-Office has just said , does he feel that the sentiments expressed in this question are naive and include insinuations , cheap generalisations and , I would say , criticisms of valued security staff at our airports ?
Further , would the Council agree that perhaps , for example , paying a bit more for water and sacrificing some convenience at our airports is a small price to pay if it means increased security for passengers , lower risks of terrorist attacks and improved welfare for all people using the airports , whether departing , arriving or transiting through airports ?
( LT ) Madam President , Minister , a month ago in this venue the same question was put to a European Commission representative , but we did not get a clear answer .
Really , I agree , the most important priority is safety , but nonetheless it is probably time to review that decision and either ease off on that measure or get strict with it .
What do you think ?
( EL ) Madam President , I am sorry but I can only assume two things : either that my supplementary question was not translated or that the President-in-Office of the Council did not reply at all to what I asked him .
I asked specific questions : if I , like any other European citizen , can voice my complaint following this control .
I also asked about the waste ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
The Presidency takes the view that discrimination on the grounds of race , ethnic origin , religion or outlook on life , disability , age or sexual orientation is incompatible with the foundational principles of the European Union , and the EU institutions have denounced such discrimination whenever it has appeared in any form whatever ; I would also refer you to the debate held here in this House a few weeks ago .


The Presidency also promotes freedom of assembly and association and expresses opposition to discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation , and I will take this opportunity to reiterate that any increase in racist and homophobic violence in Europe or elsewhere in the world is a matter of concern to it .
By virtue of the powers conferred upon it by the Treaties , the European Union pursues with determination an explicit policy of combating the phenomena to which I have referred not only within its own borders but also through its external policy measures ; in its foreign relations , the European Union actively endeavours within the United Nations to combat discrimination , including discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation , and so it was that it , with others , in 2006 , mounted a successful campaign for groups of homosexuals , lesbians , bisexuals and transsexuals to be unconditionally granted consultative status by the Committee for Non-Governmental Organisations of the United Nations Economic and Social Council .
Those are indeed fine sentiments , but what I am interested in is whether we are translating the sentiments into action .
We have EU Member States not only banning Gay Pride marches in the case of Poland , getting a condemnation from the European Court of Human Rights ; now we have the Vilnius authorities saying that the EU Equal Opportunities Bus cannot be received in the city .
Surely this is a matter of breach of Article 6 of the EU Treaty on Human Rights and Article 13 of the EC Treaty on non-discrimination .
What is the Council and the Presidency saying to the Governments of Poland and Lithuania and other EU countries which are not respecting equality law ?
Is Vilnius the right place to locate the Gender Institute in the light of these very disturbing tendencies in that city ?
Mr Posselt , we do share the concern evident in your question on the position concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Northern Caucasus and Russia as a whole , and , for that reason too , we are keeping developments under continual observation .
The Council regularly brings this concern to Russia 's attention in the course of the EU / Russia dialogue , to which I have just made reference in another instance , and various levels have been established at which concerns may be raised with the Russians , not only in policy dialogue at summits and ministerial meetings , but also at the human rights consultations which were introduced in March 2005 under the presidency of Luxembourg and now take place twice a year .
At these consultations , the EU regularly expresses its particular concerns in relation to the situation in the Chechen Republic .
The fifth human rights consultations are now a fixed component in relations between the EU and Russia , and the latest round took place on 3 May , with the situation in Chechnya on its agenda .
While we are on this subject , I should also like to mention that the TACIS action programme for social and economic reconstruction in the Northern Caucasus , which is funded by the EU to the tune of EUR 20 million , has now become operational , and it offers the prospect of positive developments being brought about .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , just as the Federal Chancellor , at the weekend , demonstrated that it is possible to combine firmness of purpose and faithfulness to principle with diplomatic adroitness , you are doing the same here .

I would like to ask now - and this is a very practical question - just what can be done to improve access to Chechnya .
Are you doing anything to this end ?
Secondly , elections in Chechnya are held under the supervision of the OSCE , and the Council of Europe has done a great deal too .
All that has been brought to nothing .
Would it not be possible for the EU , as a community within the Council of Europe and the OSCE , to press for new initiatives for direct action in Chechnya ?

Mr Bushill-Matthews , the Council would refer you in the first instance to its answer of 5 March of this year to the written question on this subject , in which it explained why it was that , in 2001 , anti-dumping tariffs were imposed on the import of integrated electronic compact fluorescent lamps originating from the People 's Republic of China , and in which it also stated that the Commission , on 17 July 2006 , had begun a review further to the imminent cessation of these measures ' applicability in line with Article 11 ( 2 ) of the Anti-Dumping Regulation and that it was expected that this review would be completed within at most 15 months , that is to say by October 2007 .

Once the Commission has arrived at its conclusions , it will forward a proposal to the Council , which will then have a month in which to decide whether or not to agree to it .
No such proposal has as yet been submitted to the Council , nor is it as yet aware of the final positions taken by the Member States .
I can assure you , however , that any decision will take the interests of all parties into account .
I am sure that you will understand that the Commission and the Council , when enacting trade protection measures , constantly consider the facts and the various interests involved - for example those of producers , users , importers and consumers - and try to keep them in balance in order to make it possible for a suitable level of protection to be guaranteed to the branch of industry in question .
What that means is that action will be taken only to such an extent as will make it possible for the Community sector in question to be protected against unfair practices in third countries , and only for such a length of time as is in the interests of the Community .
Well that was a most diplomatically crafted answer , but perhaps I could try again in a slightly different context .
I see announced in the paper today that a certain food processing company is now asking for protection against imports of sweetcorn from Thailand .
Is the Council - not the Commission - concerned at the growing tide of protectionism coming up from fellow Member States and is the Council under your Presidency going to provide any leadership to combat this ?
The intention is that the agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation on the facilitation of the visa system should enter into force with effect from 1 June 2007 , and this , too , was the subject of a debate here in this House a few weeks ago .
The object of this agreement is to make it easier to issue visas for a planned stay of no more than 90 days in duration for nationals of the Russian Federation travelling to EU Member States , or for citizens of the European Union travelling to the Russian Federation .
According to this agreement , a national of the Russian Federation is a person possessing Russian Federation nationality or having acquired it in accordance with Russia 's own regulations .
The consequence of that is that , in accordance with the law as it currently stands , the agreement is applicable to all Russian citizens irrespective of the country in which they live .
No initiatives have been taken to mandate the Commission to commence negotiations on a similar agreement with Georgia , for provision is already made in the EU-Georgia action plan and within the European Neighbourhood Policy for the initiation of a dialogue on the transit of persons , with specific reference to issues of return and the visa problem .
( FR ) Minister , you have given me exactly the same answer that Mrs Ferrero-Waldner gave me three times , but you are not in fact answering the question .
The question concerns the facilitation of the visa system for persons residing on Georgian territory , in Abkhazia or South Ossetia , and to whom Russia has kindly offered nationality by issuing them with Russian passports - even though these people are Georgian - to the extent that the people of Georgia are subject to a system of double standards .
My question is this : did you weigh up the fact that , when the visa system was facilitated for Russian citizens , those persons , to whom Russia has granted nationality , with passports in support of this , and who , residing on Georgian territory , are Georgians from Abkhazia or South Ossetia , were going to benefit from the facilitation of the visa system , while the people of Georgia themselves would not benefit from it ?
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , what is the Council 's position as regards similar favourable visa arrangements for states such as Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus ?
I think it very important that we should not forget them .
I can tell Mrs Isler Bguin that , if the Commission and the Council have given the same answer three times over , that does not mean that they have given a wrong or incomplete one ; that is the legal position .
Listening to your question , though , I alighted on the political issue of how one can - in view of the frozen conflicts in these regions - make concessionary arrangements for the citizens in , for example , Georgia or - as Mr Paleckis has just pointed out - in other countries .
These issues are the subjects of negotiations in the context of the specific relationships , and with Georgia , for example , within the framework of the neighbourhood policy .
It is quite clear to me that the special relationship between the EU and Ukraine or Belarus makes it necessary for us , in these specific cases , to keep on trying to bring about such agreements in accordance with the provisions of the EU and with the Schengen regime .
Thank you , President-in-Office and thank you all for helping us get through more questions than I anticipated .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.05 and resumed at 21.00 )

Beniamino Donnici ( debate )
The next item is the report by Giuseppe Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the verification of the credentials of Mr Beniamino Donnici .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to mention in this Chamber the work carried out in committee , which has thoroughly discussed the credentials of Mr Donnici , resulting in a large majority in favour of the report .
I defend the committee , of which I have the great honour to be chairman , and I would like to answer those making petty insinuations to the effect that the committee has not been calm or objective - insinuations that clearly do nothing to honour this Parliament , given that the committee contains many jurists .
We have people and jurists such as Mr Lehne , Mr Medina , Mrs Wallis and Mrs Frassoni , to mention just the coordinators , and also very many other prominent figures throughout the committee .
Our discussions were always at a high level , and were conducted exhaustively and with great sincerity .
We always focused primarily on the role of this Parliament , which is a giant in terms of many things that it does and its role in Europe , but a dwarf on some occasions when you want to force it into a procedural corner .

The issue we were discussing comes within this major issue : the facts are known , the withdrawal by Mr Occhetto infringes the European Act , and we cannot give Mr Donnici a positive verdict .

The rules governing the European election procedure fall within the Community 's jurisdiction and therefore the reference to national provisions laid down in the 1976 European Act is of a solely supplementary character .
The national provisions must , however , conform to the fundamental principals of the Community legal system , its primary rules and the spirit of the wording of the 1976 Act .
For these reasons , the relevant legislative and administrative national authorities , as well as the jurisdictional authorities , may not omit to take account of the Community legal framework on election issues .
The admissibility of the withdrawal by Mr Occhetto must be assessed firstly on the basis of Article 4 of the 1976 Act , pursuant to which Members of Parliament may not be bound by instructions and may not receive a binding mandate , and the freedom and independence of parliamentary representatives constitutes a fundamental cornerstone of the freedom of citizens .
This is laid down in the 1976 Act , but the new Statute for Members of the European Parliament , which I now quote , even though it enters into force for the next parliamentary term , is , in the current state of the Community legal system , a legislative act of primary law , adopted by the European Parliament with the approval of the Council and published in the Official Journal .
It is perfectly obvious that the withdrawal from election made by Mr Occhetto is the result of an expression of will that has been affected and vitiated by an agreement made prior to the proclamation of those elected in the 2004 European elections , that this agreement was entered into with the other member of the Societ civile Di Pietro-Occhetto list , and that this withdrawal must be considered incompatible with the letter and spirit of the Act of 1976 , and specifically with Article 6 .
It could not under any circumstances be validly revoked , as it was revoked .
In the grounds for the judgment holding the opposite to be true , the Italian Council of State - I want to confirm this in this Chamber , as an Italian - did not mention or take into account in any way the aforementioned principles of Community law , thereby disregarding not only the spirit and the letter of the Act but also Article 4 and Article 6 of the text .
Pursuant to settled case law by the Court of Justice of the European Communities , the infringement of Community law by the authorities of a Member State , even when committed by a legal body of the highest level , through a final judgment , does not prevent the Court of Justice from holding that the supreme national court is in breach of Community law as mentioned above .
This does not , however , constitute a waiver of the responsibility of the State - in this case , Italy - to which the said court belongs , as has been established .
I believe that all this clearly demonstrates the situation in which we find ourselves .
I would like to quickly explain two things that are part of Italian law .
The act of withdrawal may validly have existing rights as its object , and in such a case the withdrawal made by Mr Occhetto with regard to Mr Chiesa is , because of its explanation , fully valid and effective .
The withdrawal also holds valid for future rights , but naturally the withdrawal may certainly be revoked before the event ends , before the withdrawing party finds himself in the actual circumstance of being able to withdraw .
The withdrawal expressed by Mr Occhetto following the proclamation of the electoral results did not alter the classification of the candidates on the Di Pietro-Occhetto list .
The final argument , Mr President , is that we must recognise as a basic principle of law the fact that withdrawal can only take effect at the moment in which the necessary prerequisites exist for the right to be realised .
For this very reason , in the decision of 3 July 2006 that is alleged to contradict what we have done - in fact because of that decision by the Committee on Legal Affairs - we have confirmed the election of Mr Occhetto , because at the time the proclamation was in conformity with the European Act , in that we recognised his withdrawal to be invalid , improper and null and void .
The exceptions with regard to Mr Donnici were then irrelevant .
It is because of this that there is no contradiction .
We took this decision last year , and today we can confirm that decision because it is consistent , thoroughly reflected on by a Committee on Legal Affairs that naturally has no partisan interest , but has every interest in promoting and guaranteeing the autonomy of this Parliament .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe that we are at an important moment in the history of this Parliament .
The rapporteur , the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , has explained the legal reasoning , with which we agree .
My group has tabled a series of amendments aimed at enhancing this kind of legal reasoning .
We should look at the issue from a rather broader perspective , however .
The European Parliament - the Committee on Legal Affairs - has always recognised the decisions of the national authorities with regard to the appointment of an MEP , and has also recognised electoral dispute procedures .
What is not acceptable is for the Italian judiciary , practically three years after the last elections , a year after Mr Occhetto was accepted as a Member of this Parliament , to suddenly tell us that that appointment was not valid .
Mr Gargani has explained the reasons from a legal point of view , but there is a fundamental political aspect : Parliament is made up of Members appointed in accordance with national law , by means of decisions by national authorities : administrative , electoral or judicial .
Once we are in this Parliament , however , Parliament constitutes a body in its own right , with its own personality , with the right to defend itself .
I believe that the Occhetto case is going to set a great parliamentary precedent .
From this point onwards , the national administrative or judicial authorities will know that Parliament has the power , at a given moment , to declare that a national decision does not comply with the law , that it has been arbitrary .
Parliament has the right and the duty to protect its Members .
If we do not do so , Mr President , we shall be exposed to a situation in which , as a result of an arbitrary decision by a national authority or national court , you or any other Member of this Parliament can have their status as MEP taken away .
It is essential to our parliamentary work that Members of Parliament should feel secure when carrying out their work .
I believe that Mr Gargani has done a great job as chairman - we have discussed many issues over many years - and in this case we have an agreement that is accepted by all of the parties , which does not reflect any party-political interest , but which responds to the need to defend the very status of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament , the body that represents the people of Europe , is established as a body in its own right and makes its own decisions .
It is not like the Council , which is subject to the vicissitudes of national politics .
We MEPs have a mandate , a fixed-term mandate that cannot be interrupted by means of an arbitrary national decision .
I shall therefore say once again that the Occhetto decision will be an historic decision in the history of Parliament , in the history of the affirmation of the personality of Parliament and of the rights of MEPs .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if there is one thing with which I agree , it is that there is a risk that the decision by this Parliament may mark a genuinely historic step , in that it will compromise issues , problems , principles and rules that go far beyond this specific event .
This Parliament has never cast doubt upon the principle and rule laid down by the provisions of the Treaty on the national jurisdiction to settle disputes relating to electoral procedure and , thus , to proclaim those elected , with regard to whom Parliament then proceeds to carry out the so-called ' verification of credentials ' - in other words , verification of electoral offices .
To confirm what I am saying , instead of commenting on it I would like to quote word for word the content of Parliament 's decision , adopted on 14 December 2004 by this plenary , validating the mandate of all of us who were elected in those European elections .
The mandate was declared valid , and I quote exactly ' ... subject to any decisions by the competent authorities of Member States in which the election results have been disputed ' .
This plenary confirmed a rule that is well-known to all !
I would like to add that in support of its decision the Committee on Legal Affairs refers to several articles both from the European Election Act and from the Rules of Procedure , referring to Parliament 's jurisdiction to intervene in the event of resignations .
We are not talking about any resignations !
The issue on which the Italian courts handed down a judgment relates to the dispute or the resolution of the dispute regarding the election , once Mr Di Pietro had resigned as a Member of this Parliament , his replacement being Mr Occhetto or Mr Donnici .




The dispute was resolved by means of a provisional judgment , subject to appeal , which resulted in the proclamation of Mr Occhetto as the successful candidate ; then came the judgment by the Italian Council of State - the Electoral Office , it is the same thing , Mr Gargani , it is not important - then came the judgment on the dispute , the final judgment by the Council of State , which proclaimed Mr Donnici as the successful candidate .


Let us not discuss the resignations by Mr Occhetto , their compatibility with the wording , with the letter or with the mandate - let us simply discuss the prerogative and the jurisdiction of the national authorities to proclaim a Member , whose electoral credentials are then verified .
The consequences of the vote that we are about to make would involve a serious institutional conflict , breach of the provisions of the Treaty , and a possible empty seat , because in any case it would be for the national authorities to proclaim the person elected to replace the person whose mandate was not validated .
I will end by expressing my full appreciation for the members of the committee .
Mr Gargani , nobody is casting doubt on the competence of the members ; on the contrary , you have all my admiration , because the real skill of a jurist can be seen not when he is defending just causes , but when he is defending lost causes .
I have every appreciation and respect for the way in which you have succeeded in obtaining this result .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with all respect to the multitude of authoritative jurists with which the Committee on Legal Affairs is swarming , more modestly , I believe that if this Chamber were to approve the Gargani report tomorrow , the European Parliament would be committing a very serious and unprecedented act . It would be an unheard-of abuse of a Member who would see himself illegitimately deprived of his parliamentary mandate , and an unprecedented and unique breach of the treaties which , on electoral matters , clearly recognise the pre-eminence of the laws , procedures and authority of the Member States .
This would be a serious conflict with a Member State , which would be deprived of a Member recognised as such by the laws and the legal authority of that country .
Mr President , the Committee on Legal Affairs has usurped powers that do not belong to it .
I do not side with either of the two contenders .
I am politically indifferent because they are both from the centre left ; I understand Mr Occhetto 's personal problem , for which I have empathy in purely human terms .
What is at stake here , though , is the law , the correct composition of the European Parliament and the credibility of the highest Community institution .
Justice , and only justice , must therefore be done , and any hint of politics and petty political party calculations must be left aside .
What sort of trust can the citizens place in a European Parliament that distorts its own composition by excluding a Member who is eminently qualified to be a part of it ?
Let us look at the facts : the legal authority proclaimed Mr Donnici as the successful candidate , in an unappealable judgment .
The Italian State notified the European Parliament of his election .
The committee was charged with verifying Mr Donnici 's credentials .
It was supposed to verify the offices he held and any incompatibility in them .
It is of course true that it could examine appeals by third parties and therefore it legitimately examined the challenges put forward by Mr Occhetto .
What it could not do was to declare null and void an act delivered before a public official of a Member State .
This is a legal act that may be carried out solely by the legal authority of the Member State that has dealt with the matter and that has handed down an irrevocable and unappealable judgment .


( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to thank Mr Gargani , because the issue has been very complex and difficult , and the work has been completed with great wisdom and with a sense of responsibility , in accordance with just one criterion : safeguarding , above all , the rights and prerogatives of this Parliament .
The main or crucial point of the decisions taken is right and , above all , it avoids a precedent being set , namely the recognition of acts or initiatives that restrict the choices of candidates or of those who are about to become MEPs .
It is true that this is a first , and probably also sets a precedent , but this precedent and this first are fair and guarantee the prerogatives of the European Parliament .
The decisions that we are taking are linked to a function and to a prerogative that is granted to us , giving us the right to express ourselves , to accept , to assess or to reject credentials and acts that are put before us .
So this is not a case of going beyond our territory , but just the right to express an opinion that is given to us by this Parliament itself .
It is necessary firstly to protect the rights of our colleagues and secondly the rights of the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) I will vote against the proposal for a decision , for the following reasons which , I am certain , will be accepted by the Court of Justice .
The proposal is misguided because :
1 ) in general , the appointment of those elected is the province of national bodies , as provided by Articles 7 and 11 of the Act of 20 September 1976 ;

2 ) in letter C : Mr Occhetto did not withdraw from the mandate at all , but from nomination by the Italian central electoral office and his position in the list of the candidates voted for ; the withdrawal referred to in Rule 3 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure is that of a Member who has already been appointed and does not refer to acts preceding appointment ;

3 ) in letter D : the prohibition on a binding mandate relates to the exercise of a mandate already received , and not to events preceding the appointment ;
4 ) in letters E , F and G : the reference to the Statute for Members that has not yet entered into force is irrelevant , and so is the reference to Members subsequent to appointment ;
5 ) in letters J , I , K and L : the Italian Council of State not only annulled but also amended the previous decision by the regional administrative tribunal , in a judgment not subject to appeal ;
6 ) point 2 : Parliament cannot replace the Italian office appointing a Member of Parliament .
Common organisation of agricultural markets ( debate )
The next item is the report by Niels Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products - C6-0045 / 2007 - .

Madam President , I want to start by thanking Parliament , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and the rapporteur , Mr Busk , for the swift and constructive way the proposal was dealt with .
Secondly , on behalf of Mrs Fischer-Boel , I am grateful for the political support you are giving to the proposal .
I also greatly appreciate the positive thrust of the Committee on Agriculture 's report .
We are discussing a very specific subject : the European Parliament 's opinion on the single common market organisation , or CMO .
Simplification in the field of agriculture is one of the flagships of the Commission .
This text is different from most Commission proposals in the area of the CAP .
Why ?
With the single CMO we want to make an important step towards simplifying and improving the legislative framework of the common agricultural policy .
I know that it has become popular to talk about simplification and better regulation .
This proposal shows very clearly what these terms can mean in practice .
The single CMO will merge all 21 CMOs into one text .
It will replace more than 40 Council regulations and almost 620 articles and it will reduce the number of articles and pages in the Official Journal by more than two thirds .
Apart from such merely quantitative parameters , the single CMO will make our market legislation more homogenous and consistent , in other words more easily accessed and read and thus better understood and applied .
According to the Presidency 's planning , this proposal will be discussed at the meeting of the Special Committee for Agriculture on 29 May and 4 June and probably on 11 June in the Council .
Let me also at this stage thank Parliament for helping make this early decision possible .
From time to time the Commission is told that the single CMO is not enough to make our farmers ' lives easier .
I fully agree .
It takes more than one legislative text to achieve real simplification .
That is why the single CMO is only one element , even though a very important one , of several components of simplification strategy in agriculture .
Other components , as you will recall , include the Commission 's cross-compliance report , which will have a real impact on farmers ' lives once its proposals are implemented , the simplification action plan , currently with 37 practical measures , which agriculture is busy implementing , and the health check , which will also be targeted at further simplifying the CAP .
But back to the CMO .
As I have already said , on behalf of the Commission , I appreciate the positive tone of the report and I will therefore be able to accept a number of amendments set out in the Committee on Agriculture report .
But you will not be surprised that I have some serious difficulties with some of the proposed amendments because I believe they would unnecessarily reduce the proposal 's impact .
I would like to mention two points of particular importance .
First there is the request to keep two areas entirely out of the single CMO until they are reformed : fruit and vegetables and wine .
I do not share this view but I could accept incorporation of their substantive parts only after the reform processes are over .
The second point concerns the set-up of the management committee .
The Committee on Agriculture report recommends four subsections .
This would in our view be in contradiction with the single CMO and make the new committee unnecessarily inflexible .
But I can assure you that the Commission is determined to organise the meetings of the single committee in such a way as to include the necessary expertise and take account of the specificities of the sectors concerned .
Thank you for your attention at this late hour .
I am looking forward to the discussion .

rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , firstly I should like to thank the German Presidency and the Commission for their particularly constructive cooperation during the preparation of this report .
The cooperation has been based on openness and trust and has without a doubt contributed to this report being adopted by a very large majority in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I would , of course , also thank my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for some interesting debates and for their major contribution to this report .
It has , overall , been a pleasure to cooperate with them on this matter .
The Commission has put forward a very ambitious proposal , which I welcome .
It is good to simplify and to create openness and transparency , and transparency is something that I do most certainly believe that this proposal will result in .
That being said , it should be added that this simplification is most evident of all in the legislative document itself , which overall has been reduced from 600 to 200 pages .
This shows that a lot has happened .
This legislative package constitutes the agricultural industry 's framework conditions , and the overarching objective should be to create clarity regarding the framework conditions , and in such a way that those at whom this report is targeted , namely the operators , also perceive the changes as a simplification .
There is no real policy change here , and the simplification will not be noticed in any way by the end-user , that is to say the farmer .
During the process , many people have complained that what has taken place has been anything but a simplification .
The operators have until now worked with one market organisation or perhaps with quite a small number of them . These are now to be incorporated into just the one , which will comprise all the old organisations .
Some people may not immediately perhaps see the changes as a simplification .
For those , however , who use more than one of the sector-specific market organisations or those who want to obtain an overview of the different market organisations , this consolidated set of regulations is definitely a simplification .
The Commission proposes that a number of provisions of a technical nature be transferred from the Council to the Commission .
The provisions concerned are ones that , until now , the Council has been able to adopt without first consulting the European Parliament .
These are what are known as the second-generation agreements . Insofar as we are concerned exclusively in this case with provisions of a purely technical nature , I think it very appropriate to transfer these , as a regulatory power , to the Commission , which will thus be able to take some very rapid and effective decisions .
I should like , however , to emphasise that any decision of a political nature must still be taken in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 37 of the Treaty , that is to say after consulting the European Parliament .
As a natural extension of the simplification , the Commission proposes that , in future , only one management committee be employed .
That is something I am very sceptical about , since I cannot imagine only one management committee being able to provide the necessary expertise .
There are such big differences between the many market mechanisms we have , for example as regards animal production and vegetable production , and that applies within all the various sectors .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has therefore proposed that four management committees be set up .
This is an area that I want the Commission to keep a careful eye on and that it should also report on .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would like a progress report to be drawn up two years down the line .
We shall then have to look more closely at the number of management committees .
We must look at the organisation and at the support we receive from experts , and we must take an overall look at how this very important area - the market sector - operates .
In conclusion , I should like to wish the Commission good luck .
I am convinced that it will continue to be possible for the Commission and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to cooperate in this area .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my sincere thanks to our rapporteur Mr Busk for the truly constructive , collegial and - in my opinion - very good work he has done in cooperation with the other members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We have all been calling for a simplification of the CAP and the market organisations for a long time .
I am delighted that it is agricultural policy , the only policy really brought within the Community , that is prepared to take this course .
I warmly welcome the fact that these 21 regulations on sector-specific market organisations are being combined into a single Regulation , and thus that the legal framework is being streamlined .
The rapporteur has already specified the benefits of this single common market organisation .
In my opinion , the CAP should be managed by means of the four basic regulations .
I fully agree with the rapporteur that this can only be a matter of technical changes , which are dealt with by the Commission , and not of changes to political decisions .
We , as representatives and Members of the European Parliament , want to , and must , insist on having codecision powers and on participating in dealing with these issues .
I also consider it important that the wine and the fruit and vegetables sectors be exempted , as the process of reform for these is not yet complete .
I am also in favour of the special management committees , as , particularly in very specific matters , things cannot just be lumped together .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur once again and say on behalf of my group that this is a very successful report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) In theory , I cannot believe that anyone could object to the principles of simplifying , streamlining and removing bureaucracy announced by the Commission in this proposal to bring the 21 current regulations under one single regulation .
Anything that can be done to remove or reduce the bureaucratic intricacies woven by agricultural policy while it has been in force , which in some cases have been the most surreal puzzle for farmers , has to be applauded .
When it comes to the practical benefits of the proposal for farmers ' lives , one cannot help but feel a certain amount of disappointment .
The proposal is a good exercise in codification , insofar as it brings a series of dispersed rules under one single text .
I also welcome the inclusion of the new common market organisations ( CMOs ) for various products thus far covered by standards that did not constitute genuine CMOs and the fact that other rules adopted by the Council not currently part of CMOs have been brought under the same regulation .
The reduction in the number of management committees will also certainly lead to some savings for the Commission 's budget , although there is a serious risk of a drop in the technical level .
All of these are real gains for the Commission services but , let me repeat , I do not expect real gains for the farmers , who are the biggest victims of the complexity of the bureaucratic system .
For these reasons , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament gives the benefit of the doubt to the Commission 's proposal , and seeks to contribute by means of amendments on its initiative and by supporting others aimed at improving upon the proposal .
Examples of this include re-establishing the balance of powers between the Commission and the Council , clarification and strengthening of the role of interbranch organisations and the guarantee of adequate involvement of the Member States in a more limited number of management committees , with the aim of ensuring that the technical quality is kept at an acceptable level .
We also support the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development aimed at excluding the CMOs under review from the new regulation , as we believe that their inclusion at this time could lead to less compliance among participants with the ongoing process , the conclusion of which cannot and must not be brought forward .
The Commission will hopefully welcome these constructive suggestions , which I am sure Parliament will adopt by a resounding majority .
Lastly , as shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I should like to commend the work of the rapporteur , Mr Busk , and all those who helped to achieve a broad consensus on the core issues .
Madam President , the initiative to simplify the common agricultural policy and to adopt more comprehensible and transparent legal norms deserves our support , but on condition that the new regulation does not end up imposing yet another set of technical - supposedly universal - standards on the Community .
This begs the question as to whether such wide-ranging simplification is not tantamount to restricting specialisation , and the loss of sensitivity to specific agricultural conditions .
The Commission assures us that these are merely technical amendments , but in reality it also wants to take some of the powers away from the Council .
The Commission also assures us that all decisions of a political nature are taken in accordance with Article 37 of the EU Treaty , after consultation with the European Parliament .
But we know that this is not the case .
One instance of this rule being infringed was the sugar market reform .
Now , under the guise of technical amendments , it is trying to intervene in the pork market , which in combination with the elimination of maize subsidies , will destabilise these areas of agriculture and will again hit farmers ' pockets .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group - ( PL ) Madam President , please allow me to re-iterate the fundamental facts of discrimination against the new Member States in the framework of the so-called ' common ' agricultural policy .
And note that these statistics come from EU institutions .
For example , in 2004 the new Member States had 22 % of the total farmland , but received just under 4 % in subsidies .
Per-hectare agricultural and rural development subsidies in 2007 were EUR 148 per hectare for the new Member States , and EUR 366 per hectare for the old Member States .
A similar imbalance is expected for 2013 , which means we face ten years of discrimination against the new Member States , thereby losing the opportunity to build up a strong European agriculture .
Imbalances in the allocation of milk quotas persist .
Holland , which has one-eighth of the farmland that Poland has , has a higher milk quota .
As regards the sugar market , the reform mainly favours the old Member States , which are the ones responsible for over-production in the first place .
And finally , the fruit and vegetable market , where some EUR 700 million are allocated to producers ' organisations .
90 % of these subsidies go to three Member States where they go to a narrow circle of the most powerful producers ' organisations .
The processed fruit and vegetables market currently enjoys EUR 775 million of subsidies , of which more than 86 % go to just three old Member States , and 2.5 % goes to the new Member States .
All new Member States receive one-tenth of the average for one old Member State .
Ladies and gentlemen , in his speech before this House on 25 of April this year , the Indian President Abdul Kalam said amongst others that achieving a lasting solution required ' righteousness in the heart ' .
His message was warmly received with ovations by yourselves .
The agricultural market reforms we are discussing today has many good points : it will simplify legislation and reduce administrative costs , and make the lives of farmers easier .
But it has one fundamental flaw , and that is that it does not have ' righteousness in the heart ' , as it fails to correct the unfair subsidies for farmers on individual markets .
It affects mainly the poorer farmers in the new Member States .
The poor get less , and the rich more .
This has nothing to do with fundamental principles of the European Union , such as solidarity .
The rules of the CAP are blatantly breached in many markets .
Repeated attempts to introduce fair subsidies for farmers in particular markets have proved ineffective .
Statistical data showing clear discrimination have been ignored .
The European Commission 's present proposal retains some of the organisational defects of individual markets .
It is artificial , unfair and cut off from the real situation .
Voting for simplification in this situation is voting for continued injustice and discrimination .
So I appeal mainly to the Members representing the new Member States : do not vote for simplification , because despite its apparent merits , it discriminates against your farmers .
At the same time I appeal to the representatives of old Member States : do you know that financial discrimination against the new states is a threat to the future of the entire European Union , and perpetuates the division of the EU into rich and poor by denying the idea of building a strong Europe capable of competing on the global market ?
For this reason I am voting against the Commission 's proposal and against adopting this report .
While I realise that simplifying legislation is necessary , it should only happen when individual markets have been organised fairly .
My fellow Europeans , let us all have ' righteousness in the heart ' !
- Madam President , consolidation of 21 regulations on sector-specific common market organisations into a single regulation which combines all sectors as a simplification step is welcome .
But it is the impact delivered on the ground that really matters .
Simplification must translate into noticeable improvements in terms of a lesser bureaucratic burden for the agri-food sector right across the Member States .
If I have one major concern : we must not denude the new management committee - or committees , if it be that - of the valuable expertise which existed on the outgoing sectoral management committees .
A super CMO which , on the face of it , ticks the boxes of regulation reduction but which diminishes expert sectoral input would only be a short-term gain .
A triumph of bureaucrats over experts from the sectors is not a good deal .
Sectoral expertise has been valuable and must be preserved .
Thus , I think we need to hear more from the Commission in terms of assurances and indications as to how sectoral expertise will , in fact , be retained , utilised and respected .
- ( PL ) Madam President , today we are debating the simplification of CAP legislation .
On the table is the creation of a unified common agricultural market organisation in place of the 21 sectors that currently exist .
We will be able to abrogate 41 Council regulations containing more than 600 articles and replace them by one single regulation .
These activities obviously deserve a positive response , if they lead to an improvement in EU legislation and will be more readily understood by farmers and taxpayers .
However , it all appears somewhat unrealistic .
Let me give you an example : the paying authority in Poland is now accepting applications for direct payments for the third time .
This year they have been so simplified that we were late in submitting them because the farmers had problems filling them in .
The whole idea of simplification will be technical in nature , and therefore cannot by metamorphosed in the latest CAP reform .
Removing intervention purchases for the pork meat market is not acceptable .
I would also tread carefully on the matter of transferring the Council 's regulatory authority to the Commission , as it may give Member States less say in the decision-making process concerning the functioning of the first pillar of the CAP .
Another question that arises is what is the point of making all of these changes , when we are in the process of reforming the fruit and vegetable and wine markets anyway , and we do not know the results of the 2008 health check which will generally determine the future of the CAP .
In my view , we should streamline and simplify the system of direct payments in the EU 27 particularly , and equalise the rates of subsidies , and only then can we talk of equal conditions for competition .
As regards the simplicity of the SAPS system , we should consider its simplification for the EU 15 .
Let us hope that this simplification , and the creation of a harmonised common market ( ... )
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Madam President , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very good report .
He is a very experienced Member of this House and I would have expected nothing less from him .
There is no doubt that the need to streamline decision-making and removing red tape from the common agricultural policy is a primacy of importance .
It is my view that if we have to harmonise - and we must have harmonisation - we should always harmonise up to the best possible standard .
It is clear that better regulation can be achieved .
I do not want more and more civil servants - let me make that very clear - either in Brussels or in Member States making more difficulties for the farmers trying to do their job on the ground , creating and developing more problems than we would like to solve .
Yes , we need better regulation , but we also need more transparency .
I share Mr Busk 's view on the need to keep intervention for pig meat , because this sector does - as we have experienced on numerous occasions - from time to time go into over-production , which is very difficult to control .
I believe that , for short periods , we require support in that sector .
I also believe that it would be going much too far , in the short term , to reduce the advisory committees , as we require a high degree of expertise on what can be extremely delicate issues .
I would give qualified support to the Commission to consolidate the existing 21 regulations .
It is my belief that we need less regulation , not more .
This is a welcome start , and I trust we can look forward to the health check to bring forward even more deregulation .
Let us destroy red tape in the common agricultural policy forever .
( PL ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Niels Busk for his report in such a difficult area as the creation of a harmonised and common organisation for agricultural markets .
Replacing the 21 common market organisations by a single horizontal Regulation of the Council for a single market organisation will undoubtedly lead to a simplification and improvement of the legal structure of the first pillar of the CAP , and to greater transparency in agricultural legislation .
However , we must not forget that creating a uniform , common market organisation is a process of technical simplification which cannot incorporate elements of policy change .
The work currently underway on the new directive cannot mean the endorsement of the adopted rules of the CAP , and should not be a pretext for changing political decisions already taken in respect of agricultural policy .
In this regard , the Commission 's proposal to remove the intervention group on the pig meat market , which in Poland at least is so important , is unjustified .
The European Commission 's proposal to create a single committee to manage the common organisation of agricultural markets also arouses doubts in me .
Can one committee with a limited number of national experts function properly ?
Will this solution not result in a limitation of the influence of Member States on the administration of market instruments ?
How does the Commission intend to ensure the full representation of national expertise in the committee-based process ?
Would the above not indicate the need for at least a few management committees , including separate committees for the meat , milk and vegetable markets ?
And one final question : As regards extending the authority of the Commission , I would like to say that the competences of the Council can only be transferred to the European Commission on technical matters which do not have any effect on the functioning of the agricultural markets .
This means that the authority to define quality standards and the system of classifying carcasses on the beef , veal and pork markets , the authority to determine trading standards on the egg , poultry and live plant market should be within the competence of the Council , and not the European Commission .
Furthermore , any questions of a political nature should continue to be discussed with the Council and Parliament .
Madam President , honourable Members , this was a very interesting discussion , I should like to thank you very much for it .
First of all , let me recall that this exercise is indeed about simplification and not about another reform of the CAP or a redistribution of aid as some have feared .
I think it also revealed that there are quite a few points which I can accept or where I am certain that acceptable solutions will eventually be found , notably on the carcass classification , the reference to potato starch quotas and also a clause giving a further assurance that the status quo for producer and inter-branch organisations is maintained .
As far as the fruit and vegetable and wine sectors are concerned , and their inclusion in the single CMO from the outset and as regards the kind of management committee , I have already made my point .
In some cases the report is asking to go beyond the status quo of what we have today .
I do not think we should introduce any such amendments on this occasion as that would change the character of the exercise .
Concerning the set-up of the management committee - a matter raised by Mr Busk - organising four subsections would go against the idea of a single CMO and make the new committee unnecessarily inflexible .
But we can assure you that the Commission is determined to organise the meetings of the single committee in such a way as to include the necessary expertise and take account of the specificities of the sectors concerned .
Let me also make very clear that with regard to the role of the European Parliament , technical decisions and market management decisions need to be decided at Commission level .
In no way is the Commission receiving powers to amend substantive or any other policy decisions .
Therefore Parliament is not being bypassed .
The Commission 's powers will be restricted to implementing rules .
I can assure you of that .
With regard to pigmeat , I am not so certain why an instrument that has not been used in more than 30 years should still be considered as a basic policy decision that needs to be maintained .
In concluding , let me stress once again in answer to the points raised regarding the complexity and the bureaucracy of the CAP , this is just a first step .
Others will follow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )

Madam President , on a point of order , under our Rules of Procedure , Annex I , Article 2 , any Member who has not submitted a declaration of interests has to be reminded of this fact by the President .
If he or she continues to fail to do so , this fact is published in the Minutes .
It is then stated that , if the Member continues to refuse to submit the declaration , the President shall take action in accordance with Rule 147 to suspend the Member concerned .
I see from the Minutes of the sitting on Monday that Mr Herrero-Tejedor and Mr Nattrass , from the UK Independence Party , have still failed to complete their declaration of interests .
It is now several months in a row that they have been named and shamed in the Minutes and I would urge the President to take action appropriate to the situation .
It undermines the reputation and the credibility of this House .
I shall pass that on , Mr Corbett .
Documents received : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Kashmir : present situation and future prospects ( debate )
The next item is the report by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on Kashmir : present situation and future prospects .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I am honoured to present the Committee on Foreign Affairs report entitled ' Kashmir : present situation and future prospects ' .
This report correctly contrasts the situation between the world 's largest secular democracy which has devolved structures at all levels - India , including Jammu and Kashmir - and Pakistan , which still lacks full implementation of democracy in Azad Jammu and Kashmir and has yet to take steps towards democracy in Gilgit and Baltistan .
It also highlights the fact that there is considerable evidence that over many years Pakistan has provided Kashmiri militants with training , weapons , funding and sanctuary and has encouraged militants to commit atrocities on the Indian-administered side .
It takes a firm line on human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir .
It is also constructive as it highlights the common heritage shared by India and Pakistan , exemplified in the ancient culture of Jammu and Kashmir , and recognises and values the pluralism , multiculturalism and multi-faith nature and secular traditions of the peoples of Jammu and Kashmir , which have been kept alive in the Indian part of Jammu and Kashmir .
This is an enlightened and balanced report , which denounces terrorism and those who support terrorism ; it promotes a vision of peace , coexistence , friendship and economic integration and commerce between peoples on both sides of the border and in Gilgit and Baltistan along the lines of the European Union model .
I urge this House to adopt it in its entirety , with certain amendments , so that an unambiguous message is sent to the disturbers of peace in that part of the world that the international community will not tolerate extremism or terrorism any more and that we respect and uphold the rights and ethnicity of the Kashmiri people .
I have with me a strong statement - of this morning - by Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto , Chairperson of the Pakistan People 's Party , in which she welcomes this report for drawing attention to the right of self-determination of the Kashmiri people ; for reaffirming the EU 's commitment to the settlement of dispute by peaceful means ; for taking note of the impact of the earthquake and urging the European Union to help and support the Kashmiris ; for supporting the role of the composite peace process in moving towards a durable settlement for the Kashmiris based on democracy , the rule of law and fundamental rights ; for urging the Indian and Pakistan Governments to facilitate the ceasefire on the Line of Control by calling further on militant armed groups to enrol in a disarmament , demobilisation and rehabilitation process ; for encouraging the Pakistan Government to transform the ceasefire in place in Siachin since 2003 into a lasting peace agreement ; for urging both governments to allow international human rights organisations immediate and unrestricted access to all parts of the former princely state in order to investigate the human rights situation there ; for calling on the Indian Government to put an end to all practices of extrajudicial killings , ' disappearances ' , torture and arbitrary detentions in Jammu and Kashmir ; for calling on the Indian and Pakistani authorities to ease restrictions on travel between Srinagar and Muzaffarabad ; for urging Pakistan to revisit its concepts of fundamental rights of freedom of expression , freedom of association , freedom of religious practices in Azad Jammu and Kashmir and Gilgit and Baltistan ; for calling for the first-ever elections to be held in Gilgit and Baltistan and for seeking higher democratic representation in the Northern Areas .
She firmly supports this report .
I am proud to inform the House that Imran Khan MP , former captain of the Pakistan cricket team and now head of his political party Tehreek-e-Insaaf , today pledged his full support for this report .
The plight of the Kashmiri people has been of concern to the international community for nearly 60 years .
The European Union strongly supports regional integration , trade liberalisation and economic cooperation .
The European Parliament is keenly interested in all aspects of the situation .
Let me draw your attention to the hundreds of young people who demonstrated in favour of this report , calling for the democratic freedoms that we recommend .
They were beaten up by the police , their banners and petitions to the UN were destroyed .
They demonstrated again .
Two hundred of their relatives were kidnapped and have not been heard of since .
Subsequently , many thousands of citizens of Azad Jammu and Kashmir have held meetings and pledged their full support for the report .
Over the border in Jammu and Kashmir , India continues to be criticised for her large military presence .
The report is strong on human rights in Jammu and Kashmir , as in the other areas .
In Gilgit and Baltistan , the people are kept in poverty , illiteracy and backwardness .
The report makes clear its support for the current peace process .
It recognises the ancient and unique heritage of the Kashmiri people . It reflects many principles of the European Union .
I earnestly hope that this House will support the report as wholeheartedly during the vote today as it was supported by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Madam President , I followed with great interest the very lively debate in the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Kashmir report by Baroness Nicholson .
There is much food for thought in this report .
It is too comprehensive for me to be able to respond in detail today , but I should like to reflect on some of the issues which it raises .
The focus on Kashmir is timely .
On the political front , there have been many positive developments , which , for the first time in many years , give some hope that this long-standing issue is getting closer to a solution .
Both India and Pakistan have indicated that the Line of Control could become a ' soft border ' .
The European Union has expressed its firm support for the reconciliation process between India and Pakistan .
But the road is still full of pitfalls .
It is encouraging that the composite dialogue process remains on track despite terrorism .
I was in Delhi when the terrible attacks on the daily Lahore-Samjhota Express train took place last February .
It would indeed be tragic if the peace process could be taken hostage by terrorists .
I see no alternative to both countries addressing their differences through dialogue .
This will , hopefully , lead eventually to settlement of all bilateral issues .
I also feel it is important that the Kashmiris themselves have become more involved in the arrangements for the peace process .
I would like to say a few words about the terrible earthquake that struck Kashmir on the morning of 8 October 2005 and which , as Baroness Nicholson 's report describes , had a devastating impact on the lives of the Kashmiris on both sides of the Line of Control , especially in Pakistan-administered Kashmir and the North West Frontier Province .
I had the opportunity to visit the earthquake-affected areas in person when I visited Pakistan to represent the European Commission at the earthquake reconstruction conference in November that year .
The European Commission responded to this tragedy by providing humanitarian aid of EUR 48 million and by committing , in December 2005 , a EUR 50 million programme on ' Earthquake Recovery and Reconstruction support to Pakistan ' , which covers rehabilitation of education and health facilities in the affected areas , an emergency education programme and community-based livelihood recovery schemes .
Thus , we are aiming to do what the report recommends , namely help the most vulnerable and restore economic activities in the affected area .
This earthquake response comes in addition to other development programmes in Pakistan under our country strategy .
Although the Commission has been quick to react to this challenge , I nevertheless expect that the reconstruction effort will still take a number of years .
The Commission 's reconstruction programme will be implemented over a period of five years .
As far as the Northern Areas of Pakistan are concerned , the Commission has been active there over many years in developing human resources especially , in improving the public school system and in cooperating with the Aga Khan Education Services .
While implementing our programmes there , we have ensured that all communities - and government schools - benefit from project activities .
Before I conclude , I would like to thank Baroness Nicholson for the encouraging words she found to recognise the work of the Commission 's delegations in Islamabad and New Delhi .
This is much appreciated .
I would just like to add that I would have loved to have stayed for the whole debate but , as communicated , I have to leave before the end due to long-standing commitments which I could not alter after Parliament 's change to the agenda , but my colleague Mrs Grybauskaitwill take over and stay on in the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , the tragic and bloody dispute over the beautiful Himalayan territory of the former princely state of Kashmir between the two great south-Asian countries of India and Pakistan is one of the oldest in the world , going right back to UN Security Council resolutions 39 and 47 of 1948 .
I strongly support the Nicholson report , and I congratulate the rapporteur on its content and quality , after considerable rebalancing during the committee stage , both in tone and in terms of its approach .
The report is accurate and primarily recognises that current ongoing bilateral confidence-building talks between the Indian and Pakistani Governments remain the best strategy to achieve a just and enduring peace between these two nuclear-armed states .
My British colleague , Mr Bushill-Matthews , who alone voted against it in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , informs me that he will now be supporting the report , which indicates how it has progressed during its various stages .
Mercifully , since the agreed ceasefire on 25 November 2003 , we are now witnessing one of the most peaceful periods in terms of military action since the 1971 Indo-Pakistan war : a ceasefire that has survived serious provocations to the Government of India , including the Mumbai terrorist bombings .
Nevertheless , Kashmiri Pandits still continue to claim that cross-border infiltrating terrorists are attempting a campaign of ethnic cleansing against the local Hindu population , albeit it on a vastly reduced scale .
Similarly , the report rightly calls for restraint by the Indian military , with full respect by the security forces for human rights , the wellbeing of civilian populations and observance of issued court orders .
The report highlights the lack of genuine democracy in Azad Kashmir and , in particular , for the first time , the plight of the inhabitants of Gilgit-Baltistan .
There are also general concerns expressed in AJK over a number of issues , including women 's rights and religious minority rights .
I , and many colleagues , warmly welcomed in 2005 the launching of a bus service across the line of control between Srinagar and Muzaffarabad allowing divided families to be reunited after nearly 60 years , and it is my hope that , eventually , the borders , including the line of control , will be just a line on the map and become increasingly irrelevant .
We in the EU have already proved this with our four freedoms of movement of people , goods , services and capital . A similar future vision of a south-Asian economic community by 2025 will require free trade across the line of control .
Both India and Pakistan , much to their credit , cooperated positively after the October Kashmir earthquake to provide humanitarian aid to thousands of victims and displaced people .
But much remains to be done to resettle the displaced populations permanently .
The EU 's role , in my opinion , is to support a peaceful settlement of the problem over the former princely state , with the EU willing to act as an honest broker for peace , but only if both sovereign governments ask for our help , as , ultimately , we regard the Kashmir dispute as a bilateral matter .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to repeat my appeal to all parties that support the militants waging a violent Jihad to stop their activities immediately .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , India and Pakistan have waged three wars over the Kashmir region .
This very much reminds me of the dispute between Germany and France over the Alsace-Lorraine region - where this sitting is being held .
Three wars were waged in this region , too - but Germany and France decided after the Second World War to put an end to the confrontation and make cooperation the maxim of their policy .
The successes of this policy can be seen in the European Union today .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament would like to see India and Pakistan , too , moving on from confrontation and making cooperation the maxim of their policy .
People in the Kashmir region would benefit tremendously and the whole region would blossom .
I believe SAARC ( South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ) has the potential to be a similar success story to the EU .
Naturally , peace thrives best where democracy prevails .
In this report , we are very critical of the absence of democracy - the democratic deficits - in the Kashmir region , and also of the many human rights violations .
People are suffering on both sides of the Line of Control .
All parties involved are called on , therefore , to introduce democracy and respect for human rights there once and for all .
We can see that there is a tremendous amount of violence there - consisting of violence within the region and also infiltration from outside - and 80 000 people have lost their lives .
There must be an end to the arrival of violent groups in the region from across the border .
Naturally , we call on the military , too , to respect human rights .
We also call on human rights commissions to penalise , including in court , violations of this kind taking place in both countries .
It is unacceptable that people are being kidnapped , tortured and killed with impunity .
In our opinion , the EU should support the region 's environmental and economic rehabilitation .
Excellent work has been done there in the field of humanitarian aid , as I have been able to see with my own eyes .
This commitment must continue .
This report is evidently the first in the world to deal with Kashmir .
I wish to thank the rapporteur for her courage in including quite a few things in her report .
We have been struggling over this for months .
I believe that this report will help the people in the region and also assist the India-Pakistan peace process .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) First of all , I would like to congratulate Baroness Nicholson for the comprehensive and important report .
I know that she was under all sorts of pressures but that she was able to withstand them .
I am aware that it is not easy for a British deputy to free herself from domestic political considerations , and that she was successful in doing so .
Therefore she deserves all our respect , and I support the report .
The European Union is taking on a serious commitment to repair the damage caused by the earthquake in Kashmir .
We have agreed to provide support in the amount of EUR 100 million , and in the coming years will be offering 200 million to Pakistan and 470 million in the form of development aid .
This means that we have a moral basis for expressing an opinion on these questions .
We are all very concerned that on both sides of the ' Line of Control ' serious violations of human rights have taken place .
But it is very encouraging that Prime Minister Singh of India has announced a policy of zero tolerance , and over the past few years there have visibly been very positive steps forward in Indian-controlled territory .
We expect the same from Pakistan .
We also expect Pakistan to take much more decisive action against extremists and terrorists , and not to allow them to drift across the border into Indian-controlled territory .
The conflict is not simply a question of boundaries .
It cannot be resolved from one day to the next .
The first prerequisite for building confidence is for the conflict to be resolved .
Baroness Nicholson 's report shows that real improvement is needed in the current situation .
The necessary social and economic conditions must be created .
Family reunification must be made possible .
Commercial ties need to be fostered , the infrastructure developed , new education institutions established and jobs created .
But all this is not enough .
It is necessary , but not sufficient .
It is important for political dialogue to begin , with the Indian Government , the Pakistani Government and the whole spectrum of Kashmiri political life , with all those authorities that are willing to give up the use of force .
It is very important for the Kashmiris to be involved as well in finding a solution to the problem , for there will be no durable solution to the problem in Kashmir as long as freely and democratically elected Kashmiri leaders are unable to take part .
In my judgment , India has shown a high degree of flexibility in recent times , and for this reason we expect the same from Pakistan as well , since there are close ties linking us to both countries .
Both countries are important partners to us , and it is in our greatest interest that the two countries finally put an end to their conflict in a peaceful , constructive manner , and that in the meantime everything be done in an atmosphere of trust and dialogue .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , Baroness Nicholson , for her report .
I also wish to thank those Members who helped steer this difficult and very controversial report clearly in the direction of a compromise , and thus helped us all make considerable progress .
I do think , however , that we have some way to go in today 's vote before we have a report that - without also attracting censure from India , Pakistan or anyone else - ultimately serves our common aim of helping Kashmir to finally become a region characterised by peace , prosperity , and respect for the environment and human rights .
We can make an important contribution to this today , if together we find the willpower and focus on the heart of the matter .
This is a report on Kashmir , not one on India or Pakistan .
We are perfectly justified in drawing up similar reports .
I should like to point out that much of the criticism levelled at India or Pakistan in the report is undoubtedly legitimate - in the case of Pakistan , in particular , much more could have been said .
Yet this is not the place for a debate on Pakistan , as we are talking about Kashmir .
Since time immemorial , Kashmir has been a bridging point and intersection between the Near East , Central Asia and South Asia .
The region , which has even been the subject of a rock song by Led Zeppelin , can once more be a region in which people from all parts of Kashmir can live together in peace and prosperity .
Let us contribute to this today .
This would be the best contribution we could make towards the fight against terrorism .
The region does not need more armed forces ; it needs fewer arms , fewer armed forces .
Parliament would then send out a signal to India and Pakistan today that they should continue to go down the route of peace ; that they should do everything to increase the irrelevance of the border , so that Kashmir may one day be a region of prosperity and peace .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , for a long time , it was Europe that decided how other parts of the world should be governed .
One of the effects this had is that all the states in a large part of South Asia were combined into one enormous British colonial empire , some parts of which were governed directly by colonial officials , and some indirectly by the successors of traditional sovereigns who had submitted to the colonial supreme authority .
In 1947 , the future of the states formerly ruled by those sovereigns was in the hands of the sovereigns themselves .
They were able to join one of the two new states that had gained independence during that year and into which the colonial empire had been carved up : India , which was large and secular and Pakistan , which , while in those days also comprising Bangladesh , was small and Islamic .
The earlier states were unable to regain independence and there was no referendum about whether they wanted to join India or Pakistan .
In most areas , this did not lead to any insuperable problems , for the preference of the sovereign and most inhabitants happened to coincide .
Kashmir was the exception to the rule .
The people would probably have opted for Pakistan , while the sovereign went for India .
This goes some way to explaining the problems of the past 60 years .
India may be the world 's largest democracy , but that democracy is being dealt heavy blows because of the overlap with Indian territory of a large section of Kashmir .
Without any majority backing from its inhabitants , Kashmir can be kept under Indian control only by the army and the police .
Democracy there cannot function as it should under such conditions .
India , being a secular democracy , has considerable advantages over Pakistan , where religious fanatics and the military have always had far too much influence .
It is to precisely those benefits that India can offer that the inhabitants of Kashmir are blind .
In the contacts between the European Union and India , instead of sweeping this problem under the carpet , we should draw attention to it , and it was this idea that I found absent from the rapporteur 's original text , which was very much focused on three components : recovery following the earthquake , cementing relations between the European Union and India and more trade and transport as means of improving relations between the leaders of India and Pakistan .
The people of Kashmir did not , however , have any role in this .
Their long-term desire for a referendum about the future , and international support for this , were explicitly omitted , although it now looks like the final result will be more balanced .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the theme of the Kashmir-EU week in early June will be ' peace building in Kashmir ' , and it is an important initiative given the human rights violations in that region , where the need for help on both sides of the border is highlighted not least by the actions of militant groups both in the Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir and in the Pakistani part Azad Kashmir .

It is important that European aid be offered to all victims within Kashmir .
Humanitarian aid , however , does not involve political interference .
The United Nations found out earlier this month how difficult aid operations are to manage in the region , when eighty-three of their staff had to be evacuated because - according to a UN spokesperson - local groups that had not managed to secure reconstruction projects had been pitting the people against them .
The rapporteur is also right to note that the European Union has not been asked to act as an external mediator in the Kashmir conflict , although the space given in the report to the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) is in stark contrast with this view .
The EU should not lose sight of the value of international intervention , aid and mediation .
It is an omission that this value should be given such scant attention in this report .
How do the Council and Commission intend to provide aid to all Kashmiris and the Asian regional partners ?
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , it goes without saying that the European Union will need to make a meaningful contribution in order to support the peace process in Kashmir .
It is important that the channels of communications between all interested parties are opened , and indeed kept open .
Perhaps I might touch on one of its many aspects , that being the problem of terrorism .
It is a fact that many acts of terrorism are committed by groups that either operate from Pakistan , or are supported by it , Lashkar e-Taiba and Hizb ul-Mujahideen being two examples .
President Musharraf has on several occasions committed himself to tackling the problem of terrorism , but I am afraid that he has a long way to go yet .
The same can be said of the extreme Islamism that is promoted on a large scale via the notorious schools called madrassas .
If Pakistan does not manage to get this problem under control , the peace process is bound to founder in the longer term .
This is why the European Union should no longer content itself with promises from Pakistan ; it should also expect concrete action .
Madam President , I warmly welcome this debate this morning .
It is the culmination of a long process which started in March 2000 when the House voted overwhelmingly for a factual report on the question of Kashmir .
It has thus become not just a British problem , but is seen increasingly as a European one , as our debate this morning shows .
We have had vigorous discussions in committee and we now have a more balanced report than when we started out this morning .
Some 450 amendments have been tabled , around 180 of those amendments have now been included in this document and so there has been a substantial revision .
There are still some areas where I remain unhappy , in particular regarding Amendment 21 which refers to the question of machine-readable Pakistan passports .
I understand there is no such concern in AJK .
We have to be careful to keep the report factual .
There are , however , three amendments in particular to which I would like to draw colleagues ' attention and which I shall be supporting .
The first is tabled by Mr Tannock on behalf of my group - and I thank him for having done so - where in order to create an atmosphere of confidence and goodwill it is vital to remove all obstructions and hindrances for all Kashmiris to travel freely in the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir .
Secondly , this particularly relates to the financial aspects of the earthquake .
We all know what terrible suffering there was .
There has been a request for further funds from the Government of Azad Kashmir , but I understand that they have not yet had a full reply , therefore Amendment 41 is asking for a clear reply from the Commission so that we know what we have to do in budgetary terms .
The last aspect refers to demilitarisation and that is why we have tabled Amendment 55 together with Mrs Lambert .
The article in The Economist of 7 April was very clear and I commend it to the House .
It says that there are three fundamental reasons why we should now be pressing for demilitarisation .
First , the present numbers are not needed .
We now have a process of nearly three years of a ceasefire and the dangers of militancy have significantly decreased .
Second , this would be hugely popular in Kashmir where , to quote from The Economist , there is an alienation ' from Indian rule which runs deep , the withdrawal of the army would be widely seen not as a removal of a protective shield but as a lifting of an oppressive curse ' .
Third , withdrawing troops from Kashmir would be a great boost to the painstaking rapprochement between India and Pakistan .
In conclusion , I would like to draw attention , as one or two other colleagues have done , to the work of my colleague Mr Bushill-Matthews .
I will be voting in favour of this report because it has a positive message of shining a light on the problems which are faced on a daily basis by the people of Jammu and Kashmir .
We should keep that spotlight shining brightly and we should associate everybody possible with the process to find a resolution to the problem for the Kashmiri people .
Madam President , the European Union 's positive role in dealing with any conflict in the world and our role in relation to Kashmir should be to support peace processes and to uphold international law .
Our own Labour amendments to this report concentrated on advancing the withdrawal of troops on both sides , extending development aid , encouraging the practical involvement of the Kashmiri people themselves : balanced , constructive , diplomatic in our approach .
When I was in Kashmir in March at the same time as the Commissioner , I saw an AJK more open than ever before ; the Indians willing to talk with the secessionists and both governments optimistic about their composite dialogue and when that bomb on a train from New Delhi to Lahore killed 68 people in February , the politics of blame was replaced by a mutual solidarity to defeat the terrorists who had planted it .
However , the support the Liberal Democrat rapporteur claims for her report this morning is possible only because at parliamentary committee level we defeated her proposals to cut off trade relations with one side , not the other ; to provide economic aid on one side only ; to overturn the UN resolution in favour of self-determination ; and , most offensive of all , to score political points about the sixth worst earthquake in the history of humanity .
I note today the Liberal Democrat Amendment 58 to blame one side for preventing a plebiscite and the Conservative Amendment 5 to resist a plebiscite in the future .
Labour and Socialist MEPs will oppose both .
In this report , I regret to say we have seen a rapporteur who claimed to uphold the principle of primum non nocere - do no harm - yet she has done only harm .
I caution others in this debate and in our vote : do not speak today for India or for Pakistan ; speak for Europe , for peace and for human rights and you will do a greater service for the people of Kashmir and for the honour of this Parliament .
Madam President , I welcome the Commissioner 's comments .
In October 2005 the catastrophic earthquake opened the eyes of the world to the desperate plight of the Kashmiri people .
This tragedy offered India and Pakistan a window of opportunity to make peace out of disaster .
It also gave the international community the prospect of engaging in a previously closed region .
The Council has stressed that India and Pakistan must find a durable settlement for Jammu and Kashmir which takes into account the wishes of all the people of Kashmir .
This is a just and responsible approach and one which this House must follow if it is to contribute constructively to the Kashmir debate .
As Liberals , whose forefathers shaped the concept , my group 's passion must be self-determination , self-determination and self-determination .
It is an absolute right enshrined by the UN and respected and protected by the European Union .
It is a democratic process that as a House we have a duty to support .
The EU must support the positive ideas now coming forward - systems of self-governance , making borders irrelevant , and joint management across the Line of Control .
It is not for us to take any options off the table .
We must , however , insist that they are explored through full consultation with the Kashmiris and , if the conditions are right , we must support their desire to determine their destiny through a democratic plebiscite .
With a history of human rights abuses , a sustainable solution is impossible without ending impunity and ensuring that human rights are the building blocks of peace .
India and Pakistan are now both members of the UN Human Rights Council .
With membership comes a responsibility to lead .
Women and children have born the brunt of the conflict and the earthquake .
Women have been widowed and children left orphaned .
All are struggling to rebuild their lives .
The EU , through its trade and economic relations with both India and Pakistan , must protect the most vulnerable in the short term and secure their livelihoods in the long term .
The greatest tragedy of the earthquake was the loss of a whole generation of Kashmiris .
We must mourn their deaths .
For those who remain , our core goals must be peace , justice and self-determination for the generation of Kashmiris to come .

Madam President , I would agree with everything that my colleague , Mr Karim , has just said and , in particular , that self-determination is of crucial importance - even more so for peoples divided by history .
We would agree that the conditions for a plebiscite are not met at present , but they should not be set aside .
Hence our Amendments 18 and 56 , tabled with colleagues from ALDE Group , are of crucial importance for us .
This conflict in Kashmir has brought the world nearer to nuclear conflict than anything else since the 1960s .
Therefore , it is hugely important to all of us in this House .
Whether our countries have a historical involvement or not , the EU definitely has an interest .
We welcome the confidence-building measures .
The environment is of common concern to peoples on whatever side of the Line of Control , and can be a valuable peace-builder .
We need the normalisation of relations at every level , grass-roots to political , and that softening of the border as an interim measure .
( MT ) Thank you , Madam President .
Throughout the years , the conflict in Kashmir has left thousands of victims in its wake , including thousands of victims torn from their families and thousands of others forced to leave their country to seek a better life elsewhere .
Therefore , I believe we can all agree that the time has come for the European Union to do all it can to seek a long-term solution that is devoid of violence - one that is beneficial to all those involved .
Surely everyone will accept that after years of insecurity , spilt blood and unfulfilled promises this is no easy task , even though there may seem to be consensus on an official level .
Yet , we must ensure that what we have achieved up till now is not lost , and we must also see to it that permanent dialogue between India and Pakistan is given our full support and assistance .
Both India and Pakistan must be given the chance to persevere with their confidence-building measures and to continue to allow people to cross control lines .
This step was greatly welcomed after so many years of division .
I am certain that the European Union will lend all its support to any initiative that could bring about peace , even if this could turn out to be a slow and lengthy process .
As the Commissioner said , we must ensure , on a humanitarian basis , that people in refugee camps are provided with all the humanitarian aid they require , especially following the devastating earthquake that left so many people in a desperate plight .
Aid has to be increased and the camps that have been in existence for so long must be given some form of official status .
I strongly appeal to all Indian and Pakistani authorities to honour their obligations and to bestow upon the Kashmiri population the dignity it deserves , because every single person in the world has a right to such dignity .
Last but not least ; I believe we need to take action in order to protect the unique history of this people .
The Indian , Pakistani and Kashmiri population must focus on the factors that bind them together .
It is only in this way that the peace process can be successful .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for all the work she has put in to making this report a successful one .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Baroness Nicholson on her work on what has already become one of the most talked-about reports initiated by this House .
When I led a delegation to Pakistan last December , this report was raised with us almost everywhere , and , having followed the progress of the report closely , I do not underestimate the challenges there have been in bringing the basic facts about these issues into the open .
I am sure that , in time , it will become an authoritative report on the issue .
I , too , have visited one part of divided Kashmir and empathise with the plight of the Kashmiri people , especially following the tragic impact of the earthquake .
This report has also brought out into the open for the first time the conditions prevailing , not only in Kashmir but also in the northern areas .
Whilst in Pakistan , I met many people who expressed a strong desire for greater democracy and a greater voice .
Therefore , I hope one outcome of this report will be more democracy and greater democratic structures , especially in Gilgit and Baltistan , in the near future .
One of the issues that has most divided the Members of this House has been the question of a plebiscite .
However , I welcome the consensus that has now developed on this issue in the report , and it is important to remember that the UN resolution that called for a plebiscite to be held clearly stated that it should happen only when the conditions have been met .
It is therefore unfortunate that the conditions under which this might happen have not been met so far .
Having chaired the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia and the South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation , and now the Delegation for relations with India , I recognise that this issue has hindered proper development between neighbouring countries and the region as a whole .
Therefore , I strongly welcome the confidence-building measures that both India and Pakistan have committed themselves to in the past few years .
I urge them to continue along this track with soft borders and more trade , because this has already paid dividends as regards regional prosperity , and I sincerely hope it will eventually lead to improvements on all fronts for the people of Kashmir .
Madam President , this report is about the present and future prospects for the Kashmiri people and we must not lose sight of that .
This report is not about India and it is not about Pakistan .
I am pleased that the report was amended substantially in committee .
I have , however , sought to amend it further and many of the amendments tabled by my group - though not all - are the ones I hope you can vote for .
Amendment 18 calls for the Kashmiri people to exercise their right to self-determination through a plebiscite in the future .
This , to my mind , is the bottom line .
I believe all people should have a right to determine their own destiny .
This is what the Kashmiri people have been calling for for many years .
Sixty years ago the resolutions were passed by the UN and they still have not been brought into effect .
How can we be so selective about which UN resolutions we adhere to ?
I would like us , however , to go further and for any plebiscite to have the three options : governed by India , governed by Pakistan or independence . Hence Amendment 57 .
Another concern I have about this report , although it is now much better than it was , is that it seems to be concentrating a great deal on the shortcomings of the Pakistan Government within Pakistan , rather than taking a balanced approach relating to both India and Pakistan 's failures in Jammu and Kashmir generally .
Finally , we must build on the positive steps taken by both India and Pakistan and not undermine them .
However , no solution can be achieved without the Kashmiri people having the final say themselves .
- ( PL ) Madam President , from the point of view of international human rights organisations , Kashmir has been one of the most volatile places on the map for the last 56 years .
The civilian population has been in a difficult situation for many years and has received virtually no aid or protection from the international community .
There is almost continuous fighting in Kashmir .
Human rights organisations report that , since the Mujahadin insurrection in 1989 , over 30 000 civilians have died in Kashmir .
Kashmir should weigh heavily on our consciences .
All European democracies that pride themselves on a tradition of dialogue and freedom , especially concerning matters of faith , seem not to notice or to ignore the tragedy facing the civilian population in Kashmir .
The European Union has to take part in spreading and promoting democracy by all possible means , especially in areas which have been affected by armed religious or racial conflict for many years .
At the moment , in view of the talks that are being held between India and Pakistan on the issue of Kashmir and which are , unfortunately , unlikely to end in success , we need the European Union to show a strong will to support the civilian population in Kashmir .
We need the European Union to show the same sort of active attitude in supporting the peace process in Asia as it did when it backed the Orange Revolution and supported Aleksander Milinkiewicz by awarding him the Sacharov Prize .
We should not forget that Asia will be the European Union 's most important partner in the future , thanks to its natural resources and manpower .
Ignoring conflicts is a sign of ignorance and foolishness , something we cannot afford in the twenty-first century , knowing that weapons of mass destruction may be used in these conflicts .
( SV ) I wish to thank everyone for the success in finally reaching an acceptable compromise .
India , Pakistan and Kashmir do not constitute a traditional issue for me as a Swedish Social Democrat and Member of the European Parliament , but I felt very committed when I read the first draft and heard different parties ' representatives , mainly from the United Kingdom , engage in debate .
Our task is not to live in the past or to adopt a position in favour of , or against , India and Pakistan .
We have a responsibility for what is happening in Kashmir and for the human rights situation there .
Our task as Members of the European Parliament is to see if we might play a role of some kind and then to offer our support and experience and in that way help resolve the conflict surrounding Kashmir .
What is going on , and has been going on for such a long time , is a scandal .
I believe that two civilised countries such as India and Pakistan should be able to take greater shared responsibility , devise a timetable for achieving practical results and , naturally , help each other to combat terrorism .
If that does not happen , the United Nations and the European Union will have to intervene more seriously than in the past .
The EU 's strategy is to exert pressure via agreements , aid and contacts .
I should have liked us to have gone further and been prepared to support a referendum , but I appreciate that we are not yet in a position to do that .
Kashmir 's wishes must be our guide in our future work and a guide for all those who wish to accept responsibility for the region .
I want to call on everyone to think in terms not of prestige but of peace and in terms not of history but of the present and future .
As Mr Leinen said , if France and Germany were able to create peace in Europe and found the EU , I am convinced that India and Pakistan have it within them successfully to bring about freedom and peace in Kashmir .
Madam President , the Commission would like to emphasise its belief that there are now renewed hopes that the Kashmiri issue can be brought closer to a solution .
Both sides have , we believe , sent out signals that appear to be more flexible now than in the past .
Nevertheless , we would expect a slow and gradual process rather than quick results .
But it is important - and this is where the rapporteur is very clear in her report - that the key to resolving this conflict is very much in the political aspirations of the people of both sides and of both countries .
The European Union will continue to support the reconciliation process between India and Pakistan and , for its part , the Commission is fully prepared to continue to provide assistance to the region through its different cooperation programmes and , in reply to Mr Elles , we have already decided on EUR 50 million for reconstruction work , which we think will take a few years .
We have not had any additional claim from either government for additional resources , but we are open to discussing this in due course if such requests come .
This programme will also help restore economic development and good governance in the two countries .
That is the main and fundamental condition to finding a sustainable solution to the situation in Kashmir .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 p.m.
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Kashmir has suffered more than its fair share of tragedy , the most recent being the devastating earthquake .
Sometimes out of tragedy comes hope , and so with the aftermath of the earthquake both India and Pakistan showed a desire to cooperate to improve the lives of the Kashmiri people .
We must encourage all sides to continue with confidence measures and ' softening ' the border .
India must reduce the suffocating impact of its troops in Kashmir and Pakistan must continue to tackle terrorism .
When the time is right the people of Kashmir must be given a voice in determining their future .
Via Baltica ( debate )
The next item is a statement by the Commission on Via Baltica .
Member of the Commission .
On behalf of the Commission , and replacing my colleague , Commissioner Dimas , who is unable to participate today because of serious health problems , I would like to make a presentation on the situation and to explain why the Commission applied to the Court .
The Polish authorities gave the green light to the construction of the Augustw bypass , which cuts through the unique Rospuda valley in a forested Natura 2000 site , despite the initiation of previous infringement procedures .
A letter of formal notice , covering the Augustw bypass among other things , was addressed to Poland on 15 December 2006 , while the decision authorising the start of the works was issued by the Polish authorities on 2 and 9 February 2007 .
The Rospuda valley is the last peat bog system of its kind in Europe .
Therefore , the Commission is of the opinion that , if the project is executed in its current form , it would be in breach of the directives on birds and habitats .
On 28 February 2007 , the Commission issued a reasoned opinion on an urgent basis requesting Poland to comply with EC environmental law within a week .
Having found the response of the Polish authorities unsatisfactory , the Commission decided on 21 March to refer the case to the Court of Justice .
The decision provides for a request for interim measures , which means the suspension of construction works until the judgment of the main case is delivered , in order to avoid irreversible damage to the Natura 2000 site concerned .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , perhaps first we could send our good wishes to Commissioner Dimas and wish him a speedy recovery .
Secondly , let me say to my Polish friends that this is not an issue which is getting at Poland .
There are many Member States who have been subject to pressure from Parliament and the Commission when a development proposal is potentially damaging to the environment .
I think in this case , though , we have a serious case which is going to be a test of will of the Commission , of the policy and certainly of this Parliament too .
We have irreversible damage in prospect for the habitats of a large number of species from eagles to woodpeckers , to capercaillie , wolves and lynx .
I welcome the Commission taking the steps of going to the ECJ and I certainly welcome the subsequent decision to seek a special procedure from the ECJ to make an order urgently requiring Poland to stop the works pending the proper full decision .
That is sensible .
The ECJ President granted that on 18 April and I hope that is a very strong message to the Polish authorities who are involved with this scheme .
But regrettably , it appears that Poland is ignoring that and proceeding , at least in part , with construction works for two of the projects in north-east Poland .
So my request to the Commission is to insist that we look seriously at alternative routes , because we believe , and my committee believes , that there are alternatives which would be much better for the environment .
We believe that they must be fully explored , they must use the strategic environmental assessment principles and that only if those are complied with should we agree to this road corridor proceeding .
I hope the Commission will take that message to her colleague .
I hope it will make him better .
It will certainly make it better for the Polish environment if we comply with the rules .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , my group supports the Commission in this dispute with the Polish Government .
With its environmental directives , including the Habitat Directive and the Bird Directive , the European Union has made a vital step towards the sustainable development of our continent .
The directives are a great success .
The areas where they apply often form part of Europe 's Natura 2000 network , which network of protected nature conservation sites located in the Member States is at the heart of the EU 's environmental policy and of the preservation and recovery of biodiversity .
They give the protection of nature and the environment an enormous boost .
In some cases , this goes against the local and national grain .
Politicians easily yield to pressure on the basis of short-term economic interests , instead of standing up courageously for a clean environment for the sake of future generations .
Needless to say , the Via Baltica is of major economic importance .
This is beyond dispute .
Moreover , it is essential to open up Northern and Eastern Europe , and to link up the Baltic states with the west of Europe .
Increased prosperity and wellbeing in Poland are in the interest of the whole of Europe .
This is why billions of euros from the Structural Funds are being invested in that country , and everyone will understand that the residents of the city of Augustov are keen to see the end of the dangerous , noisy traffic pollution caused by lorries .
Traffic will need to be diverted away from the city centre .
At what cost , though ?
The Rospuda valley is a unique area , a special protection zone under the Birds Directive , and it should , on account of its extraordinary value , also fall within the scope of the Habitat Directive .
Poland has enormous natural resources , with a landscape of outstanding natural beauty .
It is these resources that hold the key to Poland 's economic future .
In the Netherlands , we faced a similar situation not so long ago , with the construction - that was subsequently turned down - of a new motorway cutting across some of the Naardermeer , the Naardermeer being the oldest nature conservation site in our country which falls within the scope of the European Birds Directive .
This situation was comparable to the Polish nature conservation area where the Via Baltica is planned .
The Commission was right to warn the Polish Government against the construction of this section of the motorway .
As a European Member State , Poland has the duty to protect the Rospuda valley , and , whilst it has proposed measures that are intended to compensate for the destruction of part of the nature conservation area , this compensation is inadequate .
The study into possible alternative routes has not been carried out fully .
There are other routes conceivable that could prevent irreparable damage being done to the area .
In mid-June , this House 's Committee on Petitions will be sending out an inquiry mission that will be looking into the complaints by Polish citizens who do not want to see the valley destroyed .
Although we will hear all parties and weigh up all arguments , one thing will be paramount : that the Via Baltica should not be allowed to damage one of Europe 's most attractive nature conservation sites .
The construction of this road should not contravene European environmental laws which Poland has also signed .
Pacta sunt servanda : treaties are there to be complied with .
Madam President , we can view the case of the Via Baltica and the Rospuda Valley from two different perspectives which should not be contradictory .
The first point of view is a practical one , involving the people who live there and who use those roads .
It is not only Poles who are affected , but also the inhabitants of the Baltic states and Scandinavia .
It is a real problem which we cannot ignore .
Many people die on these roads .
These people have a right to roads that are built to the highest standard possible and they have a right to travel in comfort and safety .
The other issue at stake here is that of the authorities taking responsibility for decisions that they make .
It is not true , in spite of attempts to prove to the contrary , that there is no alternative route .
There is an alternative .
It is possible and practical to implement and needs only the necessary political will .
In Poland , this issue has been debated for many years .
We , together with a group of Members of the European Parliament , drew attention to this problem last year when we tabled a question to the Commission and appealed to the Polish Government to stop this project from going ahead , as it would be a good idea for the project to already comply with European standards at the planning stage .
The second issue is that of lessons learnt .
This is the first case of its kind in Poland , and sets a precedent .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , and the European institutions should take care to ensure that , for the good of citizens and in order to improve their safety , all Member States plan their investment projects properly , in line with European Union directives and environmental protection standards .
This can be achieved .
There are no contradictions .
This lesson has to be very effective .
We , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , therefore strongly support a solution that will allow the Via Baltica to be built as soon as possible .
However , this solution also needs to quickly lead to a breakthrough based on the fact that it is pointless to insist on bad decisions that damage the environment .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Madam President and Mrs Grybauskait .
First of all , I would like to say that , on becoming acquainted with the history of this section of road , it certainly seems to me , as a Latvian citizen , that it has been known for several years that this stretch of road was going to be built .
It is possible that the agreement of the Natura 2000 territories by the previous Polish Government was perhaps not conducted in the best manner .
As a result , however , this delay is causing not only residents of Poland to suffer , particularly those in the eastern region , who may use this stretch of road every day , but also three entire European Union Member States - Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania - and not only citizens travelling to the European Union but also a large section of industry , since 4 500 lorries pass through the town of Augustw daily via this stretch of road .
I would really very much like a compromise to be reached that would not further delay the already delayed construction of this road .
It worries me that these three Baltic States are in fact not connected with the European Union via a normal , modern highway .
These three Baltic States are not connected with the European Union through Poland by rail , since it seems that the Rail Baltica section in this region will encounter the same difficulties in complying with environmental requirements .
Nor are these three Baltic States even connected with the European electricity market at the Poland-Lithuania border .
So I call on the Commission and all other parties , including the Polish Government , which can reach these decisions within a reasonable length of time , to reflect upon this issue not only from the viewpoint of Poland and Europe 's environmental needs , but also from the point of view of the interests of these three European Union Member States . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , the Polish Government is issuing a challenge to the European Institutions .
European environmental legislation must be applied .
The directive on natural habitats is there to be applied .
The way we deal with this issue will be crucial .
We must either take Community law seriously , and take the application and use of European funds for great infrastructures seriously , or the whole thing will gradually become pointless .
I have had the pleasure of visiting the beautiful and unique area of the Rospuda Valley , and I can state that this project is absurd .
It is also practically impossible from a technical point of view , given the marsh area that it has to cross .
At the same time , I can state that there are clear alternatives which are more viable , more economical and which could serve the same purpose as this road .
People suffering from lorry traffic in Eastern Poland , in Augustw , are hostages to the political game being played by the Polish Government in relation to other issues .
It is a political challenge to the European Commission , which is combined with other political issues .
It is the inhabitants of the area and nature that are going to suffer as a result .
Furthermore , the alternatives to this road which runs through the forest have the support of the preliminary study , the strategic environmental study , carried out by the Scott Wilson consultancy , which is a highly prestigious international consultancy .
It is not true , therefore , that the option of this road via the Via Baltica through the Rospuda Valley is the only possibility .
Not at all .
The seriousness of this Parliament and the seriousness of European environmental legislation is at stake .
I hope that the European Commission will stand firm , and that means not sending any more regional funds until Poland realises that being part of the European club means obeying the rules .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , most of the EU Member States that acceded in 2004 and 2007 possess well-developed railway networks .
Unfortunately , this railway network has , in the last 15 years , been pared down , and there have been cutbacks also in the maintenance of it .
Moreover , in many cases , the old railway companies have not received from the state the compensation they thought they could count on beforehand for their operating shortages , and this has the effect of deterring new enterprises that would otherwise be keen to take part in tenders , and so the likelihood is that the railway network will be used less and less and that rolling stock will become unusable .
These countries once had a huge head start over the west of Europe in the area of rail transport , but it has thus been lost , and their environment is particularly vulnerable too .
Fewer tracks does not mean less traffic .
In order to channel this traffic elsewhere , all attention is now focused on investments in motorways .
Roads like these were around 15 years ago , except that they were limited to the busiest routes , particularly around the big cities .
New roads of this sort will now be built very quickly .
In an effort to limit costs , the interests of nature and the landscape are often overlooked .
The shortest possible route cutting through areas considered empty is preferred , and there is no money for diversions , tunnels or bridges for wildlife .
Poland is not the first , or only , country to face this problem .
The same thing occurred years ago in the Czech Republic , which planned a connection from Prague to Dresden and also in Bulgaria when a link was planned between Sofia and Thessaloniki .
The way in which valuable nature conservation areas are handled does not only make the national , but also international , news , as international nature and environmental organisations draw attention to this .
They also point out that the European Union is partly responsible for destroying the environment if it helps to finance bad projects of this kind .
I have been urging the European Union to refuse any responsibility in this matter for years .
On 2 July 2002 , Commissioner Wallstrm stated by way of response to my written requests that Poland should adapt its Via Baltica plans .
I would remind her that , according to the original plan , the Via Baltica avoided this vulnerable area , but that these plans were subsequently reviewed in a bid to better serve other cities .
What the European Union should insist on is a return to the original plan that was drawn up a long time ago .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , it is a good thing that we , despite the urbanisation that goes hand in hand with increasing prosperity , still boast valuable nature conservation areas within the European Union 's borders .
These areas form part of the Natura 2000 network , which does something very important by ensuring that nature in the European Union is accorded a protected status , and , for example , by helping to maintain biodiversity .
We approved Mr Adamou 's proposal only this week , in which a stand is made for maintaining biodiversity .
Moreover , the Natura 2000 status ensures that the nature conservation areas remain intact for posterity .
At least , that is how it should be .
Not every government appears to realise this , as was evident last year .
The Polish Government seeks to build the new road , the Via Baltica , right across the Natura 2000 area of the Rospuda Valley .
Along with a delegation of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I have visited the Rospuda valley and was able to see for myself how unique and valuable this Polish nature conservation site is .
It is totally beyond me that it is the Polish Environment Minister , no less , who is in favour of this project , even though sound alternatives are available .
He , of all people , should surely realise what disastrous effects this project could have .
By way of compensation for the construction of the road , it is intended to plant a million trees to the north of the region , despite the adverse effects this will have on nature .
I know that this is a very sensitive issue in Poland .
For traffic safety , it is necessary for the Via Baltica to be in place soon , provided it is tailored to regional circumstances with minimum adverse effects on the environment .
I am delighted that the Commission has issued warnings to the Polish Government , and that , when it received no response to its demands , it brought the matter before the European Court of Justice .
It is to be hoped that the Court 's ruling of 18 April , according to which the Polish Government should stop the compensation measures with immediate effect , will be a message for the future - a message that Member States cannot simply tamper with valuable nature conservation sites .
- ( PL ) Madam President , the planned construction of the Via Baltica has caused a lot of controversy , as have many other trans-European transport routes .
Having studied the Commission 's statistics on the subject , it is clear that a number of Member States have considerable problems related to planning infrastructure projects in the areas covered by the Natura 2000 network , namely Austria , Spain and Portugal .
At the moment , the Polish Government still wants to continue the construction of the Augustw bypass which will pass through the Rospuda Valley .
It argues that the decision regarding the project was made before Poland joined the European Union , when Poland was not bound by the strict requirements of the European Union directives on birds and habitats .
The European Commission is accusing Poland of infringing these directives as a result of its investment in the road building project .
For Poland , road safety is the argument that speaks in favour of constructing the bypass .
However , the environmental criteria that need to be fulfilled in the implementation of this project , seem to have been forgotten .
However , in spite of the current situation , we cannot allow talks on the issue of the ring road to stall .
The problem has to be solved in the form of a compromise which will be satisfactory for both sides .
Both arguments , namely those concerning environmental aspects and road safety , are equally important and will affect hundreds of similar projects in Poland and elsewhere .
We should make cooperation mechanisms more efficient at various levels and adapt the regulatory criteria to the current environmental and social situation .
However , I would appeal for similar requests for debate to be treated equally in the future .
To this day , in spite of the support of over 60 Members , no permission has been granted for a debate on the biggest environmental threat resulting from the construction of the North European Gas Pipeline under the Baltic sea .
I would like to remind you that over 10 % of marine areas are part of the Natura 2000 network and no one , literally no one , has taken this issue up in the European Parliament .
At the moment , when important areas of biodiversity are being destroyed before the very eyes of environmentalists and the whole of Europe , there seems to be no will to discuss the issue of the environmental threat to our only internal sea , namely the Baltic .
( PL ) Madam President , the Polish PSE delegation in the European Parliament has stressed the need for the construction of the Augustw bypass for a long time .
However , the chosen construction plan for the new road , which will pass through the Rospuda Valley , will certainly have a negative impact on the ecosystem , which is unique in Europe and is located in an area that is protected by the Natura 2000 programme .
Allowing the Augustw bypass to pass through the valley will cause irreparable damage to the natural environment , including the destruction of 20 000 trees and the disappearance of extremely rare plants and animal species .
Sadly , we need to be aware of the fact that any alternative to the ring road will have an impact on the natural environment in that region .
We should opt for the project whose negative impact on the unique fauna and flora in the Rospuda Valley will be as small as possible .
Representatives of the Law and Justice party , which currently governs Poland , assured us before the elections that the Via Baltica , which includes the Augustw bypass , will avoid the most precious natural areas .
Now they are breaking their promise .
The Polish authorities have had time to reconsider the location of the bypass .
However , they have ignored the environmentalists ' suggestions that changing the route of the motorway would avoid damaging the environment and would save money .
The Minister for the Environment did not take advantage of opportunities to reconcile the interests of the residents of Augustw , who are campaigning for a motorway , and those who seek to protect the environment .
The Polish Government is ignoring the problematic fact that this investment will be incredibly expensive and will place a large burden on the Polish taxpayers , as the European Union will not contribute to the construction of the road in an area where , according to the habitats directive , it is forbidden to destroy the environment .
Moreover , given the European Commission 's negative assessment of the project , further work on the construction of the road may make Poland liable for fines amounting to millions of euros .
This will be a burden which Polish taxpayers will have to bear .
In my view , Prime Minister Kaczyski 's proposal to hold a local , regional referendum on the Augustw bypass , and its route through the Rospuda Valley , is simply a sign that the Polish Government wants to shirk its responsibility for home affairs and is an unnecessary bone of contention for Polish society .
The referendum was held because local government elections were being held in the Podlasie Voivodship at the same time .
However , it was obvious from the start that the result of this referendum would not be binding for the European Court of Justice , which is currently dealing with the matter .
It is therefore irrelevant and these kinds of activities only serve internal political ends .
In addition to this , I would like to point out that , according to Polish legislation , a referendum is only valid if the turnout is over 30 % of those eligible to vote .
The turnout on Sunday did not exceed this threshold .
The natural environment is one of our greatest treasures , and yet we do not do enough to protect it .
I think that the Polish Government should make a real effort to draw up alternative solutions to the problem as soon as possible .
( LT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Augustavas bypass should become part of the Via Baltica .
This is very important to the city of Augustavas , where about 1.5 million vehicles annually drive through the centre of the city .
The European Commission has appealed to the European Court of Justice against Poland 's building of the Augustavas bypass on the Via Baltica , which was commenced before Poland joined the EU .
The appeal is based on claims that the environmental protection requirements of the Rospuda Valley , through which the projected viaduct must pass , will be violated .
The territory is protected by the Natura 2000 programme .
However , no such environmental protection issues have been raised concerning the Nord Stream gas pipeline , which is projected to pass through Natura 2000 territory and which may lead to unpredictable ecological consequences .
Poland is seeking ways of solving the problem , perhaps by building a considerably more expensive tunnel .
However , the people of Augustavas want to live quietly .
No one is concerned about the residents suffering from pollution .
I have asked the Commission what solution there might be , apart from a prohibition on building the bypass , and what help Poland might get .
It was explained to me that in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , the Commission is not empowered to dictate concrete solutions to Member States nor to prescribe expenditure .
Perhaps it is time to review the Commission 's powers ?
Will residents of the Baltic countries be obliged to travel to Europe only by air ?
( PL ) Madam President , the natural environment is very important .
Indeed , it is one of the most important issues today .
The natural world is an independent part of our surroundings .
We did not create it and we should certainly protect it .
However , protecting the environment cannot become an alibi for certain small groups of environmental activists who resort to blackmailing specific regions and governments .
For reasons that are rather more political than environmental , and due to expected material gains , these groups are trying to block the construction of roads , bypasses and airports .
A classic example of the misuse of environmental arguments is the campaign against the construction of an airport in widniku , near Lublin , in Poland .
The colony of marmots is the reason given .
However , no mention is made of the fact that this was not their original habitat and that , according to experts , they could be safely relocated to another site .
Similarly dubious arguments are used by environmentalists to argue against other planned investments in Central and Eastern Europe , including the Via Baltica .
No mention is made of the fact that a referendum in Poland produced a definite majority in favour of the project in the region where the bypass is supposed to be built .
European environmental regulations cannot be applied automatically , without acknowledging that specific cases exist .
We should use our common sense and not be led by ideological feelings .
Use of the environment as a scarecrow could be prevented by more investment in infrastructure in the new Member States .
Let us not forget that these investments really do influence peoples ' quality of life , and that their right to good quality infrastructure is at least as important as environmental considerations .
- ( PL ) Madam President , it is true that Poland , which has done a lot since starting its programme of reforms 18 years ago , has unfortunately neglected the building of roads .
That is a fact .
We are now quickly trying to make up for lost ground , although this is clearly far from easy .
One of the hurdles in our path consists of environmental restrictions .
We should bear in mind that when Western Europe was building roads that covered a significant proportion of its territory , no such restrictions existed on the construction of transport networks .
Now , a conflict has erupted .
However , nature is not mute in this conflict . Various environmental groups speak on behalf of the environment .
Indeed , they often speak too loudly , forgetting that man is also an important , if not the most important , part of this ecosystem .
Indeed , it is man who needs to be protected , first and foremost .
It is regrettable that the conflict surrounding the construction work in the Rospuda Valley has escalated to such an extent and that it has become so complicated , including its political dimension .
Is there a way out ?
Is there a sensible solution which could satisfy both sides ?
I am afraid that the answer is no and that the Commission has to choose .
A decision has to be made .
I personally think that the road should be built .
However , permission for the work should include a strict list of conditions that have to be met in order to minimise damage to the environment .
This is because , let us admit , losses cannot be avoided .
They accompany civilisation , as progress is never free .
Everything has its price .
( PL ) Madam President , the Via Baltica is most important in terms of increasing cohesion within the European Union .
It is important in terms of decreasing the temporal distance separating the Baltic states , namely Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , and indirectly also Finland , from the rest of the European Union , by means of access through Poland .
The benefits for the Union and for Europe seem to be significant and measurable .
I am also aware of the very difficult situation in which the inhabitants of Augustw find themselves , as an increasingly large number of lorries , passenger vehicles and buses continues to pass through the town .
Those people cannot continue to live like this .
This region of Poland is very rich in natural resources : flora , fauna , lakes , forests and the entire landscape .
Any road in this area will have a negative impact on the environment .
However , it is simply impossible to avoid this region altogether .
The road will give Europeans access to these landscapes and bring them closer , while not building the road will mean that the region will remain an inaccessible fortress .
In spite of the fact that the current Polish Government 's stance has sometimes been less than professional , I would like to ask the Commission to take these aspects into account .
It is possible and necessary for the Commission and the Polish Government to effectively seek a solution that will be beneficial to the Union , the citizens and bring relief to both the inhabitants of Augustw and the drivers of the vehicles passing through the area , without causing too much damage to the environment .
During the mid-1990s , I was the Minister of Transport in Poland .
I supported the project then , as I thought that it was necessary .
Today , I continue to support the construction of the Via Baltica .

( PL ) Madam President , it is my duty as a Polish Member of the European Parliament to inform my colleagues that the case of the Via Baltica has two sides to it . The first is environmental and the other is political .
The worst thing in this case is that the European Commission has also become involved in local electoral conflicts .
I would like to take this opportunity to mention the fact that the European Commission has recently become too frequently and unnecessarily involved in matters which fall within the remit of Polish national and local government .
That is why we will soon be hearing a lot about the E-19 road .
This begs the question : what does the Commission want ?
In Poland , people say that it wants to block resources allocated to Poland for the construction of motorways .
Perhaps it would be better for the Commission to deal with issues such as GMOs in Europe , as this is the reason why we are facing the threat of an environmental and biological disaster , or perhaps the Schmidt farms , whose increasing pollution of the environment continues to go unpunished .
There is much to do and there is no need to interfere with those who are doing an honest job .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Commission decided to file a case against Poland at the European Court of Justice because it began to build a section of road that was 1 500 metres longer than the road that is currently used by lorries and five kilometres of which infringes on land protected by the Natura 2000 programme .
The current state of the road is so appalling that residents have dubbed it the ' road of death ' .
In 2006 alone , 14 people died and 25 were injured on that stretch of road near the small town of Augustw .
Postponing the construction of the road by three to five years , as this is the minimum amount of time that the Court will need to deal with the case , and perhaps having to start from scratch with the investment process , may lead to another 40 to 70 deaths .
I would also like to mention the noise pollution created by the thousands of lorries which pass through Augustw and the potentially lethal threat of accidents involving lorries transporting dangerous goods through built-up areas .
The habitats directive permits investment in projects on Natura 2000 land in exceptional circumstances , if compensation is offered .
Last Sunday , nearly 92 % of local residents voted in a referendum in favour of the designated new route .
Is this stance on the part of the residents not enough reason to withdraw the case filed at the European Court of Justice ?
If the Commission does not decide to withdraw its complaint , it will show that it has not been able to fairly balance the opinions of a small but significant minority in the Directorate-General for the Environment , environmental groups and eco-terrorists , as well as the expectations and needs of the inhabitants , which both the mayor and the Marshall of the Voivodship presented to the Commission .
In this situation , if the alternative methods for building a bridge across the Rospuda Valley do not satisfy the Commission , a serious conflict may erupt , which threatens to permanently paralyse and block the road that is currently used .
In view of how determined the local residents are , and I know that they are because I , unlike the others here , actually live in that area , anything is possible .
If the aforementioned road is not going to be built soon , we should perhaps consider opening negotiations with Russia , Belarus and Ukraine , with a view to diverting transit traffic from the Baltic states through these countries .
( ET ) Madam President , as a representative of Estonia , I would like to emphasise the importance of the Via Baltica .
Historically , this has , for us , been an important connection with European countries , and it must be developed so that it becomes quick and safe .
Today it is neither .
This spring , for instance , it took more than 12 hours to get from Tallinn to Warsaw by car , and this is not as it should be .
Thus we wholeheartedly welcome the opportunities offered by the Tenth Framework Programme for the construction of the motorway .
That being said , a good road does not justify abandoning all environmental requirements .
Nor are such roads likely to lead us to a happy future .
Unfortunately , the Polish incident casts a shadow over the entire Via Baltica project , which is of vital importance for the Baltic region in particular .
We hope that the European Court of Justice will soon make its decision and that a compromise can be reached between the Commission and the Polish authorities as soon as possible .
I would like to reiterate the importance of all connecting links between the Member States of the European Union - whether they be roads , railways or power lines .
We cannot feel like full members of the European Union if these connecting links are virtually absent or in very poor condition .
Madam President , I understand the sensitivity of this issue .
We are talking about trans-European networks , about trans-European works and roads and people who are living near these roads .
We understand that this project started before the entry of Poland into the European Union .
However , I would like to stress , on behalf of the Commission , that certain procedures need to be followed before large programmes can be started , in particular impact assessments .
The Commission is urging Poland - as it is now its responsibility - to complete the impact assessment as soon as possible .
In comparison , and in reply to the question on the North Stream proposal , the project concerned has not yet started ; the impact assessment is ongoing and this project can only start after the impact assessment is completed .
That is a different matter .
It is the opposite with the Via Baltica situation .
There has been no impact assessment ; the process is only halfway through , but the works are ongoing .
The works are ongoing outside Natura 2000 .
We do not have any information that Poland is breaching any decision of the Court .
I can also confirm that no European financial resources have yet been given to the project .
There were some comments concerning the Commission 's responsibilities and powers .
They are outlined in the European Treaties .
If you want to change them , then you will have to change the Treaties .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , Poland , Lithuania and Latvia need both the Via Baltica and other investments in road-building projects , as well as measures to protect the natural environment , including the Rospuda Valley .
We cannot cut certain areas of the Union off from other regions and countries simply because of environmental protection requirements .
However , we cannot ignore the environment and use the need for infrastructural improvements as a way of justifying any decision we make .
Experts tell us that there are alternative routes that do not damage the environment as much as the current plans .
If that is the case , then we should focus on bringing forward their implementation , rather than stubbornly sticking to this less than ideal solution .
This problem is stirring up a lot of emotion in Poland .
It seems that it would be more sensible to find a solution that is based on facts .
The coalition governing Poland has made the issue extremely political .
It has even forced a local referendum , which it is difficult to view as anything other than an attempt to use the issue of the route of the Via Baltica for their own purposes as the referendum took place at the same time as the regional elections .
Furthermore , the referendum is not binding either for the European Court of Justice or even for the Polish authorities .
The best solution for the inhabitants of the region and future road users would seem to be a compromise at a European level , in order to make sure that the principle of sustainable development does ring hollow .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 and resumed at 12.00 )

Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , It was on 15 April that I invited Garri Kasparov to come to the European Parliament , at a time when he was being held under arrest for eleven hours , and a member of my staff had other reasons - to do , in fact , with the legacy of Andrej Sakharov - to be in Moscow .
I am glad that Mr Kasparov has been here yesterday and today , and I rejoice in the great support that you have expressed for him and for his friends in Russia .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to inform the House that last night the Israeli authorities arrested a number of elected representatives of the PLC , including a Minister of the Abbas Government .
I would therefore ask you , President , to condemn this Israeli action and to make a strong statement against their practice of arresting elected representatives of the Palestinian people .
This is not the way to go forward with the peace process .
( Applause )
We have just been discussing this in the Conference of Presidents , too .
Unless there are unavoidable changes to my schedule , I shall be flying to the Middle East on Sunday and seeking suitable means to express this .
1 .
Common organisation of agricultural markets ( vote )
- Busk report
2 .
Common organisation of the market in cereals ( vote )
- Glattfelder report
- Before the vote on the proposal of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development :
Mr President , could you make it entirely clear that it is rejected on the recommendation of the rapporteur , not the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I make no further statement .
It is the recommendation of the rapporteur to reject the Commission proposal .
Those wishing to follow the rapporteur must now cast a negative vote .
3 .
Verification of the credentials of Mr Beniamino Donnici ( vote )
- Gargani report
- Before the vote :

Mr President , I rise under Rule 3 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure to ask you to invoke your presidential powers , defined in Rule 19 , to declare inadmissible , and therefore to stop the vote on , the report by Mr Gargani .
This report is in contravention of the Treaties and , in particular , of Articles 12 and 13 of the 1976 Act .
It is , therefore , without legal basis , and I ask you to use your presidential powers to declare it inadmissible .
This is a report by the Committee on Legal Affairs : who could be better qualified to provide information about the legal situation than they !
The President does not feel he is in a position to correct a decision by the Committee on Legal Affairs on a legal matter - even though he , too , studied law a long time ago .
For this reason , it is my decision that the vote on this report will proceed .
- After the final vote :
Mr President , my Group considers what the House has just done to be illegal , as I explained earlier .
Nonetheless , we accept the verdict of the House .
As they sometimes say in my language , we look forward to seeing you in court !
( Laughter )
This concerns the whole Parliament ; as you are also among its Members , you , too , would be appearing there .
( Applause )
4 .
Situation in Nigeria ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
5 .
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : See Minutes
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to welcome the members of a delegation from the Parliament of Kyrgyzstan , under the leadership of Mr Matubraimov , who have taken their seats in the VIP gallery .
The delegation is here to take part in the fifth session of the EU-Kyrgyzstan Parliamentary Cooperation Committee here in Strasbourg .
A very warm welcome to you all !
( Applause )
We rejoice in the further progress made in relations between our two Parliaments since the entry into force , in 1999 , of the Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Kyrgyzstan .
I wish you an agreeable sojourn in Strasbourg .
1 .
Innovation Strategy ( vote )
- Gierek report
2 .
Tackling organised crime ( vote )
- Newton Dunn report
3 .
Kashmir : present situation and future prospects ( vote )
- Nicholson of Winterbourne report
- Before the vote on Amendment 5 :
Mr President , I would like to move an oral amendment to delete the two words ' at present ' from the paragraph .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 11 :
In English the text reads : ' Urges the EU to take a firm stance in upholding the democracy and human rights clause ... examining the possibility of setting up a specific human rights dialogue with Pakistan ' .
Then comes the oral amendment : ' as is already the case with India ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 13 :
It reads , ' [ ... ] cautions the European Union and the international community that the Kashmir dispute continues to represent a serious risk of conflict in the region and the wider world , [ ... ] ' .
The amendment reads , ' [ ... ] cautions the European Union and the international community that the Kashmir dispute has represented a serious risk of conflict in the region , [ ... ] ' .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- After the vote on Amendment 52 :
Mr President , I understood that a request had been put in for an oral amendment by myself through the ALDE Group secretariat .
Could you kindly check your notes ?
It might have been requested , but it is not in my papers .
Therefore we have to proceed as usual .
4 .
Estonia ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
Voting time ( continued )
Explanations of vote
in writing . I welcome the Busk Report which should lead to significant simplification of the Common Agricultural Policy .
While I want to see further reform of CAP I accept the Rapporteur 's argument that this should not be by the " back door " .
in writing . ( SV ) It is good that the legal framework is being simplified , but both export subsidies and other aid in the form of intervention also remain in place .
That is a state of affairs that I can never accept , and I am therefore abstaining in the vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) I question the reasoning behind the Commission 's action which , despite the quite appealing appearance of concern for the simplification of administration , is liable to take less account of the specific details of certain modes of production .
I also find it regrettable that neither my fellow Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development nor I have had the time to study , under the right conditions , the Commission 's proposal , as a consequence of the diabolical timetable laid down by the Presidency of the Council .
This whole process was worthy of being considered in greater depth within the European institutions , and I find it regrettable that more time could not have been found for a subject of such fundamental importance .
It is for that reason I decided to abstain from the final vote .
in writing . ( SV ) The European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has again prepared a report opposed to reform of the common agricultural policy .
We wish to abolish the common organisation of the market in cereals .
However , we support the Commission 's proposal , as opposed to the approach of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , because the said committee now wants to oppose the abolition of maize intervention .
The June List observes that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy . Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of providing heavy subsidies to all the various farming groups .
I voted for the Glattfelder Report on the Common organisation of the market in cereals not because I entirely support its contents but because it is in line with CAP reform .
I also accepted as a compromise the phasing out of public interventions to support cereal crops .
in writing . - ( FR ) Reform of the system for intervention in support of maize is a matter of necessity .
Although it is thought of as a safety rope in the event of difficulties and as a means of getting production flowing , the system is no longer - particularly in Hungary - playing only this primary role and constitutes nothing other than a business opportunity .
It must not , however , be abandoned overnight , and certainly not only on the basis of an economic study relating to two exceptional marketing campaigns , and based on the problems of one Member State , namely Hungary .
The Commission 's proposal is unacceptable on the grounds of being premature and incapable of being managed by producers under favourable conditions .
One must not treat speed and haste as being the same thing .
Limiting the quantity eligible to benefit from the intervention system and re-examination at the time of the health check would be a good compromise between the need to act and the need to take the time to do so .
Solutions to local problems need themselves to be local in nature , and Parliament 's response to the radical and ill conceived measure proposed by the Commission shall be to propose progressive reform , reflection , listening to agriculturalists and a re-examination at the time of the health check .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall limit myself to pointing out the regrettable fact that the vote that has been taken in favour of our colleague will easily be overturned by the European Communities ' Court of Justice , and the reason why this is so is that you have variable-geometry case law .
When the scandalous attempt was made to deprive Mr Le Pen of his mandate , you had recourse to national competence and were unwilling to confirm for yourselves that the French authorities were interfering with his rights .
You saw fit to act similarly when it came to the verification of the credentials of another Member of this House , Mr Ruiz-Mateos , when , again , you had recourse to national law .
Yet now you want to defend the prerogatives of this House , and why ever not ?
In any case , the end product of your attitude was a ruling from the Court of Justice of the European Communities which , unfortunately for you , found against you , thus confirming the truth of the Latin dictum , ' Hodie mihi , cras tibi ' - my turn today and yours tomorrow .
This House 's acting as judge is defensible only if the House judges all its Members equally .
The issues raised in this report are complex and have far-reaching implications . At the heart of the matter is the sovereign power of Member States to nominate MEPs and to define how they are represented in the European Parliament within the context of the existing regulatory framework for elections to Parliament .
I do not wish to go into detail regarding a procedural and legal issue that rests exclusively with the Member State in question , but , according to the report before us , the Italian authorities have decided , on the basis of a decision by the Italian Council of State , to nominate a particular politician to the European Parliament whose credentials are called into question by this report .
We take the view that , given that all the criteria and conditions for the nomination of an MEP by a Member State have been met - at national and European Parliament level - the Member State in question should be allowed to proceed with the nomination , in compliance with the internal legal framework .

( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to make known that I abstained from the vote on CITES : not because I did not agree with many things contained in the resolution but because , as so often happens , this House is dictating to developing countries behaviour that seems right to us , but that those countries may not consider so appropriate .
That is why I abstained .
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) is an international agreement aimed at ensuring that the international trade in certain species of wild fauna and flora does not threaten their survival .
171 countries are signatories to the Convention , including Portugal , which ratified the text of the Convention in December 1980 . It entered into force in Portugal in March 1981 .
Given the vulnerability of many species , CITES is of acute importance .
There are currently 5 000 animals and 28 000 plants protected by CITES including species found on Portuguese territory .
The species covered by CITES are divided into three appendices according to the level of protection needed .
The legal trade in animals and plants has for a number of years constituted a serious threat to many species and , although many countries have stepped up the fight , and have become increasingly vigilant , the threat level unfortunately remains high .
As in other kinds of agreement and protection plans for wild species , the success of CITES also depends on the adoption of a balanced approach based on scientific criteria and recommendations by accredited bodies thus ensuring the validity and credibility of its actions and the effective implementation of the agreed recommendations .
The report views innovation as a variable in the internal market . It calls for the liberalisation of the markets and the systematic removal of obstacles to the free movement of goods , services and capital , to freedom of establishment and to the mobility of the workforce , all of which forms part of a capitalist approach based on competition and concentration .
In order to deal with the under-funding of the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development , the report follows the trend of providing for the use of structural funds and seeks ' to promote and strengthen public-private partnerships ' , in other words to put public investment at the mercy of private profit .
What is needed is to promote public investment in research , education and innovation , on the basis of sustainable development strategies , in every country .
This would help improve the quality of life , create jobs ( with rights ) and generate ( fairly distributed ) wealth .
What are needed are strategies that oppose the commercialisation of knowledge , education and research and that oppose the idea that only highly profitable research , with market opportunities , can actually take place . What are needed are strategies that promote greater investment in education and training at all levels and that actually make it easier for SMEs to access existing programmes and actions .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . ( PL ) The report basically highlights the need for a broad innovation strategy in Europe , which would improve the competitiveness of its economy .
The innovation strategy should be based on the creation of specialised areas of knowledge , the reform of patent laws and the introduction of tax incentives for companies investing in research and innovation .
In order to make the exchange of knowledge between research institutions and economic entities easier , the rapporteur sees a need to promote specialised areas of knowledge in the Member States , greater trans-border cooperation and more intensive cooperation with experts from third countries .
In keeping with the spirit of the report , I would say that the European Institute of Technology should create the necessary conditions for connecting centres of knowledge with companies by means of an emphasis on innovation and efforts to foster competition in economic sectors focusing on innovation .
Another important part of the report is the emphasis it places on the need to reform European patent policy .
We cannot deny that reliable and fair copyright protection and patent systems are key elements for building an economy , and a society , that is based on innovation and knowledge .
I voted for the Gierek report but against all amendments which could have led to reviving discussions on the Computer Implemented Inventions Directive .
Given the efforts to find a majority in the first place for this directive it would not have been helpful to reopen the debate .
There is a long-established idea that close relations between higher education and business can only benefit both parties . There is sometimes a discrepancy , however , between that idea and the reality .
The public authorities are often engaged in creating conditions ( depending on methods and times ) that are conducive to scientific and academic research , but do not always do so - or do not always succeed in doing so - as effectively in the business community .
Support for innovation in the business sphere of course follows different rules and methods from those governing investment in research in the academic sphere .
Even so , bearing in mind that a major part of innovation comes directly from business activity and from the quest for responses to what the market is looking for , I feel that this report by Parliament makes a useful contribution to the proposals contained in the Commission communication .
Let us hope that the national and regional authorities make the most of these opportunities .

Mr President , I would like to explain the way I voted on Mr Gierek 's report on innovation .
I voted in favour , since the rapporteur has done a difficult and necessary job on an issue that is crucial in terms of achieving the Lisbon objectives , but which we have yet to deal with .
In order to become an advanced knowledge-based society , not only do we have to be strong on technological research and development , that is to say on our capacity to generate , absorb , assimilate and communicate new knowledge and capacities to society and to companies , but we also have to be strong on the capacity to convert this knowledge into wealth and social well-being . That is innovation .
Not all of the EU 's countries are at the same level in terms of the indicators defining a knowledge-based society , nor in terms of innovation efforts .
Reducing these differences would benefit everybody .
Innovation is probably the only instrument that can enable us , within a reasonable space of time , to achieve such important objectives as :
1 ) Improving the quality and competitiveness of our companies ;
2 ) Making economic growth compatible with preserving the environment , and with quality of life and social cohesion .
3 ) Innovation makes it possible to maintain traditional sectors ;
4 ) Naturally , innovation can contribute to substantially improving working conditions and also the integration of certain groups , such as disabled people .
The most up-to-date economic analyses establish a direct relationship between research , development and innovation efforts and productivity , which is of particular interest to the majority of our countries with economies based on the services sector , for which productivity is perhaps one of their greatest weaknesses .
All of this is taken up to a greater or lesser extent in the report , and for that reason I have voted in favour .
I am voting in favour of Professor Adam Gierek 's report on ' Putting knowledge into practice : A broad-based innovation strategy for Europe ' .
At the moment , there is a great innovation divide in the world .
On the one hand , there are countries who create ' innovation fronts ' , which group together the great majority of the scientific , research and development sectors , while on the other there are the sidelined countries , which can only participate as importers or countries where innovation is diffused .
The world leaders in terms of innovation are the USA , Japan and the countries of the European Union , and the competition between these economies provides a stimulus for further innovation .
However , in the European Union , there has recently appeared a so-called ' innovation paradox ' .
Economic results for the Community can be seen as disappointing in view of the opportunities that the single European market offers .
The plan to transform the EU into the ' most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world '  is , on the one hand , a sign of the fact that the Union is aware of the need to fundamentally reform its social and economic system and , on the other hand , a sign of the ambitious and optimistic view that such change is possible .
In the report , the rapporteur very aptly points to the main reasons for this situation in the EU and , above all , highlights the need to develop an effective innovation strategy for Europe .
( CS ) Today 's recommendation from the European Parliament to the Council concerning the development of a strategic concept for tackling organised crime is an extremely important and welcome piece of news for Europe 's citizens .
It is proof that the Union is fulfilling its central role in an area that requires the closest possible international cooperation .
Such cooperation is already working extremely well , but it is no longer enough .
Terrorism and other forms of organised crime know no boundaries and are also , quite literally , exploiting the benefits of our democratic system .
We must therefore weigh up what are the most important values in any given situation : combating crime or unfettered freedom .
The time has come for us to cut back on our wonderful unlimited freedom in situations where that freedom prevents us from protecting the most precious thing of all , namely life itself .
The time has definitely come to change tack and to remove some internal obstacles , including those which protect illegally acquired economic and financial resources .
The Council must provide Europol and Eurojust with greater independence and authority .
This is a new strategic task , and it is a responsibility that we have towards the 500 million citizens of the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am happy that Mr Newton Dunn 's own-initiative report has been adopted by a very large majority ; for our House is thereby making several recommendations to the Council in respect of the drafting of a strategic concept for combating organised crime .
The abolition of internal borders between the Member States belonging to the Schengen area is certainly a major advance for our fellow citizens , but it is also helpful to organised crime , and so the European Union has a particularly important part to play in this area .
One fundamental and urgent requirement is that a policy of prevention be implemented and effective instruments put in place .
If there is to be greater trust between states , and between their respective police forces in particular , then a great deal of progress needs to be made , and the countries from which we all come need to be pressed to set aside sufficient budgetary resources for their exchange and training programmes .
Finally , this House of ours has highlighted the need not only for victim and witness protection schemes to be reinforced , but also for the promotion of campaigns making public opinion more aware of the traffic in human beings .
For all these reasons , I have given the rapporteur my backing and have , in the final vote , cast my vote in favour of this report .
I welcome the report by Bill Newton Dunn on tackling organised crime .
It is vital that the EU has the necessary tools to promote and strengthen a coordinated strategy to tackle organised crime .
The roles of Europol and Eurojust need to be enhanced and the public need to be made more aware of the EU 's role in this matter .
I voted for the report on the fight against organised crime presented by Bill Newton Dunn ( ALDE , GB ) because it will ensure that Europol 's role as a criminal intelligence body is strengthened , allowing it to fulfil its task of providing Member States with information and intelligence leading to more effective results in preventing and combating organised crime .
The EU has always played an important role in the fight against organised crime and it is now necessary to provide the Union with a more powerful and ambitious instrument to work more closely with Member States to improve cooperation in order to combat organised crime more effectively .
More than a matter of choice or duty , the need for cooperation when it comes to fighting organised crime is clearly of practical value , as organised crime becomes more sophisticated , better equipped and more efficient in its use of the most up-to-date technology .
As well as the opening up of physical borders arising from the process of EU integration , one must be mindful of the fact that globalisation and its mechanisms also come into play when it comes to crime .
As with all technological innovations , it is always open to being used for good deeds and bad .
I therefore welcome the overall thrust of this report , which advocates enhanced cooperation and the need for a strategic approach that encompasses this fight and everything connected with it at all stages .
That being said , the recommendation will only prove useful , and be at its most effective , if in addition to passing laws , steps are taken aimed at actually enhancing mutual trust between the institutions responsible for fighting crime in the various Member States .
Trust of this kind , which is not always in evidence , has been shown to be vital to the success of this mission .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union needs to equip itself with the instruments that will enable it to fight more effectively against organised crime , which knows no frontiers and is , lamentably , on the increase .
In view of organised crime 's activities being spread over different areas , the European Union must coordinate and maximise the effect of its actions ; while it must be able to respond , it must also put in place a policy of prevention .
Putting this strategy in place will make for deeper understanding of problems and will make available the tools with which organised crime can better be fought , and one of our priorities is greater cooperation between the police in criminal matters by means of Europol , Eurojust and OLAF .
A multi-disciplinary approach is of primary importance if we are to find the best possible way to keep organised criminal gangs in check , for we need to dismantle such organisations , bring the criminals in them to justice and deny them the proceeds of their crimes .
The fight against money-laundering and weapons trafficking is among Europe 's priorities in this conflict , for these two types of organised crime serve the interests of terrorists .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report uses the existing problem of organised crime as a pretext to promote a harsher policy to restrict fundamental individual rights and strengthen the police state and the uncontrolled action of the repressive mechanisms of the U .
Within this framework it proposes : the approximation of the criminal law provisions of the Member States , thereby paving the way for the ' communitisation ' of criminal law and limiting one of the most important foundations of the national sovereignty of the Member States , the creation of joint investigation teams acting for the repressive mechanisms , the autonomy of Europol and Eurojust and the strengthening of their character and competences , so that they can act as a ' moving spirit ' in the exercise of the policy of the Member States , the recognition of the fundamental role of the EU Counter-Terrorism Coordinator and the adoption of an informant mechanism , calling for ' a formal status for collaborators of justice at European level ' .
Of course , after all that , it is hardly surprising that the report makes no reference to the link between organised crime and state institutions and the repressive state mechanisms themselves , even though their underground relations are common knowledge .
It is clear that , ultimately , the real aim of the report is to ' combat ' democratic rights and grassroot freedoms , not organised crime .
in writing . ( SV ) Because we believe that it is not at EU level that foreign policy should be conducted or , by extension , foreign policy statements made , we have voted against all the amendments and against the report as a whole .
There is no doubt that many of the proposals are commendable in themselves , but neither the EU nor the European Parliament should have competence in these issues .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party is pleased to have been able to inject a degree of balance and impartiality into this report , which was severely lacking in the first draft presented to Committee .
In relation to amendments 16 and 34 , we express our deep concern regarding the suspension of the Pakistan Chief Justice and subsequent unrest that has led to over 40 deaths .
Protecting the independence of the judiciary is of vital importance in a modern democratic society .
However , referring to this case is inappropriate in a report dealing specifically with the Kashmir dispute .
With regards to combating terrorism , we have supported the more constructive and forward-looking language in amendments 55 and 56 , which acknowledge that there has been progress in decreasing the levels of infiltration by militant groups , but that further action needs to be taken in parallel with meaningful demilitarisation .
In voting for amendments 18 and 56 , we reaffirm the right to self-determination for the Kashmiri people , which can be expressed through a plebiscite when the conditions are right .
Reluctantly , I voted for this report .
I recognise that it is radically different from the one-sided version originally put before the Foreign Affairs Committee and thank those involved for those changes .
Kashmir is a region divided by history and has become a cause of conflict , which has been perpetuated at times by government and militant action on both sides of the Line of Control .
This is not simply an issue for governments but also for the Kashmiri people .
I regret that Parliament did not vote to strengthen the commitment to the right of those people for self-determination through a plebiscite .
I also regret that we did not strengthen our calls for the demilitarisation of the region .
I recognise the role of insurgency but we must acknowledge that the Indian side has one of the highest ratios of military and security personnel to the population of any part of the world .
We call for confidence-building measures and greater democracy : democracy cannot flourish in such circumstances .
So , I wish the final report had been stronger on these crucial areas but I also recognise that this version now has a political value in EU relations with the peoples concerned .
I voted for this report , which is more balanced than the text put to Committee .
I abstained on the amendment which expressed regret at the suspension of the Chief Justice of Pakistan not because I disagree with the criticism but because I did not see it as relevant to this report .
I voted for the amendment calling for a plebiscite at a future date because I believe that the people of Kashmir should be in charge of their own destiny .
Having visited Kashmir and seen some of the devastating effects of the past violence but also having seen a people ready for peace , I support this report based on the importance it has for the way the European Union seeks , by offering best practice measures and experience , to show other countries how an economic zone can develop peace and prosperity in regions that have a history of war .
I herald the confidence-building measures proposed in this report , in particular the joint monitoring cell for the sharing of data on seismic activity to provide early warning against possible earthquakes .
I also see the importance of community development measures that will stimulate the economy and activate untapped economic resources in the region .
Furthermore , I believe it is of utmost importance that the region of AJK has proper representation in the Pakistani Government , which it does not yet have .
( LT ) Mr President , first I would like to thank my colleagues who voted for the resolution on Estonia .
Today 's vote in the European Parliament showed that EU common foreign and defence policy is not just a declaration on paper or a collection of slogans .
It showed that it is an operating policy .
Today the European Parliament demonstrated something else too ; namely , that solidarity in the European Union is alive and an operating principle .
It is easy to declare and demonstrate solidarity when there are no problems and everything is fine .
However , it is much more important and more complicated to implement solidarity at critical moments , in times of crisis .
Today the European Parliament also showed that there is no disjuncture in the European Union between old and new , or large and small European Union Member States , and that there are no important or less important Members whose interests can be sacrificed for the benefit or interests of the large countries .
UKIP deplores the behaviour of Russia towards Estonia , but cannot vote in favour of any resolution from the EU Parliament whose legitimacy we do not recognise .
We are firmly opposed to the resolution adopted by Parliament today , which trivialises and obfuscates the true , serious significance of the recent events in Estonia and forms part of attempts to rewrite history .
Hence our vote against the resolution .
The point must be made that the resolution fails to make any reference to acts of Nazism and Fascism in Estonia , such as the renewed veneration of collaborators with the Nazi occupiers , thereby hiding their participation in the brutal repression and systematic murder of thousands of people .
The recent decision to remove a World War II memorial in honour of those who lost their lives in the cause of defeating the Nazis and Fascists - entailing the removal of human remains - from the centre of Tallinn is a further provocation which forms part of this revisionism .
The citizens of Estonia legitimately expressed their opposition to this decision and their actions were brutally repressed .
Added to this provocation is the unacceptable discrimination towards large sections of the Russian-speaking Estonian population , who are refused citizenship by the authorities .
This is an issue that goes way beyond EU relations with the Russian Federation .
All anti-fascists and democrats should join forces to express their indignation .
in writing . ( SV ) I support the resolution because we believe that Russian interference in what happened in Estonia is very serious and is unacceptable .
I do not , however , agree with paragraph 8 .
It is up to each sovereign state to decide whether or not a dialogue should be begun .
Paragraph 7 comments on the Internet attacks carried out .
These are very serious actions , but I do not believe that the EU should devise a plan in this connection , because the issue is best dealt with at Member State level .
I supported the resolution on Estonia , which showed solidarity with the country in the face of interference by the Russian authorities in the internal affairs of Estonia .
In particular , I support the call on the Russian Government to respect the Vienna Convention on the protection of diplomats .
I voted against the compromise motion for a resolution on the recent events in Estonia , as did the left wing of the European Parliament , because it is governed by unilateral perceptions and because I believe that it is unacceptable for anyone to revise history , whatever they suffered from the Soviets .
The monument whose removal was the cause of the demonstrations and tension is a monument to the victory over fascism .
No one can call it otherwise in the name of opposition to Soviet sovereignty .
The unilateral approach to the matter cannot be accepted .
Not only does it not help to reduce the tension caused between Estonia and Russia , it feeds it .
in writing . ( PL ) The riots in Tallinn and the attack on the Estonian embassy in Moscow have made Member States aware of the current government 's policy towards individual Member States .
However , on this occasion , Moscow , which has adopted a very aggressive stance towards one of the smallest European countries , has bitten off more than it can chew .
For the first time , Europe has presented a unified front towards Russia .
This is an important day in the history of the European Union , as solidarity is one of the fundamental principles on which the Community is based .
That is why I am pleased to have been part of the majority of Members who supported the adoption of the previously mentioned resolution .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes
1 .
The Radio Caracas TV Channel in Venezuela
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on the case of ' Radio Caracas TV ' in Venezuela .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Venezuela we are witnessing the classic phenomenon of the gradual concentration of authoritarian power .
The Venezuelan Government often speaks of itself as the promoter of a revolution and we should therefore be asking whether that revolution is leading in a democratic direction or not .
Unfortunately it is not .
Things are increasingly moving in the opposite direction to freedoms , fundamental rights , pluralism and social harmony .
There are other worrying phenomena that I could mention in the political , constitutional , legislative , social and also , recently , military spheres .
These events are worrying for all democrats , for the Venezuelan people 's friends in the world and also for the large Portuguese community that lives and works in Venezuela .
We know that the Venezuelans have paid a high price to win democracy over the last fifty years , and we want it to be maintained .
We also know that political and social stability is valuable for democracy , freedom and peace .
Today we are focussing on the Radio Caracas Televisin case and on the threat that it represents to freedom of expression , a universal fundamental right .
I shall not go into details , but it was his Excellency President Chvez who , on 28 December , announced the decision to close down the broadcasts of Radio Caracas , making extremely serious political accusations against it .
The competent authority did not issue the administrative act until three months later , on 28 March , and that act does not mention any of the serious accusations that the Venezuelan Embassy in Brussels has also communicated to us .
None of these accusations have been brought before a court and the administrative act of the National Telecommunications Council ( CONATEL ) mentions other intentions involving the creation of a public service channel , in a process which , in our countries , we would consider illegal and arbitrary .
The mood has become more heated and we have seen people protesting against this decision in the streets .
We also know from the polls that public opinion is against and we know that this is a political case , and , being a political one , it is therefore a bad case .
We are calling for the Rule of Law to be upheld and we are appealing for dialogue : dialogue and law .
That is what is needed .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , an international campaign is being conducted to delegitimise Venezuela , its freely elected President and all its democratic institutions .
There is a direct relationship between today 's debate and this international campaign ; even the European Parliament is inappropriately debating an issue that is for the Venezuelan national government alone to decide .
What is more , our debate focuses on an inappropriate sector , that of human rights violations , when in fact we all know that no human rights have been violated .
The reality is that this represents a political move ; it is no accident that this agenda item was put forward by a group of MEPs and not by an official European Parliament delegation as some have tried to claim , to be precise , by a group of MEPs who went to Venezuela and met with members of the opposition only .
In reality , the non-renewal of the licence for Radio Caracas TV is a matter for the Venezuelan Government alone , and their decision respects the country 's laws and constitution .
Radio Caracas TV will be able to transmit via cable , satellite and the Internet , and therefore those who claim that the decision represents an act that is hostile to freedom of expression know this to be a lie .
There are a great number of cases in Europe in which frequency licences are not renewed and yet this Parliament has never spoken of human rights violations and curbing freedom of expression .
The fact is that freedom of expression and pluralism of information and television broadcasts are guaranteed in Venezuela .
In the particular case of Radio Caracas TV we are talking about a television station that played an active role in supporting the coup in 2002 and the oil blockade in 2002 and 2003 .
Any accusations of subversive activities should therefore be made to those who have encouraged the breakdown of Venezuela 's democratic and constitutional regime through a terrorist campaign and by manipulating information , and certainly not to a democratically elected government actively demonstrating its social commitment .
author . - Mr President , RCTV is a privately-owned TV station , which has been operating in Venezuela for more than half a century .
RCTV 's history is , unfortunately , stigmatised mainly by its alleged controversial role in the April 2002 attempted coup in Venezuela .
This is seen as the main reason behind the recent National Telecommunications Commission 's decision , supported by a Supreme Tribunal decision , not to renew RCTV 's broadcast licence .
Against this position , one has to set the upholding of the principle of freedom of the press and of media plurality .
I admit the situation here is not black and white and the line separating one side of opinion from another is very fine , but only by a tiny margin we consider the freedom of the press prevails and any alleged ill-doing by the RCTV station must be properly substantiated in a court of law .
Consequently , my group supports the resolution as it stands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance believes that the non-renewal of the frequency licence for RCTV represents a politically inopportune precedent , insofar as such measures should be restricted to the specific cases laid down by law .
At the same time , we refuse to become involved in a campaign that is justified not only by events in Venezuela , but has arisen within a Member State of the European Union , that is to say in Spain , where this idea is actively used .
In our opinion , dealing with such matters in an atmosphere of urgency , in a situation in which there is no opportunity for background work on freedom of expression , not only in Venezuela , I might add , but also in various other countries of the European Union , does not enable our Parliament to work on these issues in a credible manner .
We cannot divide ourselves into left and right on such subjects , we cannot take a vote in which one side of the Chamber goes one way and the other side goes another .
We must send out a positive message that encourages dialogue and does not conjure up phantoms and devils .
Although we will not support the resolution , we believe and we hope that approval will be given to a paragraph enabling our competent committees to work together on these issues to achieve a united position that may be of use to the debate in Venezuela .
It is not a question of interfering in national affairs , but words like ' legitimacy ' and ' illegitimacy ' are not to be bandied about at random .
We are talking about a serious topic ; we recognise that there is indeed a risk of restriction of freedom in Venezuela , but this does not justify a witch-hunt that is , moreover , unworthy of the European Union .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , when we speak about freedom of speech and the fact that President Chavez decided not to renew the licence of one of the largest radio and television networks in Venezuela , we should consider in general terms what the limits of freedom are .
We agree that freedom is not absolute , that it is restricted for the good of others , that it is limited by moral principles and that it may be restricted by legal principles .
Freedom must serve a purpose .
The freedom of the press is the very cornerstone of useful freedom .
That is why I am surprised that here , in this Chamber , there are those from the Left , as is often case , who are attempting to justify the fact that freedom can be limited simply because the freedom in question is that of political adversaries .
Freedom for us , according to one of the previous speakers , is a good thing , but freedom for our adversaries is not .
This kind of freedom is no freedom at all .
This is something we have experienced and observed .
We lived in a communist state where people said that freedom should exist , but only for us , and not for our adversaries , in keeping with the famous motto that ' there is no freedom for enemies of freedom ' .
Communism fell and it seemed that we would have peace .
Meanwhile , it turns out that Communism is like a hydra which springs back to life in various parts of the world and that there are those who defend it even here in this Chamber .
They say that Mr Chavez is doing the right thing by silencing those he does not like , as it turns out that those people are also disliked by some of those present here .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us beware of the Left , the extreme Left , which is always prepared to defend all restrictions placed on human rights when it suits their purposes .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , dictatorships are not established overnight .
They take form through a thousand small subversions of the democratic order - the targeting of opposition leaders , the subversion of the electoral commission , the vitiation of the judiciary , the dissolution of the national assembly and , not least , the silencing of independent media .
Hugo Chvez 's Venezuela has something of the feel of Eastern Europe in the late 1940s .
There are still elections , there are still opposition parties , there are still free newspapers , but the direction is unmistakable .
True , President Chvez has not annulled the electoral process , but then there were elections every four years in the Comecon states throughout the Cold War .
There are elections today in most of Mr Chvez 's closest allies - Iran , Byelorussia , Zimbabwe - it is simply that opponents of the regime find it hard to contest those elections , and that is why we should be so alarmed by the harassment and expropriation of Mr Chvez 's critics .
Venezuela is not Cuba , at least not yet , but the complacency exhibited by some in this House is at best naive , and at worst shameful .
We are witnessing the slow asphyxiation of a once open and liberal polity .
If we do nothing else , for heaven 's sake , let us at least register our disapprobation !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to speak in this House in defence of press freedom : here , in Venezuela and anywhere in the world .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has supported a motion for a resolution , basically presented by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance with certain amendments , and we are still supporting it in this House .
We are doing so because there are elections in Venezuela , as previous speakers have said .
Mrs Frassoni and I were there representing the European Union during the last elections , and we witnessed a fair election process .
There is press freedom in Venezuela .
It is true that it is not good for press freedom to be restricted and we must be concerned about anything of that nature , but we must also acknowledge that the Venezuelan Government is a democratic government and that there are judicial guarantees .
Any intervention by us could therefore be interpreted as the European Union interfering in the internal affairs of a country that is in a rather delicate situation .
Venezuela is currently split in two and the last thing we should do is contribute to a confrontation amongst Venezuelans .
The role of this Parliament and of the European Union must be to act in a friendly manner towards the Venezuelan authorities , society and political forces in order to prevent this conflict from becoming any worse .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is true that President Chvez 's economic and social policies are posing a big challenge to powerful interests and there may well be , as Mr Catania maintains , a campaign to delegitimise his government .
However , we are not here to discuss the rights and wrongs of his socio-economic policies or indeed the internal politics of Venezuela .
This motion for a resolution is an expression of worry about a suppression of pluralism and dissent , and that is our business .
It is a shame if the elevation of President Chvez to an icon of anti-globalisation and anti-capitalism blinds some in this House to the drift towards an authoritarian and anti-democratic system .
I find myself in rather rare agreement with Mr Hannan .
This has happened to the Mayor of my city , London , Mr Livingstone , who belongs to the Labour Party .
A year ago he said : ' For many years people have demanded that social progress and democracy go hand in hand , and that is exactly what is now taking place in Venezuela . ...
With Chvez the choice is not difficult at all .
He is both carrying out a progressive programme and doing so through the mandate of the ballot box . '
It is true , as Mr Hannan has said , that there are still elections , but there is an undoubted drift towards autocracy and a suppression of opinions that do not fit with the regime .
We had some amusement when six months ago Mr Livingstone went 5000 miles to try to see President Chvez but unfortunately got stranded in Cuba because the President could not find the time to see him .
We had a laugh about that .
However , it is quite serious when somebody who is democratically elected as the Mayor of , I would say , Europe 's premier city , finds himself wishing to cosy up to someone who is not only populist but increasingly authoritarian .
It is because there are breaches of human rights in Venezuela that we have this motion for a resolution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we have said it before and we must say it again : freedom of expression is not just a fundamental right , but it is also the guarantee of democracy .
We must therefore condemn , and combat , any attempt to restrict it or violate it , wherever it takes place .
This is precisely what is expressed in the joint resolution presented by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , in which we call essentially for two things : firstly , for the Venezuelan State to guarantee the plurality of the media and non-concentration as a mechanism for promoting freedom of expression ; and secondly , we call upon the Venezuelan media , both public and private , to treat information relating to electoral politics in an objective and impartial manner .
The resolution also takes note of the Venezuelan Government 's statement that it will abide strictly by decisions taken by the judiciary , and we add that all of the parties should do exactly the same thing .
I sincerely believe that this is an extremely balanced resolution that is consistent with the principles of freedom of expression and plurality of the media .
I can therefore only imagine that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Union for Europe of the Nations Group have presented their alternative proposal for reasons of Spanish domestic politics , not motivated by the fundamental issue that we are discussing but rather by the kind of political opportunism that we have seen on previous occasions in this House .
It ignores fundamental facts such as , for example , the fact that the non-renewal of the licence is only for VHF and not for broadcasts by cable , UHF , satellite or Internet .
It is not a question of deciding whether or not we are in favour of Hugo Chvez : that is not the issue .
What we are talking about here is freedom of expression , but let us not indulge in demagoguery please .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the present resolution represents a further attempt by the conservative groups to exploit the subject of human rights for their own ends .
This is not about the freedom of the media ; it is about condemning the Venezuelan Government , one that has repeatedly received an overwhelming majority of the popular vote in democratic elections and is serious about fighting poverty and exploitation in its country - in contrast , of course , to most European governments , who with their neoliberal agenda are making the gulf between the haves and the have-nots ever wider .
In fact , it is Europe where the tackling of the power of private media moguls and private media conglomerates , and the establishment of a genuinely democratic media culture , is long overdue .
Instead of arrogantly interfering in Venezuelan media politics , therefore , it would be far more appropriate to follow the example of the democratic and social standard of the Bolivian revolution .
Europe , too , has alternatives to neoliberalism .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the President of Venezuela , Mr Hugo Chavez , has said that he will not renew the licence of one of the largest private television stations , Radio Caracas TV , which has been broadcasting for 53 years .
This move is nothing less than an attack on democracy and freedom of speech , as well as an attempt to undermine the position of private broadcasting companies that are critical of the Venezuelan Government .
This decision is unacceptable and goes against all international treaties which Venezuela has signed and which compel it to respect the plurality of the media , not to mention the fact that Articles 57 and 58 of the Venezuelan constitution guarantee the freedom of speech , communication and information .
Events taking place in Venezuela are extremely worrying , as they are yet another example of the flagrant abuse of human and civil rights in countries which call themselves democracies , such as Cuba , China or Venezuela .
The death of Anna Politkovska , a Russian journalist who denounced the Kremlin 's activities in Chechnya , recently shocked the world .
The European Union should clearly and emphatically denounce attempts to silence journalists who have dared to criticise the government .
We cannot remain indifferent to the infringement of democratic principles .
( EL ) Mr President , the superficial interest of the political groups of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Liberals and the Union for Europe of the Nations , to project on the pretext of freedom of expression and through a joint resolution by the European Parliament the groundless , false allegations by the owners of the Radio Caracas TV radio and television station and the reactionary political forces in Venezuela which together played a leading part in the attempted coup in 2002 , in the oil embargo in 2003 , in the subversive action during the referendum on the dismissal of the president and in the constant , blatant infringements of the rules of freedom of information , is a barefaced and unacceptable action against both the government and the people of Venezuela .
Information is a social commodity . 82 % of radio and television stations belong to private companies .
The spectrum of radio and television frequencies in Venezuela is a social asset that belongs to the people of the country and the legal representative for its management is its government .
The government of Venezuela fully applies national and international rules on freedom of information .
It takes a great deal of courage for someone to attack the government of Venezuela from this tribune when it is clear that the reasons for the attack lie elsewhere .
They basically want to restore the status quo ante in Venezuela , they want the wealth-producing resources in this country and they want the exploitation of the people of Venezuela to continue and the European Parliament and the people of Venezuela themselves will not allow it .
( CS ) President Hugo Chvez has prevented Radio Caracas Televisin from renewing its license .
Tens of thousands of Venezuelan citizens have gone out on to the streets to defend free broadcasting and they are expecting the help of democratic Europe .
They are aware that if they lose their broadcasting freedom , what awaits them is the ' Cuban way ' .
They are aware that they will soon be prisoners in their own country , just like the Cubans , without independent information , because they are losing the opportunity to decide their affairs through democratic means .
Chvez is planning to silence the media and to crush the opposition , which is warning that nationalisation and autocracy are bringing to the country not development , but food rations for poor people on the one hand , and luxury and unlimited power for the communist oligarchy on the other .
Venezuela , Cuba and Bolivia : this is a dangerous alliance of autocratic regimes spreading anti-democratic ideologies around Latin America and the Caribbean .
Europe will not remain silent .
We insist on Venezuela upholding its international obligations on human rights and on maintaining equal rights for independent media outlets .
Mr President , the Commission has been closely following the debate on the future of Radio Caracas TV , and our concern was raised at the outset by the statement made by the President of Venezuela and members of the Venezuelan Government to the effect that the frequency would not be renewed as of 27 May .
The Commission has raised this important issue with the Venezuelan authorities several times .
We have always underlined each state 's sovereign right to organise and regulate its own broadcasting policies , but we have also stressed the importance that the European Union attaches to freedom of expression as the cornerstone of democracy and the rule of law .
In its contacts with the Venezuelan Government , the Commission has also underlined its support for all initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue and mutual understanding and stressed that licensing procedures for the broadcast media should be transparent and non-discriminatory .
The Commission received a letter in April from the head of television , Mr Granier , and members of Primero Justicia .
It has also held meetings with the authorities and members of the Venezuelan Parliament and has listened carefully to the arguments and explanations offered by both sides .
I wish to assure Parliament that the Commission is keeping a close eye on developments through its delegation in Venezuela and by virtue of its close cooperation with the diplomatic representations of EU Member States in Caracas .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
2 .
Human rights in Syria
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on human rights in Syria .

author . - ( FR ) Mr President , my interest in Syrian affairs is common knowledge ; I have always taken the view that isolating that country would do no good at the international level and would do nothing to advance peace in the region , and it is for that reason that I am a supporter of the plan for an association agreement , which has been put on ice ever since the assassination of Rafiq Hariri .
Commitment to Syria and friendship with it also imply , however , that we do not mince our words when fundamental rights are violated , and that is why I take a critical line on , and indeed denounce , the political repression under which all the opposition , of whatever tendency , currently labour .
Most of the prisoners for whose release we are calling today are people we have met ; they are almost friends , and none of them , when speaking with us , talked in terms of recourse to any means other than legal and peaceful ones in democratising the country that they all love passionately .
When a country turns on those who love it passionately , when it stifles freedom of expression , it puts itself in danger , and I would not want to see Syria doing that to itself .
Today , we are calling for the release of Michel Kilo , Mahmoud Issa , Suleiman Achmar , Faek El Mir , Aref Dalila , Kamal al-Labwani and Anouar Bunni , who must be set at liberty .
I would therefore appreciate it if the Council and the Commission were to pass this message on to the Syrian Government and if that body were to give it a very great deal of attention , for the message is a serious one .
Moreover , it would be good if Syria were to firmly declare itself in favour of there being an international criminal tribunal under Chapter 6 to try Hariri 's assassins ; the international community would appreciate such a gesture , which would facilitate an exit from the political stalemate with which Lebanon is struggling , a stalemate that encourages recurrent bloody conflicts and offers forebodings of a period of violence and instability .
It is common knowledge that Syria 's adopting such a position , far from being an interference in Lebanese affairs , would , on the contrary , make it possible to break the deadlock and , above all , to put a stop to the rumours that give people cause to think that Syrian could , in an underhand way , frustrate the establishment of such a criminal tribunal .
author . - ( NL ) Syria is a permanently recurring item on our agenda .
The European Union is keen to strike up good and intense relations with that country in the framework of the Neighbourhood Policy involving countries around the Mediterranean .
The chaos in its neighbour , Iraq , is yet another reason why stability in Syria would be valuable .
Syria , however , is a dictatorship that does not tolerate internal opposition .
For Christians and Kurds , it is , to say the least , an unpleasant place to be .
Although it is not a theocratic state with sympathies towards Muslim fundamentalism , it does consider Iran - which is a theocratic dictatorship - as an ally .
In Lebanon , it gives its backing to Lebanese and Palestinian Muslim fundamentalists , as long as they help to build up Syrian influence in its small neighbour .
Lebanon is considered - albeit wrongly so - as an area that has been cut off from Syria as a result of European intervention .
The conflict with Israel is being carefully nourished , because the tension that this brings with it means that the Syrians could well consider the continued existence of the regime as the lesser of two evils .
There is no improvement in sight .
Both an aggressive attitude towards Syria and friendly relations with this regime are counterproductive .
The only thing that can contribute to long-term improvement is support for Syrian refugees and Syrian opponents in prison and in exile .
I would like to finish off by saying that those who have recently become the victims of restrictions on freedom , like Michel Kilo who has been to visit this Parliament before , need our undivided attention .
author . - Mr President , the annual report on the human rights situation in Syria for 2006 makes very grim reading indeed .
Scores of arbitrary arrests and detentions of political opposition figures , reformists and human rights and civil society activists have taken place .
In addition , documented reports of torture used as a routine and systematic interrogation method of extracting confessions are found in abundance .
Furthermore , corrupt members of the Syrian judiciary , both civil and military , have been passing draconian sentences , including life incarceration and death sentences , influenced mainly by political motives .
We call upon the Syrian Government , in the face of international condemnation , to at last make a serious effort to improve respect for the human rights of its citizens or face the consequences , which I hope , with some reservation , will be forthcoming and drastic .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Damascus is one of the oldest cities in the world , and present-day Syria is an ancient cultural area in which several peoples and religions have coexisted - peacefully , for the most part - for centuries , and where close cooperation between Muslims and Christians still exists .
Mr Dess and I are particularly involved with the dialogue between these religions , which certainly has a good chance of success in that country - being an Arab country that is not Islamist and is very important throughout the region .
All the more regrettable , then , that a regime has established itself there that , under Ba 'athist national socialism , is victimising , persecuting and repressing people , subjecting them to show trials and taking political prisoners - and this at a time when our need for Syria 's help in achieving peace in the region is more pressing than ever .
I am not one of those who believe in the complete isolation of Syria .
The country has an ancient tradition ; one that should be harnessed to build peace .
Without Syria there can be no peace in the Middle East , no peace in Lebanon and no resolution of the Iraq problem .
For this very reason , however , we cannot accept violations of human rights , such as the repression of Kurds and others on the flimsiest grounds , and so we would appeal to Syria to return to a policy of dialogue and cooperation . We are prepared to engage in this , but not with a regime that lacks the fundamental will to respect democracy and the rule of law .
It is impossible to conduct a reasonable foreign and security policy and reasonable economic relations with a country that shows contempt for fundamental human rights .
This should be a clear signal to Syria , therefore , to change its course and return to the path of cooperation .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the ongoing human rights abuses in Syria are reaching a frightening scale .
The Syrian Government is drastically restricting freedom of speech , assembly and association of any kind .
The Syrian authorities continue to pursue a policy of intimidation and imprisonment when dealing with human rights defenders and peaceful critics of the policies of the current government .
Following the Beirut-Damascus declaration , which was signed in May of 2006 , and which appealed for improved relations between Lebanon and Syria , the Syrian security forces arrested a dozen or so people for expressing views in this declaration that were different to the those of the Syrian Government .
Those arrested included the brilliant writer Michel Kilo and the human rights campaigner Anwar al-Bunni .
Thousands of political prisoners remain in prison without ever having been sentenced .
The year 2006 passed without the Syrian authorities providing any information on the fate of 17 000 people arrested by the Syrian security forces .
They were mainly members of the banned organisation Muslim Brotherhood , Syrian activists arrested in the 1980s and a few hundred Lebanese and Palestinian citizens arrested in Syria and Lebanon by the Syrian security forces , as well as by the Syrian-controlled Lebanese and Palestinian military police .
As representatives of the European Union , we have to decisively oppose further repression and human rights abuses in Syria , as we jointly stated in today 's resolution .
Mr President , the Commission , together with Member States , is following the situation in Syria very closely .
Since our last debate at the June 2006 part-session there have been a few positive developments .
I would like to point out that a human rights contact was appointed in January 2007 in the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
We also consider it positive that the EU is granted regular access to trials at the High State Security Court , the Military Court and the Criminal Court .
However , we regret that none of the promises of political openness have been transformed into action - for instance , the relaxation of the emergency law , the adoption of a multi-party law , the granting of citizenship to stateless Kurds or the declaration of the National Council for Human Rights .
We also deplore the disproportionate sentences pronounced against prominent civil society activists in recent weeks .
We cannot accept that they are jailed only because they have expressed themselves freely .
We call again for the release of all political prisoners in Syria .
To give an example , all our attempts to help Mr Anwar al-Bunni have led to a dead end .
Today Mr al-Bunni was sentenced to five years in prison merely for denouncing torture and poor prison conditions in Syria and fined EUR 1500 for allegedly not respecting Syria 's law when setting up the training centre , also financed by European Funds .
For several years the Commission has been supporting the modernisation process in Syria through a range of activities .
We have seen very encouraging results in the economic field .
We sincerely hope that these will spread to the political sphere .
We will continue to encourage Syria to respect this obligation and the UN Convention on Civil and Political Rights and Torture .
I am sure that the European Parliament will give its support to these efforts by the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
3 .
Human rights in Sudan
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on human rights in Sudan .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , this is my first term as a Member of the European Parliament , but I do recall that this is our third debate on the subject of Sudan .
In an ideal situation , from the point of view of the Sudanese people , there would be no need for our involvement .
I welcome the fact that the six largest political groups in Parliament have come to an agreement on the matter of Sudan , and that we have a joint position .
Paradoxically enough , one could say that the suffering and terrible verdicts handed down by the injustice system , I repeat - the injustice system , in that country seem to unite us in Europe .
It is unacceptable in the twenty-first century for a situation to continue where women are sentenced to death by stoning for adultery or where sixteen year old children are sentenced to death by hanging .
Yes , we have become involved in Sudan 's internal affairs .
Moreover , we should be involved for moral as well as other reasons .
One of these reasons is that we have already earmarked EUR 85 million for humanitarian aid to that country this year alone .
That figure was increased two months ago , as it initially stood at EUR 40 millions .
We also have to loudly denounce cruel practices , such as the mutilation of young women , which also occurs in that country .
On a personal note , there is no point hiding the fact that there is a debate taking place in my country on the subject of the death penalty .
Personally , I am against the death penalty .
Events in Sudan confirm my convictions , although the cultural context is , of course , entirely different .
I would like to highlight the fact that we have to show solidarity in this matter .
We have to act together , as it is only our solidarity , the solidarity of the whole European Union , that can put an end to these absurd verdicts .
author . - Mr President , Sudan is perhaps best known for the conflict in Darfur , in which human rights abuses have reached gigantic proportions .
However , Sudan is also a state where respect for human rights in general is seriously lacking throughout the country .
This motion for a resolution reminds us again of the anachronistic and primitive judicial system applicable in Sudan , a system that allows the sentencing of women to death by stoning if found guilty of adultery and the sentencing of children to death .
It is truly hard to believe that in the 21st century there are still governments that continue to tolerate and support such extraordinarily barbaric systems .
We understand that Sudan is a very poor country , with many political and economic problems , but such problems should not be an excuse for not following a course of common-sense-guided progress towards upholding universal values of justice and democracy .
Furthermore , we find it difficult to accept how religion can interfere to such drastic and occasionally sadistic effect in matters of criminal and civil law .
We wish to send a strong message to the Sudanese Government that our patience is running out and the limits on our tolerance have long been exceeded .
We demand that they implement an urgent revision of their judicial system , taking into consideration international law , UN conventions and respect for the human rights of the Sudanese people .
We trust this will be done speedily , in order to avoid having to resort to more drastic persuasive measures .


author . - ( DE ) Mr President , I fully agree with Mr Matsakis , except on one point .
He states that Sudan is a poor country - which is true , but , with its oil wealth and much more , it has the potential to be an extremely rich one .
Yet it is being exploited , and international forces and companies have certainly fanned the flames of the war in Darfur and elsewhere to promote their energy interests .
Sudan , with its defective political system , is also inflicting infinite harm on itself , however , not only as a result of the conflict between north and south , east and west , Christians and Muslims - as the generalisation always goes - but also as a result of a host of individual conflicts .
For this reason , we must insist on respect for fundamental human rights there .
As has just been said , rightly , Europe rejects the death penalty .
The debate in Poland has been mentioned .
As we know , the death penalty is incompatible with membership of the European Union and also of the Council of Europe ; but similar standards are having to be developed slowly in Africa , of course .
The still fledgling African Union is particularly called upon in this regard to not only develop , but also implement and enforce politically the relevant human rights standards little by little - we know that this cannot be done overnight .
For this reason , we appeal to the Sudanese Government to not only discontinue the death penalty - particularly its particularly scandalous use on minors - but also to refrain from a ) misinterpreting Sharia law as it is doing , as the barbaric customs practised there have nothing to do with real Sharia law , and b ) extending Sharia law to non-Islamic communities .
The country must comply with normal civil law that is in line with the human rights standards of the United Nations .
author . - ( ES ) Of all the horrors that can be inflicted on a human being , death by stoning is unquestionably one of the most incomprehensible and patently unacceptable .
The case we are discussing today , the sentencing to death by stoning of Sadia Idris Fadul and Amouna Abdallah Daldoum , has two equally important dimensions .
On the one hand , it obliges us once again to state our opposition to the death penalty as a form of punishment under any circumstances , and , on the other , it brings us face to face with another case of flagrant gender discrimination , since the sentence in question is based on an alleged crime - adultery - that is only classed as such in the case of women , and not in the case of men .
It is not sufficient , therefore , to call for compliance with the international legislation regarding the death penalty against minors , nor even to urge all of the countries maintaining that practice to consign it to judicial and political history .
In this case , we must also present this situation as one of blatant sexism , or one of selective killings on behalf of a patriarchy , which comes to the same thing .
What we are dealing with when it comes to this kind of sentence that only affects women is a situation in which less value is attached to the lives of women compared to those of men .
That is not acceptable in Sudan or in any other country of the world .
I am therefore delighted with the extremely high degree of consensus on this resolution and I hope that it will contribute not just to putting an end to the death penalty but also to the practice of valuing the lives of men and women differently .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , even in the days when the current state of Sudan was still known as Anglo-Egyptian Sudan , the question was whether this very extensive area with very different peoples should gain independence as one state .
A united state would mainly be the state of the Arabic people in the north , the east and the centre , because it would be difficult for the black Islamic people in the east and the black Christian and animistic people in the south to secure an equivalent position .
These areas , which were far less developed , were at a fair distance from the sea and were largely unknown to the international community .
Eventually , they were ignored by everyone .
After years of war , a compromise appeared to have been struck for the non-Islamic south that had been given self-government and a representation in the central government .
As we know , this is not the case for Darfur that is located to the west .
Fundamentalism is a prevailing force among the dominating Arabic people , and particularly among those who wield power and administer justice , with capital punishment , even stoning , for offences including adultery being the worst outward signs of this .
The resolution rightly draws attention to international agreements and the need to abolish capital punishment .
Sufficient attention must be given to this area , for the situation facing Sudan is a terrible one .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the conflict in Sudan , which has continued for over 50 years , has claimed at least 2 million victims .
The breakthrough in one of the bloodiest wars in contemporary Africa came when a peace agreement was signed in Nairobi in 2005 .
However , the conflict continues in Darfur , in the western part of the country .
To date , this conflict has resulted in 400 000 deaths and has displaced 2 million people .
The inhabitants of this province are victims of the most serious crisis in the world today .
They have no food , water or healthcare .
The situation in Darfur has been critical for four years .
The European Union has yet to take any effective steps to force the government in Khartoum to stop committing war crimes and crimes against humanity .
The latest reports on the execution of minors in Sudan is additional confirmation of the fact that this country has , once again , infringed human rights .
Although Sudan has signed many international agreements , including the Cotonou agreement , it flagrantly disregards them .
We can no longer simply express our concern regarding the situation in Sudan , as European foreign ministers have done for the last three years in nineteen declarations on this issue .
The time has come for effective economic sanctions , which would show the Sudanese leaders that their campaign of mass violence against their own citizens has a real price .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the four-year war in Darfur gives little hope that human rights will be observed in countries at war .
Although the appropriate documents have been signed , the commitments made have not been honoured .
During the military conflict in Darfur about 200 000 people have perished , and 2.5 million of the province 's people have become homeless .
The country is rife with chaos and governmental self-indulgence .
I would like to draw attention to the conditions which continue to provoke military conflict and allow for human rights breaches in Sudan .
Whose arms are being used for the fighting in Darfur ?
According to Amnesty International , arms are being supplied to Darfur by China and Russia , although they deny it and have supported the UN Security Council resolution prohibiting the delivery of arms to Darfur .
In addition , China has many energy and raw material interests in Sudan .
They come to take profits and , it would appear , the unstable situation is to their advantage .
Resolution of the conflict and rebuilding of human rights in Sudan will depend on the EU 's cooperation with interested parties and international organisations , and their commitments , which these countries are not honouring .
Mr President , Sudan 's human rights record remains a cause of extreme concern to the European Commission and the EU , especially in consideration of the insecure and extremely volatile situation still existing in marginalised areas such as Darfur .
Almost two years after signing the comprehensive peace agreement , the Sudanese Government is falling far short of many of the human rights commitments made under the CPA and the internal interim national constitution , signed by the President of the Republic in July 2005 .
Within the international community , European efforts to improve civilian protection in Sudan focus simultaneously on both security and political civilian actions .
Since 2005 the Commission has funded approximately 35 projects aimed at promoting human rights and democracy in Sudan with a total budget of about EUR 6 million .
With regard to the cases of the two women mentioned in Parliament 's resolution , I can assure the honourable Members of Parliament that the European Union and the Commission are following the case very closely .
This case was first raised by the heads of missions meeting in the Netherlands in mid-March and it was followed by the EU Troika on 27 March , composed of representatives from Germany , Greece and the Commission .
More recently the EU raised the issue at the last Advisory Council on Human Rights meeting on 16 April .
The Court of Appeal ordered that case be returned to the court of origin - the al-Gezira State Court - to be looked into again .
Although we remain firmly opposed to the death penalty , the fact that the case has been sent for retrial is at least positive and we hope that the women will be given a fair trial in line with international human rights standards .
The last case which we are discussing now is the case of two boys aged 16 years old sentenced to death by hanging .
Various Member States and the Commission have raised this issue with the German Embassy and are waiting for the EU Presidency to take the lead on this issue in the days to come .
If not , the Commission intends to raise this issue directly in a letter to the Sudanese authorities such as the Minister of Justice and the Advisory Council on Human Rights .
The next meeting of EU-Sudan political dialogue with the Advisory Council on Human Rights will be in early June and this could be a good opportunity to raise this case again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - How is this still going on ?
There have been so many genocides in the past 100 years and each time we say it will never happen again .
But we know it is happening right now in Darfur , and the world knows it is happening - so why are we so powerless to stop it ?
In my own country of Ireland we have been able to silence the gun and bring communities together that we never thought imaginable .
So why are we so unable to make headway in this part of the world ?
To answer this question , we need to look at the situation in Darfur in a different way .
If the world 's sympathy and our resolutions could bring peace and relief to the people of Sudan it would have arrived long ago .
We can continue to call on an unresponsive government in Sudan to change its ways , or we can look at why the support for its intransigence continues .
We must cut the lifelines that are fuelling the destruction in Darfur , lifelines like Chinese oil money and Russian weapons .
Until we are willing to stand up to these powers our resolutions will remain impotent and ineffective .
4 .
The situation concerning the President of the World Bank
The next item is the debate on four motions for resolutions on the situation concerning the President of the World Bank .
( DE ) Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my group .
Under the Rules of Procedure , three debates on human rights issues are held within one hour on Thursday afternoon - and solely on cases of violations of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
This is a fourth debate , and it has nothing to do with democracy or human rights .
Therefore , we are of the opinion that this constitutes an infringement of the Rules of Procedure - which not even the Conference of Presidents may disregard .
Thus my group formally proposes that this item be discontinued immediately .
I take note of your statement , Mr Posselt .
Since the Conference of Presidents , in full knowledge of the facts , has decided to schedule four topics for debate today , I can do no more than take note of your statement and forward it to the President , who will consider how best to respond to it .
That having been said , this item clearly cannot be carried forward .
You are familiar with the rules , according to which items not taken today under the heading of debates on matters of topical and urgent importance lapse , and so , if you are absolutely insistent on this item not being discussed today , it will lapse and will not be taken forward to the mini-session .

Mr President , on a point of order , you said that the Conference of Presidents had decided this under the Rules of Procedure .
Could you tell me under which rule they were enabled to extend this item to have four rather than three debates ?
Mr President , there has been a decision by the Conference of Presidents to follow this particular procedure .
These matters have been placed on the agenda and I think that we should continue .
I do not see why we are prevented from continuing our work .
( FR ) It may well be , Mr President , that we read the Rules of Procedure in a different way ...
In any case , as I read Rule 115 , which allows these points of order to be put together under the heading of urgent business , the rule of law does actually have a part to play and , if the Conference of Presidents has ruled that , in its opinion , this resolution could be fitted in under this heading of our order of business , it may well be because the situation that has come about within the World Bank raises questions pertaining to the rule of law and of the way in which the law is applied within that institution .
( DE ) Mr President , as has already been said , the Rules of Procedure speak of three subjects - no one can disregard this .
As my fellow Member has just mentioned , the matter itself has already been resolved by the resignation of the World Bank President .
There is no reason whatsoever to address this matter , as the man concerned has taken the appropriate action .
The Rules of Procedure state the number three , and we have already discussed three subjects .
Even the Conference of Presidents cannot disregard this .
Ladies and gentlemen , the situation is as follows .
As they stand , our Rules of Procedure permit the listing of three items on the agenda for debates on violations of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ; the Conference of Presidents has proposed four of them , and the plenary of our House accepted this on Monday without any objection being made .
It can be contested under Rule 167 , by moving the inadmissibility of a matter , but this has to be done twenty-four hours before the debates .
In view of the fact that the Conference of Presidents , which is acquainted with the Rules of Procedure , made the proposal to the plenary , which did not object , I do not see how I could , today , go against the plenary 's decision on Monday , not least in view of the fact that you have not submitted your request within the prescribed time .
( DE ) Mr President , it is possible , however , to propose the discontinuation of an item at the start of the debate - and that is what I have done .

Mr Posselt , I shall quote from the Rule : ' The intention to move adjournment shall be notified at least twenty-four hours in advance to the President , who shall inform Parliament immediately . '
I very much regret it , but I am obliged to apply this Rule .
You are perfectly entitled to demand that this item be withdrawn ; you were able to do so when the agenda was adopted on Monday .
I would remind you that nobody in this House on Monday objected to the agenda as proposed by the Conference of Presidents , and the period in which the withdrawal of this item could be requested has , unfortunately , expired .
I really am very sorry , but I cannot decree that the plenary was wrong on Monday , and what I propose to do now is to move on to this debate , which , I can assure you , will be very brief , as very few Members have put themselves down to speak in it .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , appointing of the President of the World Bank should not be the privilege of the leader of the state with the largest package of shares , which has been the case to date .
There was no need to compare the United States candidate to other candidates , or to weigh them up against each other , and there is one man who decides who the US candidate shall be .
Wolfowitz was not the choice of those most closely involved in the World Bank , but the American President , George W. Bush 's , and his alone .
To Bush , he was a faithful ally , to others , an accident-prone person who always makes unsuccessful attempts at pursuing the wrong policy .
He was a very controversial man when he took up office in the World Bank and has not really ceased to be one now that he is leaving it .
Showing favouritism towards his fiance was not an inadvertent mistake , but the justification needed to put an end to his headstrong and unacceptable way of going about things .
These mistakes should not be repeated when his successor is chosen .
A transparent appointment procedure with public hearings for candidates is very much what is called for .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , 60 years after the implementation of the Bretton Woods system , something clearly has to change .
Two years after Mr Wolfowitz 's arrival at the World Bank - and we all remember the conditions under which he was appointed and of which the previous speaker reminded us , whereby Mr Wolfowitz was obliged to come and explain himself to EU representatives meeting at Ecofin - it could be said that Europeans made the mistake of being right too early .
Two years on , we find ourselves in a situation that has weakened not only the World Bank but also the entire international regulatory system , at a time when we really need it to be equal to its tasks .
I would urge the EU - and this is the point of the resolution we are proposing - in future to meet its responsibilities in full and prove capable of proposing changes to the Bretton Woods system , in order to enhance the system of nominations , which currently ensures neither the legitimacy , transparency nor credibility of the person in charge of an institution as important as the World Bank .
In this regard , the International Monetary Fund , for example , operates a system in which there is a degree of competition between the candidates and a certain amount of publicity , and this strikes me as a more acceptable system .
In order to obtain something similar , we need to hold exhaustive negotiations with our US partners , covering all aspects of the issue .
We made this point in the resolution we adopted last month and , with this in mind , we call on the current German and forthcoming Portuguese Presidencies to consider proposals that the EU might like to put on the table .
For the appointment of Mr Wolfowitz 's successor , Europeans will hopefully have the opportunity to hold a hearing with the selected candidate , prior to that person 's confirmation .

Lastly , we regret the fact that Mr Barroso acted as host to Mr Wolfowitz during the time when the latter 's post at the head of the World Bank was under review .
author . - Mr President , Mr Wolfowitz belongs to the powerful Iraq War Bush gang .
It was therefore no surprise to anyone that in June 2005 Uncle Sam appointed him to the lucrative post of President of the World Bank .
What was surprising was the sheer audacity exhibited by this individual in provocatively arranging a generous pay increase for his girlfriend , and even more surprising was the shameless way in which he fought to stay in office , despite the worldwide outcry against him .
Needless to say , during this fight he had the full backing of President Bush , himself not unaccustomed to shameful behaviour .
The Wolfowitz affair may now be over , but the stench associated with the Bush Administration 's corrupt and evil running of the world remains firmly stuck to our nasal smell receptors .
Let us hope and pray that , for the sake of the American people as well as for the rest of the world , soon enough Mr Bush and his warmongering associates will also find their way out of office .
In adopting this motion for a resolution , we wish the World Bank good riddance to Mr Wolfowitz , and may better days ensue .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Mr Wolfowitz was appointed to the head of the World Bank , our Parliament , through its Committee on Development , sent an open letter listing in detail all the problems liable to be created by an appointment made in this way , both in terms of governance and therefore the rule of law and from an international point of view .
Events have proven that initiative to be right , unfortunately it remained isolated within the European Union , given that neither the Commission nor the members of the Council have ever had a real desire to commit themselves to developing a European position on the Bretton Woods institutions .
I believe that the next few weeks hold a challenge for us : to demonstrate and try to convince the Member States , but also the Commission , to act on this issue , without pretending that the matter does not concern us ; without a European voice , this kind of procedure will remain unchanged .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Paul Wolfowitz is st