Resumption of the session ( debate )
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament suspended on Thursday 24 May 2007 .
Statements by the President ( membership of Parliament ; ETA )
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a great joy for me to be able to welcome today 18 fellow Members from Bulgaria - the first directly elected MEPS - to this House , and thus into our midst .
( Applause )
The citizens of Bulgaria went to the polls on 20 May 2007 and elected their representatives to the European Parliament in a democratic process .
This was an important day for Bulgaria , which joined the European Union on 1 January .
It completes Bulgaria 's integration into the European family after the fall of communism .
It took over 60 years for Bulgaria to be restored to a free Europe and for our continent to be reunited .
Bulgaria 's culture is an ancient one , and the country is situated at a crossing point between East and West .
It is claimed to be the site of one of the oldest countries in Europe , founded in 681 .
Bulgaria is the country of Orpheus and Eurydice , the home of the Thracians and of Dionysus .
It brings with it a rich cultural and intellectual heritage , and will thus contribute to the mutual enrichment of the European Union and Bulgaria .
Particular thanks are due to Bulgaria , and especially its people , for their efforts over recent years and the willingness to undertake reforms .
Great progress has been made , and many reforms were accomplished in a relatively short period of time .
It is now up to our new fellow Members to help ensure that the reforms that remain necessary are implemented with the same determination .
I wish you a speedy , successful integration into the work of the European Parliament so that , with your work and efforts , you are able to make a constructive contribution for the benefit of your voters and of Europe .
You will be the voice of Bulgarian citizens in the European Parliament , and will represent their interests .
Let us work together on the further development of our European community !
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , in agreement with the chairmen of the groups and the whole of the European Parliament - and seeing Mrs Dührkop Dührkop in our midst - I should like to make the following statement on behalf of this House .
The terrorist organisation ETA has declared the ' ceasefire ' announced on 22 March 2006 at an end .
I should like to express my solidarity with the entire Spanish nation and its democratic institutions in these difficult times .
Parliament firmly condemns the use of violence as a means to any end .
Today , more than ever , Parliament appeals to all Member States to be determined in their support for the Spanish authorities in their fight against terrorism . This is a fight that can only be carried out on the basis of the rule of law , with the full force of the law and strong democratic institutions .
We remember the victims of terrorism at this time , with whom we stand in sympathy and solidarity .
( Applause )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Agenda : see Minutes

Mr President , I would like to address a very brief request to you as President of this House .

I should like you to ask the Mayor of Moscow , Mr Luzhkov , for clarification on the treatment of two MEPs - Mr Cappato and myself ; a member of the German Bundestag , Mr Volker Beck , and a member of the Italian Parliament , Ms Vladimir Luxuria , on 27 May .
On the occasion of a peaceful action for equal rights for gay people , we wanted to hand over a letter to the Mayor of Moscow signed by nearly 50 Members of this House .
Mr Cappato , Mr Beck and an ALDE Group official were violently attacked by hooligans and then arrested by the Russian police .
Two of the Russian activists who were arrested are here today - Mr Nikolaj Aleksejev and Mr Nikolaj Khramov .
The police equally failed to protect Ms Luxuria and myself from an angry crowd and the police stood by watching as other activists were beaten up by thugs , skinheads and even priests .
As Members of Parliament not engaged in any illegal activity , we would expect the Russian authorities to protect us against violent criminals , and certainly not to arrest us on dubious grounds .
Freedom of assembly is a basic human right that must be observed by Russia as well , being a Member of the Council of Europe and present at the G8 Summit today .


Mr President , I trust you will ask Mr Luzhkov and Mr Putin for an explanation on the way that Members of this House were treated .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mrs in ' t Veld .
We shall take the steps you propose and do what is necessary .
I declare our solidarity with you .
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and Written Statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written Statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Middle East ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Middle East , with statements by the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and by the Commission .
Mr President , we , as Members of the European Parliament , have decided to express our solidarity vis-à-vis our Palestinian colleagues imprisoned by Israel .
Symbolically , 45 MEPs demonstrated this support by collectively sponsoring the 45 Palestinian Members of Parliament .
As elected representatives , we cannot but condemn the imprisonment of the President and of one third of the Members of the Palestinian Legislative Council .
We ask for their immediate and unconditional release .
We continue to appeal for a European Parliament delegation to be sent and for all the necessary steps to be taken in order to achieve this aim .
( Applause )
I must inform the honourable Member that last Wednesday - a week ago today - I made a similar request to the Knesset .
Making such a request before the Knesset is something that takes a great deal of prior thought .
Let us hope that we reach a solution on all the issues , including the release of the three captured Israeli soldiers and the BBC journalist Alan Johnston .
Movement is needed on all sides .
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by saying that exactly a week ago , the Quartet was meeting in Berlin .
Since I am sure that you will have read the document that was made public that same evening , you may be aware of our solidarity with the Members of the Palestinian Authority , of the Parliament , who have been detained and , as the President of this Parliament has quite rightly said , with the other people who have been detained against their will in Israeli or Palestinian territories .
Mr President , I would like to make a brief statement .
I have been asked to speak for no longer than 10 or 15 minutes - I shall try to do so I would like to tell you that I have just returned from a long journey throughout the region , and I have been able to meet with the most important regional leaders and to carry out an analysis of the situation so that I could report also to the Quartet , which met last Wednesday .
I was pleased to make that trip at more or less the same time as the President of Parliament , with whom I spoke by telephone , and also a distinguished group of MEPs , who have written me a letter to which I have not yet replied .
I would like to meet with them personally , because , please believe me , I have not been in Brussels for a single day since then .
I shall see if I can do so so that I can meet with you to talk calmly about the issues that you have raised , which I believe to be extremely important .
Mr President , I believe that this sitting is of particular importance .
It is also being held on a very important date for Palestine , for Israel and for the citizens of the world in general , and of the Arab world in particular .
It is currently the 40th anniversary of the outbreak of the 1967 war , the many tragic consequences of which we are still suffering .
When we look at the last forty years , it undoubtedly sends a shudder right through us .
They have been forty years of occupation , of suffering on both sides , of violence , during which the citizens - both Palestinians and Israelis - have suffered greatly , and also forty years during which there have been an excess of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories .
Given this forty-year situation , we have two opportunities or ways to look at the situation : to look back in order to try to learn lessons regarding mistakes that must not be repeated or to look forward and try to see whether we can learn the most important lesson of all - that the only solution to this conflict that has now lasted for forty years is peace .
A rapid peace process that leads rapidly to peace .
There have been many processes , many opportunities for peace have been missed .
I believe that we should now all have the will - the will to act , not just the will to think and speak , but the will to act - so that we can truly make peace a reality in those lands that are so dear to many of us and to Europeans in general .
I would therefore like to look forward , but I must make a brief comment on this journey , since the areas that I have visited are all areas which are unfortunately not enjoying the best of times at the moment .
In the occupied territories , in Palestine , we are witnessing a difficult situation , with violence amongst Palestinians and also renewed violence between Israel and Palestine .
The parties ' appeals for a ceasefire have not been heard , either in Palestine or between Palestine and Israel .
I would like to send an appeal today to everybody with responsibilities in this area for a ceasefire as soon as possible , so that a favourable climate can be created for progressing towards peace .
I had the opportunity to visit Gaza . So did the President of Parliament .
Visiting Gaza at the moment is a truly significant experience .
This is not the first time I have been to Gaza , but I believe that going there at this point in particular and meeting with the President of the Palestinian Authority was a moral obligation in order not to give the impression that the world has completely forgotten about what is happening in Gaza .
Gaza is in a difficult situation , with violence between Palestinians , violence which will lead nowhere if it continues .
The first thing we must do is therefore to try to quell that violence , to bring about a ceasefire , so that the Palestinians can finally begin to work together for a common cause , which is of course peace : peace with their neighbours and peace amongst themselves .
We are doing everything we can in relation to that policy , both from my position and from the position of the Commission , which is helping generously .
I would like to tell you that the situation in Palestine , from economic and social points of view , is a dramatic one .
I therefore believe that , as soon as this period is over and we can meet again with the political leaders in a clearer and more transparent way , we shall have to think about drawing up a special plan of aid for Gaza .
Otherwise we may be faced with a truly difficult situation in Gaza , and it will be difficult to recover for the purposes of a genuine peace process .
I would also like to say that I believe that President Abbas 's solemn appeal yesterday , on the anniversary of the beginning of the 1967 war , deserves to be read and analysed by everybody , because it shows a moral courage that is worthy of note .
I would like to say that I was also in Israel .
I met with the Prime Minister , with the Minister for Foreign Affairs , and I was also in Sderot , the area suffering the most Kassam rocket attacks .
I also felt it appropriate to express our solidarity European solidarity with all of those suffering any kind of violence , including Kassam rocket attacks .
It was a difficult and tough place to be , but in any event , experiencing it on the ground gives us a clearer picture of what is happening .
In our statement last Wednesday , the members of the Quartet called upon Israel to show restraint .
Israel is also experiencing a difficult political situation .
The primary elections in the Labour Party are not yet over - they are about to conclude - and we shall see what form the next government takes , if there are any changes , after the elections in the Israeli Labour Party .
I would also like to say that the Quartet 's statement contains a clear - and vigorous - appeal for Israel to transfer resources to the Palestinian authorities .
The international community can do a lot , and we are doing a lot in fact .
We Europeans are probably doing more than anybody .
The Arab countries have also started to give money to the Finance Minister , Salam Fallad , and today we can say that the possibility is beginning to emerge of creating a budget for the Palestinian National Authority .
Without the transfer of resources from Israel to Palestine , however , there is little else the international community can do .
Improving the economic conditions is essentially linked to a transfer of resources from Israel to the Palestinians .
I would like to make a few brief comments on the Quartet and then on Lebanon .
I believe that the meeting of the Quartet last Wednesday in Berlin was , in my experience - and we have belonged to the Quartet for many years since I participated in setting it up - surely one of the most important meetings we have held so far .
It was a Quartet in which we were able to give serious thought to how the peace process can be implemented .
If you read the final paragraph of the Statement you will see that it truly looks to the future and commits the members of the Quartet to beginning to work hard , in cooperation with the parties - Israel , Palestine and Arab States - to initiate a peace process , to initiate a process with a political outlook .
I would like to inform you that , for the first time in its history , the Quartet is going to make a joint visit to the region , it is going to hold a meeting over the coming weeks with the Palestinians and with the Israelis and it is also going to hold a meeting with the Arab countries , who I believe , with the Arab peace initiative , are also cooperating in the beginnings of a normalisation of life - or the beginning of the possibility of normalisation - in the territories between Israel and Palestine .
I therefore believe that , at this time of dejection amongst many people , of dejection amongst the Palestinians and also within a certain sector of Israeli society , the international community , by means of the Quartet , is reacting in the opposite manner : It is reacting with hope , with the sense that , after forty years , we have the moral obligation to make every possible effort to make progress towards the formalisation of peace , towards a peace process .
I would like to say to you that these coming weeks are going to be absolutely crucial in terms of setting in train a movement that can take us from the current situation to a peace process that leads to peace .
It is not so difficult to identify the elements that can lead this process to peace .
Almost all of us have a notion of the parameters required in order to achieve peace .
What we now need to do is to get to work on it in cooperation with all of the members of the Quartet .
I would like to stress that the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the US Secretary of State and the Russian Foreign Affairs Minister were very cooperative with regard to our proposal , and they expressed clear support for the ideas that it was my privilege to present to the Quartet on Europe 's behalf .
We are therefore at an extremely significant crossroads , ladies and gentlemen , in terms of the situation on the ground , but also a positive crossroads in terms of moving towards a peace process that we can begin to see sketched out on the horizon .
Ladies and gentlemen , I cannot let this speaking time that the Presidency has allowed me to go by without saying a few words about Lebanon .
Lebanon is once again in a situation of profound crisis .
The honourable Members are well aware of this .
These are moments of profound significance , and some of them have been going on for some time .
From the murder of former Prime Minister Hariri , the whole situation that they experienced over the summer , the current situation of political paralysis , which has become even more serious with the movements that have emerged , with acts of terrorism , in the refugee camps , in two refugee camps , specifically : one in the north and the other in the south .
As you know , the Lebanese army has reacted in a way that I would describe as patriotic , and the support for the Lebanese army from all of Lebanon 's political factions has also been patriotic , which is truly extraordinary given the differences that have existed amongst them over recent months , weeks and days .
We also hope and pray that peace will also come to Lebanon , and that the special circumstances that have arisen over recent days - which were also accompanied by the United Nations Security Council 's approval of the International Criminal Court to try the crimes that were committed in Lebanon - will make it possible to reach an agreement amongst all of the political forces in order to unblock the political process in Lebanon .
That is what we want , and we are cooperating in the best possible to way in order to see it come about .
Mr President , I shall remain within the speaking time available to me and I would like to end by reiterating what I said at the beginning : we have a moment of hope , a moment that we must be able to exploit , which in one way or another must complete the circle that was begun forty years ago and which we hope to see completed by means of peace , by means of a life lived together by two States - Israel and Palestine .
That peace must include the other countries - Syria , Lebanon - so that we can see the re-emergence of a Middle East that can offer more hope to everybody , which is prosperous and which makes a constructive contribution to peace throughout the region .
We Europeans cannot close our eyes to this task and you may rest assured that mine at least will always be open .
( Applause )
Thank you , Dr Javier Solana , for your statement but also for your untiring work and deep commitment .
Let me say that my experiences were the same as yours .
We must not let ourselves be discouraged from continuing along the path of peace .

Mr President , as we all know and as Mr Solana has just said , the atmosphere in the region is extremely tense .
I would even say that there is even a sense of despair .
My director is still there and he has just called me .
Unfortunately , security has deteriorated and we are witnessing a vicious circle of violence , particularly in the Occupied Palestinian Territory , in Israel and in Lebanon , as Mr Solana has just said .
If the causes of this despair are not addressed , we may very soon witness the consolidation of more radical groups throughout the region .
I think this is the great danger there .
In Lebanon , as Mr Solana has just said , fighting has now spread to other Palestinian camps .
We are therefore deeply concerned that the confrontation between the Lebanese armed forces and the Islamist insurgents is there .
This has turned out to be the most serious internal conflict since the end of the civil war and has already cost over 100 human lives .
I would like to stress once again our full support for the legitimate government of Lebanon .
I would , however , repeat our position that everything possible has to be done to avoid further casualties among the civilian population .
The relief agencies must be able to carry out their work .
On the other hand , I would also like to express my satisfaction with the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1757 , which secures the establishment of a special tribunal on the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri .
I think this will allow the people of Lebanon to affirm respect for the law and the rule of law in their country and to turn a page on one of the most tragic events in Lebanon 's recent history .
The meeting due to take place in Gaza tomorrow between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert has unfortunately been cancelled , but at least the leaders of the G8 will tomorrow be tackling the issue of the Palestine-Israeli conflict , as we did at the G8 Foreign Ministers ' meeting .
There was the greatest concern about the political and security developments both in Gaza and in Israel , but also recognition that there is no alternative to continuing this humanitarian support and , on the other hand , to exploring how to support this Arab peace initiative .
Even at this very delicate and difficult time , we believe that there is still some reason for hope , because the Israeli initiative is a unique opportunity for a comprehensive solution .
We know that the Egyptians too are trying to broker a ceasefire with all the Palestinian factions .
US involvement , particularly the involvement of Condoleezza Rice , is very valuable at this difficult time .
Our EU Presidency is also very committed .
The Quartet has done exactly as Mr Solana has said , I think it was a very good meeting and the idea is there for both the bilateral track and the regional track .
Hopefully the meeting can come about in Egypt with Arab League interlocutors and hopefully also with the two parties .
Two days ago I spoke to the Jordanian Foreign Minister , Mr Abdel Ilah Al-Khatib , who is planning , with his Egyptian counterpart , to visit Israel before the Arab League meets with the Quartet at the end of June .
We hope that this will help to further engage Israel and encourage it to respond positively to the Arab peace initiative .
Last week I also attended a conference in Vienna on the role of women leaders as contributors to peace and security in the Middle East .
Prominent women , such as Tzipi Livni , Hanan Ashrawi , Condoleezza Rice and others , discussed the potential contribution of civil society , of women in society , to peace .
Even if it is a small contribution , this was the first time that Tzipi Livni and Hanan Ashrawi had held discussions at the same table .
I must say that there was quite a lot of mutual understanding and there was even a friendly atmosphere .
The initiative proved to be another useful part of this very difficult process .
I plan to organise some sort of follow-up meeting in Brussels , perhaps next year .
We very much appreciate the European Parliament 's involvement : the visit by the EP Delegation for Relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council was followed by your visit , Mr President , and by your very balanced speech in the Knesset on 30 May .
It is encouraging that the speech , as you said , was quite well received by the Knesset .
This is not an easy opportunity .
The Palestinian people desperately need a political perspective .
We , the members of the Quartet , are all clear on that .
This is why we must press for negotiations on a final status issue , cooperating with the structures set up by the Arab League .
The Arab League asked Israel to free certain measures also related to the occupation , for instance the settlements and the separation barrier .
I was very encouraged by President Abbas 's call for an immediate end to this internal violence , because Qassam rockets from Gaza have to stop once and for all .
The ceasefire should indeed be extended to the West Bank .
I very much regret that tomorrow 's meeting between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas had to be cancelled , but we apparently have to realise that the two sides could not reach agreement on Abbas 's plan for a ceasefire , in particular on linking the ceasefire in Gaza with the cessation of military operations in the West Bank .
No agreement was possible , either , on unfreezing Palestinian clearance revenues withheld by Israel before the release of the kidnapped soldier Gilad Shalit .
We had hoped for some movement on this .
The Palestinians decided that they could not risk this meeting , but of course we had all hoped that this would give a little more progress on the dialogue on the ceasefire , progress on the transfer of revenues and on movement of access .
Regarding the National Unity Government , in my opinion now is certainly not the time to give up on it .
I can agree that it has not yet delivered everything we were hoping for , but there are no attractive alternatives .
If we allow this Government to crumble , the implications for the institutions of the Palestinian Authority are very grave and radical splinter groups may be strengthened as a result .
I think this is the last result we would want .
As you know , within the limits set by the Council of Ministers , the Commission has responded quickly to the National Unity Government and to the increased needs of the Palestinians .
In the first half of 2007 alone , we committed EUR 320 million of Community funds , which almost equals the total amount of funds committed last year .
This exceptional effort shows that , since the formation of the National Unity Government , we have stepped up our emergency assistance to the Palestinians .
But the financial situation of the Palestinian Authority is extremely grave , as Salam Fayyad told my colleague yesterday .
They still need us to go on even with this mechanism .
Israel must release the withheld clearance revenue to the Palestinian Authority .
I think we therefore will have to go on encouraging them to do so via the temporary international mechanism or through the PLO account .
We reiterated this request at the last Association Committee with Israel in Jerusalem on 4 June .
The Quartet has also noted the importance of the resumption of transfers to improve economic and humanitarian conditions in the West Bank and Gaza .
As I said , movement is of course essential in any case .
Since the formation of this National Unity Government , we have been working very closely with the Minister of Finance .
Because the socio-economic situation is so dire , we will extend the TIM until 30 September and we must look for fresh funds for this new extension .
I will soon ask the European Parliament and the Council to make another effort and to find additional resources in the budget .
I thank you for whatever you have given as support in the past and do hope that this support will also be extended to us in the future , because our priority task should be to help restore the institutions of the Palestinian authority so that it can then deliver services to the Palestinian people .
We are trying gradually to shift towards a resumption of institution-building and development projects , and to decrease our current concentration on emergency and humanitarian aid if we can do so - of course , this condition is still there .
We look forward to new Palestinian proposals .
They said they would come up with ideas for specific international support .
The Palestinian Authority is currently preparing an operational plan which could then be a useful tool for identifying development activities , particularly in Gaza , that we could support .
I would also like to say that the financial deficit of the Palestinian Authority is so large that it would be impossible for the Community to shoulder the burden alone .
Arab States also have to deliver on their commitments to help the National Unity Government .
I was encouraged to see that the PLO account established now was at least used by Saudi Arabia , Qatar and the United Arab Emirates .
This will help but it is not sufficient .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner .
May I also thank you very sincerely , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , for your commitment to this difficult peace process - if we can still speak of a peace process .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like firstly to thank the High Representative for his tireless efforts in the quest for peace , and you yourself , Mr President , for your visit to the region , for its symbolism and the solidarity it demonstrated ; and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , for the immense job that the European Commission is doing in the midst of a serious political crisis , with the factions making up the Government of National Unity now in confrontation and in the midst of an extremely serious social , economic and humanitarian crisis .
What can be done in this situation ?
Little more than what Mrs Ferrero-Waldner and Mr Solana have told us , I believe : to redouble the European Union 's diplomatic efforts and to act on the basis of two premises .
The first is a halt to the internal fighting between the two factions making up the Government of National Unity , which are waging a vicious battle for power , which is having a dramatic effect on the civilian population .
Secondly , Mr President - and we must also state this very clearly - a permanent and explicit commitment from the Government of National Unity to democracy and the renunciation of violence .
What can we do in the meantime , Mr President ?
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has explained it very clearly : to try to apply the humanitarian aid mechanism as flexibly as possible , to increase the sums allocated to it and to redistribute it amongst the other priorities .
Mr President , the maximum sentence according to my country 's Penal Code is thirty years and one day .
Mr Solana reminded us today that it is forty years since the Six Day War , which led to the occupation of Gaza , the West Bank and the Golan Heights .
And the situation remains stagnant and bogged down .
Forty years of suffering and death is more than a society - or two societies , as Mr Solana pointed out - can tolerate .
I believe that this Parliament must respond in a united fashion in support of the representatives of the Council and the Commission so that the European Union , within the international community in general and the Quartet in particular , can do everything possible to bring about - as Mr Solana and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner have said - a new opportunity for peace for a society and a region that has already suffered too much .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Mr Solana , ladies and gentlemen , as has been pointed out , this debate is taking place on the 40th anniversary of the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza .
What was supposed to be a lightning strike has turned into a never-ending nightmare : 40 years is such a long time that entire generations of Palestinians have never known anything but occupation , humiliation , checkpoints and then the wall and almost total imprisonment .
Movement is now all but impossible in the occupied territories .
Over these 40 years , Israel has certainly not found the guarantees of security that it was looking for , either , and it has experienced worrying erosions of democracy and the rule of law .
These are two peoples exhausted by endless war and violence .
For our part , we would like to emphasise - as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has long been saying quite clearly - that the only possible way to inject any form of a constructive approach into a constantly deteriorating situation is to openly support the Palestinian Government of National Unity .
We should add to that the commitment that the international community should consider making to send in a peace-keeping force to prevent the violence of recent weeks in Gaza from degenerating even further , to re-establish the basic conditions for people to lead normal lives and for international law to be respected , and above all to break the vicious circle of endless violence .
From Israel we expect gestures other than the murders and indiscriminate arrests that came in response to the Qassam rocket strikes on Sderot .
The occupation , the settlements , the wall and the status of Jerusalem are making the prospect of a two-State solution more unlikely every day , as even United Nations sources are now saying .
The United Nations , the United States , Russia , Europe and the entire international community have a responsibility to act before all chances of coexistence are gone for ever .
Lastly , I would remind you that there is an Arab plan that offers Israel a prospect of peace , not only with the Palestinians but with Arab countries as a whole .
That is something that needs addressing with more conviction .
Prime Minister Olmert himself said the other day that that plan could provide a basis for negotiations .
I hope he did not say so just because his government is particularly weak .
The situation in Lebanon is equally serious , as you have pointed out .
I believe that the UNIFIL forces on the ground should be supported and reinforced .
Lastly , we should like to call on President Poettering to take steps to call an extraordinary meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , around this time , we commemorate the Six-Day War , which , on the one hand , established Israel 's military supremacy , but which also ushered in the start of the occupation , confrontations , violence and endless bloodshed that have lasted 40 years .
Anyone in Israel who was born in the Occupied Territories after June 1967 , in other words anyone who is 40 years or younger , has known nothing but uncertainty and anxiety about the future of their own country , their loved ones and their own lives .
After 40 years , it is really time to say enough is enough .
Peace should now be brokered as a matter of urgency : sustainable peace , on the basis that two countries recognise each other 's right to exist and need to be left alone by their neighbouring countries .
All previous speakers have taken great pains to explain how complicated , difficult and complex this is but , ladies and gentlemen , there is one ingredient without which it will never work , namely political will and political courage .
Without the kind of political will and political courage that was evident at one time in South Africa , for example , in both camps , to end apartheid - a brutal regime - it will not work .
The unfortunate thing is that nobody can have political will and political courage for the protagonists .
It is they themselves who will need to muster this political will and this political courage .
Tomorrow , a human chain of Jews and Palestinians will be formed around the Berlaymont building who will all say together : ' After 40 years , we have really had enough .
After 40 years , we must work on peace . '
Sadly , though , the conflict between Israel and Palestine is not the only one fermenting trouble in the region .
Fresh violence has flared up in Lebanon , in which some see the hand of Syria , which wants to avoid an international Hariri tribunal at all costs .
On behalf of my group , I should like to welcome the decision by the UN Security Council , which has had the courage to say that such a tribunal will be set up .
As you know , this will be a mixed tribunal , involving both international and Lebanese judges and a mixed public prosecution , which will function according to the principles of Lebanese law .
In Lebanon , too , though , political courage will be needed in all camps finally to give the Lebanese what they are entitled to as well : peace and security .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank the High Representative and the Commissioner for their presentations here today .
Rather than speak about all the countries in such a short time , I shall concentrate on Palestine , because everything that happens in every other part of the Middle East relates to the situation in Israel and Palestine .
Looking at the debates that took place at the special session of the UN Security Council 40 years ago in 1967 , after the start of the Six-Day War , it is interesting to see that the potential solution or plan considered was a guarantee of Israeli security and borders based on a withdrawal by Israeli forces from the Occupied Territories and a two-state solution .
Forty years later , the Quartet has failed to deliver on what should be the simplest of all goals : to bring people around to this way of thinking .
We have made mistakes at European level with our negative reaction to the election of the Hamas Government in Palestine , which sent out the wrong signal , allowing radical groups to take control on the ground and leading people to say ' There is no point in voting for these people or bringing these people in because the Europeans will cut off the money ' .
That is why it was so important , as the Commissioner rightly said , that funding was restored through the emergency mechanism .
That work must continue , because only by building relations and building dialogue between the peoples can we guarantee that there will be a resolution .
That resolution must be predicated on the same principles as 40 years ago : a two-state solution , a guarantee of secure borders and justice and equity for all peoples in Israel and in Palestine .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Israel won the Six Day War , but it has lost the peace with forty years of occupation .
We are now seeing a dangerous tendency towards the Iraqisation and tribalisation of violence in the Middle East .
The emergence of Fatah al-Islam in the Palestinian camps in Lebanon and the increasing fragmentation of the civil conflicts in Gaza do not bode well for the future of the region .
We are seeing the impact of the Palestinian problem spreading throughout the Middle East and becoming mixed up with the interests of the different players .
We are running the risk of hitting rock bottom very soon .
Are we going to wait around doing nothing until the Palestinian Authority collapses ?
As I have said , we cannot allow that to happen .
How can we ensure that it will not ?
Is the chaos and violence of war by everybody against everybody a ' death foretold ' ?
Gaza cannot wait any longer .
The European Union cannot carry on turning its back on the democratically-elected Government of National Unity .
This European policy has contributed to the popular discrediting of any hint of moderation on the part of Hamas and Fatah , because it demonstrates that the acceptance of the Mecca Agreement does nothing to change the embargo or improve the terrible living conditions in the huge prison known as Gaza .
Firstly , the European Union must begin a dialogue with all of the parties , including Hamas , in order to promote a stable unity government .
Secondly , we must restore direct financial aid to the Palestinian Authority and ensure that Israel returns the money from Palestinian taxes that it is keeping .
Finally , we must work to extend the Gaza ceasefire to the West Bank , with the creation of international guarantees , sending European and Arab troops under a UN mandate to Gaza and , if necessary , to the West Bank .
At the same time , we are calling for the release of the forty-five Members of Parliament and of the Israeli Gilad Shalit and for a halt to the launching of Kassam rockets and Israel 's devastating responses .
( Applause from the left )

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Solana , Commissioner , my group was very keen to hold this debate , particularly today , 40 years after the start of a war to which the international community , including the European Union , has shown itself to this day incapable of imposing the only just and lasting solution , that is , an end to the occupation , to the colonisation , to the oppression by Israel of the Palestinian territories conquered in 1967 .
Mr President , I welcomed , in their form and substance , the strong words you spoke about this in the Knesset on 30 May .
I particularly remember three key sentences from your speech .
You stated that , ' international law is binding on us all ' .
You are right .
We ask no more of Israel than that it should respect the Security Council resolutions , the Geneva Conventions , the opinions of the International Court of Justice and humanitarian law , as the United Nations Organisation ( UNO ) has just pointed out .
The violations of the law are flagrant , constant and massive .
They are in relation to settlements , refugees , prisoners , the wall and , primarily of course , the occupation of the territories and the annexation of East Jerusalem .
You have also pointed out , Mr President , that , I quote : ' a two-state solution on the basis of the 1967 borders is and remains the only way to a satisfactory solution ' .
It is a fundamental truth .
The multiplication of settlements , the construction of the wall , the isolation of Palestinian areas of Jerusalem , however , serve precisely to make this solution impossible .
The Israeli authorities ' disregard for the Arab League 's peace plan confirms this strategy of making things worse .
You have rightly reminded us , Mr President , of this obvious fact : there is no peace without justice .
The famous Israeli historian , Tom Segev , recently echoed the thoughts of those of his compatriots who , for 40 years , have believed that , I quote , ' in 1967 , Israel laid the foundations for future terrorism ' .
Great men of State , such as Yitzhak Rabin , understood this , but the Israeli peace forces , who are a credit to that country , are marginalised by the current regime .
The conclusion to be drawn from this tragic experience of 40 years of blindness is , in the opinion of my group , as follows : laisser faire amounts to us making ourselves guilty .
Let us dare to stand up for truth .
I quote your words one last time , Mr President , you said , ' let us have the courage to make a new start together ' .
( Applause from the left )
Thank you , Francis Wurtz , for the reference to what I said before the Knesset .
Mr President , I should very briefly like to reply to the contributions from the honourable Members representing the different political groups in this House .
I think that most of the speeches followed a line which is in a sense the same one that we have been defending for a long time : namely , the time has come to move on from the policy of crisis management - which is very important , but it is not enough .
We need policies , together with crisis management , to solving the conflict .
We need to work towards a political horizon to really begin to get into the business of solving the conflict that started 40 years ago .
That is basically the view everybody has expressed , and it is something that we will be trying to do in the coming days .
I told you that last Wednesday the Quartet met in Berlin , and I said that for the first time the Quartet is committed to starting a debate with the parties in order to begin to work towards a political horizon .
This means that , before the end of this month , the Quartet will meet with the Palestinians and Israelis in order to push forward the dialogue - which is still in its preliminary stages - that has begun between President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert .
They are the two people who must find the way towards peace .
It is our obligation to push and to provide a catalyst for this process .
That is what we are going to do .
It is written very clearly in the statement produced by the Quartet last Wednesday .
I think that this is a profound change , and I would like to underline that , because someone asked whether we are going wait passively for a catastrophe to arrive .
The answer is no : we do not want to do that ; you do not want to do that ; the people in the region do not want to do that .
Therefore , under the leadership of the Quartet , we are trying to put forward this mechanism in order to move towards peace .
A few other ideas were put forward by some of the honourable Members representing the political groups , including the suggestion of an international force .
I would like to say that , for the first time in many years , the idea of an international force is not out of the question .
As you know , the idea was brought up in the Knesset by two members of the parliamentary groups , saying that this may be the time to call for an international force , at least at the beginning , in a peacekeeping role or to control the border in the south - the so-called ' Philadelphi Corridor ' - where the Rafah Crossing is situated .
We are working on that , as you probably know , because information has already been published .
The Israelis are also considering that possibility , as are the Palestinians .
The Egyptians are also considering that possibility with different intensity .
For the Egyptians it would probably be very difficult to have an international force there , as it may give the impression that they are not able to control that part of the border .
However , I think that we can still begin discussions on these issues and perhaps eventually reach a solution .
This also ties in with what Mrs Napoletano said about the success of UNIFIL .
The fact that the international force has been responsible for UNIFIL - i.e. for the application of the UN Security Council resolution on Lebanon - and the manner in which it has been perceived - i.e. the efficiency of the force , of which the backbone is European - have also caused some in the Israeli Government , the Knesset and Israel as a whole to think that it might be possible for a force of that nature also to be applied elsewhere .
In a way , we have to link all the issues together .
It may be possible for us to use what we have learned from our presence in Lebanon in another place .
That opens the way to a monitoring presence which will be absolutely necessary if we want the peace process to come to fruition .
I would like to stress again that , as regards Lebanon , the resolution creating the tribunal is very important .
The tribunal is not against anybody .
There has been a very negative reaction in Syria , but I must stress that an international tribunal is not against anybody , any country .
It is a tribunal that is organised in order to see who is responsible for the killing of a good man - a friend of many of ours , Mr Hariri - who was assassinated in a manner that has to be clarified if we want peace and reconciliation in Lebanon .
Therefore we in the European Union have been working towards this , and last Wednesday the Security Council came to another important decision on setting up an international tribunal .
I would like to say once again that what we have striven to do in taking the Quartet in the direction that we are now moving is something that has many fathers - or many mothers - as always , but you can be sure that the Europeans have been working very hard from the very beginning to arrive at this moment .
Let us hope that we are able to continue working in that direction .
It will be difficult , but for the future I hope to have the support , help and understanding of the European Parliament , as always .
( Applause )
Mr President , yesterday I met a delegation of Israeli citizens from Sderot who related to me first-hand the terror in their civilian population from 300 random Qassam rocket attacks launched at them from Hamas-controlled sites in Gaza , which clearly constitutes a war crime in international law , with two dead and many injured to date .
Last week 33 people were detained by the IDF in the West Bank , including the Palestinian Education Minister Nasser al-Shaer , allegedly for their overt support for these rocket attacks .
The detention of an education minister is interesting as it tends to support the repeated allegations in this House that the Palestinian textbooks and school curriculum supported for years by EU funds are still aimed at fomenting a climate of hatred and distrust for Israel and a glorification of terrorist violence .
Many of the Hamas ministerial components of the Unity Government - like the Hamas 1988 Charter inspired by Egypt 's Muslim Brotherhood - still believe strongly that the State of Israel has no right to exist , that all terrorist violence is justified through so-called armed struggle , and that they are not bound by previous PLO-signed international agreements .
Therefore , in my view at present the PA Unity Government clearly does not comply with the Quartet criteria , and the EU must not yet lift the ban on Hamas as a designated terrorist organisation , or directly fund the PA Government .
Neither should the TIM be abandoned for the delivery of humanitarian aid , which now totals over EUR 500 million yearly and has actually risen over the last three years , contrary to popular opinion .
I too support the Arab League 's new proposals for a negotiated solution , although the right of return is totally unrealistic .
But again , and curiously , Hamas rejects their proposals for Israel 's recognition .
Some hardliners on all sides reject peace or a two-state solution , but on the 40th anniversary of the six-day war it is clear that this is the only viable long-term solution for a lasting peace in the region .
But first the PA must ensure law and order on its territory and stop the dissent into virtual Hamas-Fatah civil war in Gaza , which is also being stirred up in Lebanon .
Once again I would like to call upon the House and the international community to put pressure on all those responsible for the release of the BBC reporter Alan Johnston , who we now know is alive and well , and the kidnapped soldier Corporal Shalit .
This will create a climate conducive to restarting the vital roadmap for peace talks .
( FR ) Mr President , at the time of the legislative elections in 2006 , I asked a Palestinian : ' Do you think that these elections will bring peace ? '
He replied : ' No , not peace , but democracy .
And we are going to show the world that , even in the occupied territories , we are capable of holding free elections ' .
Our response was pathetic .
Our disregard for the aspirations of a people , including their right to make mistakes , introduced just a bit more chaos still into a region that is now in ferment .
The establishment of a National Unity Government and the Mecca Agreement have not sufficiently altered the European Union 's hard line or its sanctions .
Despite your efforts , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner - and I appreciate those efforts - in spite of what you have said to us , and it is encouraging , Mr Solana , I believe that we have not yet radically changed our policy towards the Middle East and that we have not properly understood that we are damaging the very notion of democracy with our response to these elections .
It is an attitude that has persisted for 40 years .
I believe that we are partly responsible for having allowed , for 40 years , a situation of total lawlessness to take hold in Palestine , with extra-judicial executions , theft of land , kidnapping , now , of legitimately elected representatives and ministers , the existence of a wall considered illegal by the Court in The Hague and the Geneva Conventions flouted , Francis Wurtz spoke about it : more than 400 children still held in Israeli prisons , more than 400 young Palestinians .
The United Nations Organisation ( UNO ) resolutions ignored the sealing off of territories and restrictions on movements .
And what else ?
Of course , Mr Tannock , we condemn violence , we condemn the firing of rockets , we condemn the kidnapping of the soldier , Shalit , but there is at present an imbalance .
Look at the figures .
They are , alas , dramatically unfavourable to the Palestinian people and , I repeat , there is no equidistance .
International law - that is not equidistance .
Nothing today justifies our silence and I should like to salute , here , these new Just Men , those Jews who , in Israel and elsewhere , speak out and say ' That must be stopped ' .
They say it amid the sniggering , the sarcasm , and sometimes the threats of their fellow citizens .
I see myself as a supporter of all those people , as I see myself as a supporter of our Palestinian colleagues who , regardless of parliamentary immunity , have been imprisoned .
I should like to say to you that in Belgium , all the leaders of the political parties are to meet tomorrow , at 1 p.m. at Berlaymont , to make a chain for peace and to ask the European Union to take on its responsibilities , not only humanitarian responsibilities , but real political responsibilities which are a credit to the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , none of us questions Israel 's right to exist .
We are aware of our political responsibility .
At the same time , I would like to remind the House of the message from a peace conference held in Palestine in the last few days .
Women , who are , after all , part of civil society , Palestinian and Israeli women , delivered a clear message to us . You speak , they said , of the coexistence of two states .
That is good , but please take note that our existence is threatened in Palestine and in Gaza .
I believe that the crux of the matter at this time is the existence issue .
For this reason I am glad that Javier Solana said we had to consider whether we should not review the Lebanon experience as quickly as possible and possibly become involved in Gaza .
We must act before the situation slides completely out of control , because there will not be many more opportunities .
What you described as courage , Dr Solana , namely the hope we must have if we are to remain committed and explain our commitment to the people on the ground too , that hope has faded to a shadow in the region itself .
I wish to thank Mr Poettering on behalf of my group for having made that journey .
You said that the situation in Gaza is intolerable .
It is our duty to become more heavily committed than ever before to the right of people there to live in peace , and of course that also means criticising Hamas for its duplicity .
The statement made by Hamas to mark the 40th anniversary of the Six-Day War is unacceptable in our view .
At the same time , however , we must cooperate actively with the Government of National Unity .
We shall not get a second chance .
I second the criticism voiced by Mrs De Keyser just a few moments ago .
We in the European Union have indeed made mistakes in that region .
We have bitterly disappointed people 's hopes and have failed to harness their willingness to look to the future .
I hope that the Middle East Quartet is now roused from slumber .
I hope it will go into action , and I hope there will be trips to the region .
It may be a last chance before we can no longer speak realistically of any hope of peace .
Mr President , I would like to begin with some quotes .
On 2 April , Prime Minister Haniyeh said on Al-Jazeera : ' As far as we are concerned , the issue of recognition of Israel has been settled once and for all .
It has been settled in our political literature , in our Islamic thought and in our Jihadist culture , on which we base our moves .
We will declare a truce , but never recognition of Israel ' .
On Al-Jazeera on 27 April , he said : ' If the siege continues beyond a certain time , we will be forced to make a decision and there is no doubt that we will act ' .
On 5 May , in a prayer , he said : ' I reiterate , on behalf of the Palestinian Government , that the security plan will not hurt the resistance .
We will give Allah the opportunity to grant us one of the two mercies , victory or martyrdom ' .
As a fluent speaker of Arabic , I can assure you that the translation is correct .
The situation is grave .
We face not only the ' Iraqisation ' of Gaza but the ' Iranisation ' of the whole Middle East .
This is not just a threat to the Middle East .
This is a serious threat to our own security .
Europe must be a player and we must be absolutely unified .
Therefore Parliament should remain unified , supporting the Council , the Commission and the Quartet .
The Temporary International Mechanism must go on .
We have to continue humanitarian aid .
We may even use the PLO account .
However , the key issue is to bring the Palestinian National Unity Government to renounce violence , to recognise Israel and to honour international agreements .
Only then can we return to UN Resolution 242 , clearly asking Israel to withdraw from territories , so that there are no ' deterritories ' or occupied territories .
I therefore ask the Council and the Commission whether they consider that the preconditions for the recognition and direct financing of the Palestinian National Unity Government have been met .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , when 40 years have passed since the Six Day War and the nations of the Middle East are still suffering now from its tragic consequences ; when reports by Amnesty International and the United Nations now seriously question the viability of a Palestinian state because of the persistent Israeli policies of occupation and colonisation ; when unbearable misery is rife in Gaza and on the West Bank , feeding the fire between rival Palestinian factions , and the National Unity Government , the last rampart against civil war , is hanging by a thread ; when the whole region is in ferment from Iraq to Lebanon , we can say that compassionate speeches are no longer enough and it is urgent to bring about change , an upheaval , a revolution , dare I say , in our Middle East policy and to take on the full extent of our responsibilities .
First of all , by recognising the Palestinian National Unity Government on which we have pinned our hopes and which has declared willingness to respect all of the UN and PLO resolutions , all of the previous resolutions , as well as the demands of the Quartet to restore credibility to the two-state solution .
Next , by reinstating our direct aid to this government , because it is unrealistic to count on the Israelis to release the tax revenues that were collected by right and which remain confiscated and because the temporary mechanism has fizzled out .
Furthermore , by deploying an international interposition force at the border between Gaza and Israel , the only measure that is likely to bring about a ceasefire the effectiveness and endurance of which have been demonstrated in Lebanon .
Finally and above all , by showing considerable ambition , perhaps , by taking the initiative for a European Camp David that has become necessary since the roadmap brandished by the Quartet comes down to nothing more than a pious hope .
Since 1967 , we have lost our way in mistakes and injustices .
Do we have to wait another 40 years ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DA ) Thank you , Mr President , and thanks also to the Commissioner and the High Representative .
Simply put , however , I have my doubts .
We , in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , have attempted to discuss amongst ourselves what it is we have learnt here .
It is a top priority for us that we now recognise the Palestinian Government and that action be taken again .
I am quite simply unable to tell whether that is what we have been told is to happen .
It was not what Mr Solana told us ; but was it what Mrs Ferrero-Waldner said ?
That is - did she say that we would now grant recognition and go on from there ?
It seems to me that we need a clear answer to this question because what frustrates the whole system is the fact that all we get is endless talk and no action .
The double standards and the paralysis of action are on the point of wrecking not only the Middle East but also the EU .
The other matter about which we need clarity is what is meant by the fact that we are now to support the Arab initiative .
I was unable to conclude from Mr Solana 's presentation that this is actually what we intend to do .
All I could make out was that it was said that we must now engage again in negotiation .
We are well aware , however , of where we need to go .
It is a difficult process to turn this into a reality , but we know what has to be brought about , and we cannot allow ourselves to become notorious for mentioning the Arab initiative over and over and then letting all the steam out of it by saying ' now let us see what happens ' .
We need to say that this is the point at which we are making a start .
We have , set out before us , the final result that we are all well aware is the only acceptable outcome if we are to make progress and that , to top it all , is what both the West and Israel have long been calling for . It has suddenly been put on the table .
Can we not have clear answers ?
That would be nice .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , High Representative , the fact that the Quartet now intends to act jointly in the region is good news .
That is an important message , because , as we have often said in this House , it is only through concerted action that the Quartet acquires the credibility it needs to be able to give all parties the essential security guarantees .
In the eyes of the region , no member of the Quartet can do that on its own .
May I congratulate you on this development and also on the fact that it can be combined with the Arab initiative .
If we want to advance - and we have discussed this so often - and avoid giving in to hopelessness and despair , we must be clear about one thing : the moderates on both sides must be able to create conditions in their own territories in which the foundations can be built for a peace process that will not be demolished by the provocations of the extremist minorities on the other side .
This must therefore be the starting point .
It is true , of course , that Israel must release the money .
It is also true that this patchwork situation in the West Bank , with checks and settlements everywhere , which nips any economic development in the bud , must be ended , and that conditions must prevail in which economic development is possible again .
We can pump as much money into the West Bank as we like , but the right conditions simply must be created there .
It must also be said , however , that what is happening in Gaza is a civil war between Palestinians .
The answer is not an international force deployed between Israel and Gaza but meetings between the warring factions to bring about a satisfactory end to the conflict .
All of these issues are plainly interconnected , but please let us remember that everyone is responsible for his own domain .
We cannot take over this responsibility .
Accordingly , we must demand an end to the civil war .
Anyone trying to resolve conflicts between the rival groups by military means is destroying the future prospects of his own people .
For this reason we must take care to seek our starting points here and thus create a platform from which the Quartet can operate successfully and give us a genuine chance of progress .

Mr President , sometimes I get very dispirited when listening to the debates in this House on this issue , particularly when I hear Mr Tannock and Mrs Hybášková , who seem intent on laying down conditions in this House for a solution in the Middle East .
It is not for us to set preconditions for the Israelis and the Palestinians in terms of how they will address each other in the peace negotiations .
The only preconditions necessary for successful peace negotiations are a demonstrable commitment to peace on each side , a mandate to negotiate on each side and the capacity to deliver on the commitments made in the negotiations .
All other preconditions which MEPs in this House seek to apply to Israelis and Palestinians are so much hot air .
They have no effect and there is no possible likelihood that they will be met in a situation in which the Palestinian Authority , in particular , is at the point of collapse .
If that Authority , that Unity Government , collapses , then nothing we say and nothing the European Union does will prevent the appalling bloodbath that will follow , for the Israelis and for the Palestinians .
The role of the international community is to ensure that the patrons of each side in this conflict - the Quartet and the Arab States - set aside their immediate short-term interests and put the interests of the Palestinians and the Israelis first .
We must seek to ensure that they come to the table and address the outlines that are already there , and which have been for some time , as regards the possibilities and conditions for peace .
It is time we stopped talking and started to act in the interests ...
( The President cut the speaker off )

( SK ) As Mr Solana and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner have told us , the situation in the Middle East is indeed critical .
The situation is critical in Lebanon , and it continues to be critical in Palestinian-Israeli relations .
The very notion of ' critical ' , however , is dramatic , since it implies a situation of financial , economic and social decline , accompanied by terror attacks and activities , kidnappings and the death of civilians .
The mounting resistance and attacks against the state of Israel and her citizens breed fear and concern , resulting in measures which we find incomprehensible .
The region is a mess , conflict is intensifying and the ceasefire is not being abided by .
The meeting of the Quartet last week pointed out that our active involvement in the peace process was essential .
However , the degree of frustration on either side , be it Palestinian or Israeli , is just as great as our endeavours to further the peace process .
It is imperative , therefore , to beef up our diplomatic efforts , to make them more dynamic and , in particular , to make them balanced .
Our activities should not generate the impression that we stand on one side of the conflict .
It is our duty to demand that Israel release the funds ; by the same token , it is our duty to ensure that the funds are indeed invested in economic and social development .
It is also our duty to guarantee for the citizens of Israel basic protection of their lives and the basic defence of their state .
( PT ) This issue of the Middle East , and in particular the tragic situation in Palestine , has resurfaced several times in recent plenary sessions .
This should come as no surprise .
We have all seen on the ground what goes on there .
We have all seen the same thing , we have come to Parliament and reported a terrible and explosive humanitarian situation .
We have all seen Israel 's illegal retention of some EUR 700 million in taxes - money that does not belong to Israel and that is generating interest by the day .
We have all seen in the eyes of those people - human beings with the right to justice and dignity just like us - the hope for a future in which they can live in peace .
This is a hope that remains alive despite the constraints , a hope that every day is severely put to the test by a lack of mobility and by the wall .
This is a wall that puts paid to any kind of local economy , either in its purest meaning of subsistence through farming , or in terms of something more ambitious like having enough produce to run a small shop .
In the face of the continuous erosion of that hope , despair takes hold and , as members of this privileged club of countries that won peace after enduring the bitter taste of war , we must not think that we can solve problems by throwing money at them .
Helping the Palestinian people is very important , crucial in fact .
Much more important , though , is helping them realise that their voice makes a difference in their country and that the credible manner in which they ran their elections and sought a solution to present to the world counted for something .
Authority must be restored to the Palestinian territories .
Let us hope that Finance Minister Salam Fayad can become one of the main spokesmen on matters of financial help to the people .
It is therefore vital to normalise institutional relations .
We must demonstrate that we are actually prepared to resolve the conflict .
We Europeans have a vital part to play in bringing peace to the region and to the world .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we must give peace a chance in the Middle East .
We know how difficult it is and we all know about the challenges , but we all know about the new hopes and we have clearly explained the situation .
What is necessary is , on the one hand , to achieve a certain level of security , and a better security situation first to the Palestinians within Gaza , but also in the West Bank .
That is very true .
Both we and Americans are working with the Palestinians to come to such a solution , but unfortunately we are not yet completely there .
Second , there needs to be greater economic freedom in order to improve the daily lives of the Palestinians .
This is also what we are trying to do .
We also said very clearly that we want to engage with this national Unity Government according to the actions and the programme .
Salam Fayyad is , therefore , our preferred interlocutor to see what else can be done .
I have very clearly said what could be done .
I would like to repeat to you that in addition to from our continuous work with the temporary international mechanism - that I would have liked to phase out as soon as possible , but I cannot do so because there humanitarian assistance is still necessary - we offered Salam Fayyad technical assistance in the area of audit , revenue collection and customs .
We are currently working with the Ministry to define the delivery of assistance , but we are also resuming institution-building where it is important .
We are trying to go for development assistance in order to give more hope to the population , but it is true that a lot of political courage and political will is necessary , first and foremost on the part of the parties to the conflict. we members of the Quartet can only support them , we can push them , we can encourage them and this is what we are trying to do , but we cannot , unfortunately , take the decision for them .
That is the limit of our action .
I hope that the next meeting in the region will be a positive one and will be the trigger to this political vision and political horizon that we all have so much in our minds .
We hope and plead for the release of all the political prisoners . That means the abducted Israeli soldier and the BBC journalist Alan Johnston , but also all the members of the Palestinian government and all the others that are still imprisoned .
I think this would be very good momentum that could be brought about in order to find the next steps towards this two-state solution that we all so clearly wish for .
Mr President , I am not going to repeat what I and others who have contributed to the debate have already said .
I would first of all like to thank all the Members of Parliament who contributed , those who are still here and those who have left .
I think it has been a very interesting debate , and I would like to make an observation on it .
When I come to the European Parliament to discuss the Middle East , I have the feeling that emotions run high , starting with my own .
But I think that our debates have to be about the events which are important at a given time .
Today we are in a very difficult situation , but at the same time , as has been said , it is a time of hope , which did not exist for a long time .
I have been involved in the Middle East for many years .
I was at the Madrid Conference and at the last Conference at Camp David .
Not since Camp David have I perceived us to be any closer than I feel we are today to the beginning of real , meaningful communication and exchange and therefore the beginning of a political horizon , and a debate and negotiations about that .
There are three reasons for this .
One is that the Arab League Initiative is something that was missing at the time of Camp David .
We have it today , and we have the engagement of the Arabs to embrace whoever the Palestinian negotiator is going to be , in order to sustain him and to give the support which , as you know , was not there at the time of Camp David .
Secondly , 40 years have elapsed .
I think everybody is exhausted : psychologically , physically and politically .
Out of this exhaustion I think that we have to muster new psychological and political energy in order to move forward .
Thirdly , we have a mechanism - the Quartet - and sometimes we do not realise how much effort goes into that .
For the first time we have the United States and the European Union at the same table negotiating with the parties , which has never happened before .
We have to recognise that .
This is the first time that the European Union has been at the negotiating table .
The Russian Federation was in Madrid and then disappeared .
There was also the Secretary-General of the United Nations - imagine for a moment what that means - the United Nations negotiated in this conflict .
It was impossible to imagine at that time .
I believe that to a certain extent all these elements change the horizon of what can be done now .
We must now try to move on , try not to falter and try to continue working in that direction .
Conditions have changed and therefore we have more hope that it can be achieved .
Will it be achieved in 24 hours ?
No .
If you think that we will find the solution to all the problems by the end of this month , you are wrong : we will have to wait a bit longer than that .
But let us see whether we have the opportunity to move the process forward .
As a final thought , I would like to stress that we are Europeans here .
Everyone here is a member of the European Union .
Sometimes we have to be a little proud of what we do .
If you go to Palestine , as you do , you hear the criticism .
But probably , if you really talk in depth to the Palestinians and Israelis , you will find a growing sympathy and understanding - you have to agree with me about that - for the way in which Europeans are doing things .
I think that we Europeans have to recognise that every now and then .
Otherwise we will never move forward collectively , as we need to do .
Moving this process forward is not an effort for one or two : it is an effort for everybody .
We have an opportunity .
Let us see whether next time we meet we see progress .
We will not see the solution , but let us see whether we make progress .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session in Strasbourg .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) This week marks the 40th anniversary of Israel 's illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories of the West Bank , the ( now violently under siege ) Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem , the Syrian territories of the Golan Heights and the Egyptian territories of the Sinai Peninsula , which Egypt has since recovered .
40 years of ...
violations of international law and non-compliance with countless UN Security Council resolutions by the Israeli authorities ;
criminal and brutal occupation , colonisation and repression , and denial of the Palestinian people 's legitimate rights by the Israeli authorities ;
oppression , plundering , exploitation , unemployment and poverty , the imposition of the most degrading humiliation and inhuman living conditions on the Palestinian people by the Israeli authorities ;
actual support and collaboration , or at least connivance and tacit acceptance , by the USA and its allies in Europe in the face of the Israeli authorities ' considerable responsibility .
June 2007 is a time to reiterate the call for an end to the occupation of the territories that Israel occupied in 1967 , for compliance with international law and for the implementation of the relevant UN resolutions , such as the Palestinian people 's inalienable right to a viable , sovereign and independent State .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , the Six Day War took place in 1967 and it had its winner .
In the last 40 years the loser has been human dignity .
The humanitarian crisis in the Middle East is one of the most tragic in recent history .
There is a vicious circle of violence in the region which no one has yet been able to break .
Generations of Israelis and Palestinians have lived with instability , violence and war .
Crisis management has been the tool used in practice to seek a solution to the Middle East conflict .
Step by step the aim has been a move towards permanent peace .
A ceasefire has been reached which will soon have collapsed and a new conflict begun .
It is difficult to believe in a successful path as long as the parties fail to understand that each act of violence destroys the future of a section of its own people .
There is also a lack of comprehension among the Palestinian groups .
There is a civil war going on in Gaza .
Scores of Palestinians have died in clashes between Fatah and Hamas .
Israel 's military actions and human rights violations are to be condemned .
Each country must comply with international obligations and international law and should respect human dignity , something that can never be surrendered .
We cannot demand Israel 's immediate withdrawal from the Palestinian territories , however , as long as the Palestinian authorities do not recognise the state of Israel .
The Quartet , the United States of America , the United Nations , the EU and Russia , must obviously continue with their efforts to achieve a lasting peace .
Parliament 's job is to demonstrate European consistency and support the Commission and the Council .
There is one thing we surely cannot do : we cannot make the parties accept our desire to achieve a lasting peace .
We can encourage and put pressure on them , but we cannot force our will upon them .
United Nations Human Rights Council ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the fifth session of the UN Human Rights Council which will take place in Geneva on 11-19 June 2007 .
Mr President , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , from the very outset the European Union welcomed the creation of the United Nations Human Rights Council in 2006 but has always emphasised that it expects the Council to be an efficient and credible body making a genuine contribution to the global protection and promotion of human rights .
At the previous sessions of the Human Rights Council , the European Union has also attached importance to substantive debates on human-rights issues as well as to dialogue and close cooperation .
During the fourth regular session , the European Union and the African Group succeeded in securing the adoption by consensus of their resolution on Darfur .
This was the result of sustained efforts on the part of the European Union , and the outcome reflects not only the mandate of the Council but also the level of responsibility it should be expected to exercise .
The capacity of the Human Rights Council to fulfil its mandate is inextricably linked to its composition .
Allow me to recall once more that the General Assembly of the United Nations expects the member nations of the Council to observe the highest standards of human rights .
It has also called on all UN Members to elect to the Council only those nations with good human-rights records .
Although this ideal is still far from having been achieved , I should like to express the satisfaction of the European Union that the election of Belarus to the Human Rights Council was successfully thwarted in May .
This success was due in no small part to the opposition of the European Union to the candidature of Belarus .
Although it is in a minority in numerical terms , the European Union nevertheless plays a leading role in the Council and has established itself as a major player .
In spite of some encouraging developments , such as the adoption of an International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance , more action is needed to equip the Human Rights Council with the working practices and instruments it needs to live up to the expectations of the international community and particularly those of the European Union .
The European Union attaches top priority to the institutional establishment of the Council .
It is therefore making strenuous efforts to ensure that this institution-building process is successfully completed by the end of the first year .
The forthcoming fifth session will therefore be crucially important .
At that session the Council will take its concluding decisions on the establishment of the institution and will thereby ultimately determine its own efficiency and credibility for the next five years .
The European Union is currently cooperating closely in Geneva with all participants in order to achieve an outcome that will enable the Human Rights Council to make full use of its mandate .
In the Presidency 's contacts with the President and the other delegations of the Human Rights Council , we are trying to establish a central role within the United Nations system for an efficient and credible Council .
To this end the European Union wishes to insist on the creation of an effective and universal periodic review process and on the preservation of issue-based and country-based mandates .
The planned code of conduct for special rapporteurs must not impair their independence ; on the contrary , it must guarantee that independence and focus on the obligations of the states with which the rapporteurs cooperate .
Moreover , we are pursuing the aim of establishing a suitable process for the selection of national representatives which will ensure that they possess the requisite expertise as well as guaranteeing their independence .
We are aware of the difficulties involved in the pursuit of these objectives .
Let me assure you that we will not relax our efforts to achieve them .
It also remains the firm hope of the European Union that the Human Rights Council , with its sessions held at regular intervals throughout the year , its new and improved set of instruments and its continuing commitment to the present dialogue with special rapporteurs and the High Commissioner for Human Rights , will develop into a cornerstone of the human-rights system of the United Nations .
It is now up to all members of the Human Rights Council to act responsibly and to work towards the achievement of these goals .
Mr President , President-in-Office Günter Gloser , ladies and gentlemen , since it was founded , the European Union , as you know , has been one of the main driving forces for the protection of human rights and has therefore played an active role in pursuing the aims of the Human Rights Council and ensuring that the new body represents a real improvement on the Commission on Human Rights .
The initial aims have therefore been to ensure that the Council sessions deal with urgent human-rights issues in the context of actual occurrences , to improve coordination within the EU and to step up the Union 's outreach efforts , in other words its attempts to sensitise non-EU governments to human-rights issues .
In these respects real progress has been made , allowing us , on the one hand , to make a coherent and credible stand in the Human Rights Council and , on the other hand , to enhance our cooperation with partners in other parts of the world through bilateral meetings as well as in multilateral forums and through a broad-based campaign to raise awareness in many of the world 's capitals .
Among the priority tasks in the course of the first year have therefore been the safeguarding of the mandates and mechanisms of the Human Rights Council in the framework of the review process and the establishment of the new system , known as the universal periodic review , for the monitoring of the human-rights situation in all countries .
The general compromise package presented only yesterday by the President of the Human Rights Council certainly points in the right direction ; while it needs improvement , from our perspective it is nevertheless a very good initial basis for negotiation .
Next week 's fifth session of the Human Rights Council therefore assumes very special importance as a key to the future of that body .
This is another reason why I am particularly pleased that a delegation from the European Parliament will be attending the session as part of the delegation from the European Communities .
What is the verdict on the performance of the Human Rights Council to date ?
It is impossible to provide a clear-cut answer , but in my view the Council should be an ongoing project , a kind of work in progress , as it were .
Let me make a few brief comments .
The first Council sessions were certainly rather disappointing .
The old behaviour patterns resurfaced .
We were already familiar with them , of course , from the Commission on Human Rights .
The sessions on the Middle East in particular were truly marred by an uncooperative attitude on the part of the very states that had convened them .
The result was unbalanced draft resolutions which we in the European Union were unable to support .
Let me therefore make it clear that , while confrontation on human-rights issues may well be necessary on occasion when people 's fundamental rights are at stake , it is a different matter when human rights are used as a cover for the pursuit of a primarily political conflict .
Just like the Council Presidency , however , we too have observed that the very good resolution on Darfur which was recently adopted there has mitigated these unfavourable impressions .
I firmly believe that it is the most important resolution the Council has adopted .
It was closely coordinated with the African Group in very protracted negotiations and was ultimately adopted by consensus .
That was a considerable achievement when we consider what a sensitive issue it addressed , coupled with the fact that the EU can now be easily outvoted in the Human Rights Council .
The monitoring body of five independent UN rapporteurs that was established by the resolution will present its first report to the Council in the next few weeks , most probably next week .
And let us not forget that the International Criminal Court recently indicted two Sudanese suspects .
In short , there is at least movement on that front in Darfur .
We very much hope that this will set an example as well as setting standards for the future work of the Human Rights Council .
Lastly , the interactive dialogues with the High Commissioner and the UN 's special rapporteur have proved to be a very useful development .
They have enabled us to approach the human-rights situation in individual countries - often in connection with more general human-rights issues - in a highly visible as well as far less confrontational manner .
Our next step , however , is to find more ways of ensuring that these dialogues can be followed by practical progress on the ground .
However impatient we may be for rapid progress in the UN Human Rights Council , I would warn anyone against snap judgments on the Council at this stage .
All we can say so far is that there have been bright and dark sides .
We are convinced that the EU will continue its efforts to build on the encouraging developments that have undoubtedly taken place and to nurture , in the framework of an intensive dialogue with its UN partners , an effective UN Human Rights Council and above all one that acts in the interests of the people concerned .
It remains the main international forum for the treatment of human rights , and we in the EU have a responsibility to make active use of it to reinforce our values , our ideals and our interests .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LT ) First of all I would like to thank Council and Commission representatives for their reports about the first working year of the United Nations Human Rights Council and for the fifth United Nations Human Rights Council session .
Tomorrow the European Parliament will vote on a resolution concerning this issue , which sets out all the basic problems , such as our aspirations for the Human Rights Council 's modus operandi , its mechanisms , special procedures , special rapporteurs , universal periodic review , and the role of the European Union .
The European Parliament has undoubtedly expected and still expects a lot from the Human Rights Council for the simple reason that human rights are a matter of particular importance , since respect for human rights and their defence are a fundamental part of EU ethics and statutes , and in general they are the foundation of Europe 's unity and integrity .
The United Nations Human Rights Council can provide excellent possibilities for effective action in defending and safeguarding human rights , and for promoting them on behalf of the United Nations .
In this regard the fifth session is particularly important , since one year of activity of the Human Rights Council has revealed problems and shortcomings , which can and must be fixed straight away .
This is necessary so that the Human Rights Council can become a truly reliable structure - able to react adequately and , when required , quickly to breaches of human rights in any country of the world , and capable of finding effective means to influence the governments of those countries where human rights are being crudely violated .
The first year of activity of the Human Rights Council has permitted us to ascertain whether , in applying its planned procedures and mechanisms , the Human Rights Council will be able to implement the ambitious programme that it has adopted for itself .
The first year 's experience , resolutions on Darfur , Iran and Uzbekistan , the application of confidentiality requirements when human rights abuses in the latter two countries were being discussed , as well as other decisions , have demonstrated that the procedures of the Human Rights Council must be maximally transparent , and that the special rapporteurs and experts need to be truly independent .
Furthermore , it is essential to apply clear criteria when choosing members for the Human Rights Council : simple logic indicates that countries , in which there are gross violations of human rights , should not be chosen as members of the Human Rights Council .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe that we can be pleased with the consensus that has been achieved amongst the groups in the House in relation to the text that we are going to put to the vote tomorrow for the fifth session of the United Nations Human Rights Council .
Since this Council was created , it has not had a very easy time .
It is therefore important that the European Parliament should once again show consistency in terms of how to proceed with a view to promoting and protecting human rights and , specifically , how to facilitate and improve the work of the United Nations Human Rights Council .
On assessing its activities , it appears that there are certain deficiencies that need to be resolved and which are based on two fundamental problems .
On the one hand , the weakness and insufficiency of the responses to dramatic and urgent situations that require much more vigorous action .
I am referring primarily to the dramatic situation in Darfur , something to which everybody should be paying the greatest possible attention .
Secondly , the need substantially to improve the Council 's internal mechanisms and to improve the dynamics of the relationship between the member countries for the sake of more effective and ambitious work .
There is a fundamental problem underlying both issues , and Parliament and the European Union can do significant work in this regard .
I am referring to political differences , which must not hinder the crucial common efforts to substantially reduce the vulnerability of the world 's peoples to abuses and violations of human rights .
This aspect is vital , since Europe must be at the forefront in terms of treating all countries equally when it comes to dialogue on human rights .
We believe that this philosophy must be extended to the Council and that the next Romanian Presidency of the United Nations Human Rights Council can offer a good opportunity for these essential improvements to become reality .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , respect for human rights is of universal value and importance and is of course a fundamental principle of the EU .
This House , not surprisingly , pays particular attention to this principle , as shown by the regular production of reports and resolutions dealing with human rights violations around the world .
It was with great sadness that for years we watched the rather ineffective work of the Human Rights Commission , and it was with much relief that we welcomed , approximately a year ago , the replacement of the Human Rights Commission by the Human Rights Council .
In the words of a Human Rights Watch representative , the Human Rights Commission in effect became the abusers ' club , because abusive governments were eager to be part of it in order to block action on themselves and on countries elsewhere .
Unfortunately , our hopes for changes for the better were somewhat shaken after the Council elections , when Angola , Egypt and Qatar gained seats .
Those three countries have a well-known , atrocious record of human rights abuses .
The non-election of Belarus to the Council was a relief , although this occurred only by a tiny margin .
During the Human Rights Council 's first year , we have seen some changes which have improved its function , but it has to be said that these changes were not spectacular .
We expect and hope that more promising improvements are on the way .
The Geneva-based Council has so far shown eagerness to deal with worldwide problems promptly and repeatedly if necessary , but the effectiveness of its work has to be looked at more critically .
An example is the fact that last year the Council adopted no less than eight resolutions criticising Israel for its military actions in the Palestinian territories in Lebanon .
These resolutions had some , but not much , usefulness in practical terms .
This is not the fault of the UN Human Rights Council , but that Council has to assume some responsibility for not finding ways to make its voice heard more seriously .
Other examples include the Council 's problematic dealings with Uzbekistan and Iran .
As the next session of the Council is due to ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union has now taken over from the United States as the guardian of human rights in the world .
Of all our many policies , this is the one that gains us the most popularity on a global level .
Unfortunately , the European Union is not always able to occupy its rightful place at meetings .
At the World Conference on Climate Change last November , for example , the Union 's delegation sat in Finland 's place , as Finland held the Presidency at the time .
We need to be able to occupy our rightful place as the EU to ensure our voice is heard clearly as we deal with the many problems in our contemporary world .
One area of concern is the Middle East , where Hamas is threatening to destroy Israel , whilst the Israelis are already engaged in destroying the Palestinian nation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) The Human Rights Council was created as a replacement for the Human Rights Commission and was faced with the by no means easy challenge of not falling into excessive politicisation and governmental interference in such an important area as overseeing universal respect for human rights .
Nevertheless , the progress made so far , at least in this field , is worrying to say the least .
Just yesterday we heard Jody Williams - the Human Rights Council 's special rapporteur for Darfur - complaining about the immense pressure upon her to make her report acceptable to everybody .
We all know what that means .
It means removing , or at least toning down , the criticisms as far as possible in order not to upset anybody .
The most serious thing , however , is that these requests were made in order not to jeopardise the continuity of the Council .
Things are going badly if a structure such as the Human Rights Council puts its own survival before what should be its primary and main responsibility : to ensure the protection of human rights in the world , which involves , amongst other things , identifying the people responsible for violations , even if they are governments , or particularly if they are governments .
During this first anniversary of the Council 's existence we must bear these risks very much in mind if we do not want this Council to become just one more structure whose only purpose is to hide the shame of those who constantly violate the most fundamental human rights inside and outside of their borders .
By means of this resolution , on which there is consensus in the European Parliament and I am pleased about that , we call upon , and encourage , the Council to take on a strong leadership role at the fifth session of the Human Rights Council , and we know that that will not be easy .
But there are at least two issues that we would like it to prioritise .
Firstly , the guarantee that special rapporteurs are selected on the basis of their independence and abilities and that they are able to continue operating as independent rapporteurs .
Secondly , that the periodic universal reviews also include the participation of independent experts .
That is the only way we can guarantee the credibility of this Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the results of the work of the UN Human Rights Council in its first year are under scrutiny .
The expectations of the international community have not yet been met .
The most regrettable example is probably the resolution on the situation in Darfur , whose content was watered down partly as a result of the continuing compromises .
The work has , understandably , been hampered by the fact that the operation and practices are still being developed .
Our proposals for a resolution highlights , as it ought , the problem areas in the work of the Human Rights Council .
Two matters in particular need to be paid attention to .
Firstly , we have to learn from history .
The work of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights ( UNCHR ) , as the representative of the Human Rights Council , lost credibility , as sitting on the Council were countries which have glaringly violated human rights .
The EU must continue doggedly to push through the condition that membership of the Human Rights Council is based on an objective criterion and that requirements for membership are sufficiently strict .
The concept of human rights covers a very wide area .
Certain fundamental human rights must be unconditionally incorporated in the conditions of membership .
I think that the countries where Sharia courts are part of the judicial system are especially problematic .
The EU must fight to ensure that this Human Rights Council does not become a club for abusers of human rights , in the way of the body which precedes it .
The other matter relates to the relationship between the Universal Periodic Review mechanism and the special procedures employed in individual countries .
The EU needs to insist strongly that the work of the special experts in individual countries in the UN will in future be kept separate from the UPR and genuinely independent of governments .
I regard it as worrying that Member States could use the indirect right of veto in the UPR in connection with a debate on the situation in a country , so that they fail to produce their country-specific report .
I understand the limitations the Human Rights Council assembly puts on the EU 's powers of influence .
Just the countries of Africa and Asia together can , with their 29 seats , steer the Council 's work in a direction which differs from the aims of Western countries in the area of human rights .
The EU must now demonstrate real leadership and a strong will .
We should try and use the talks to break any regional blocs .
I wish to thank the German Presidency , which has shown exemplary firmness in its call for prohibiting the death penalty .
( PL ) Mr President , it is now more than a year since the European Parliament cautiously welcomed the creation of the UN Human Rights Council to replace the discredited Commission on Human Rights .
We hoped that the new Council would become an institution that would help reform the UN and that it would make a determined effort to ensure greater respect for human rights the world over .
The European Union , the Member States and European Parliament delegations have all been actively involved in the work of the Council .
It is now time to assess the first year of the Council 's operations .
Unfortunately , it has to be recognised that so far the creation of this new Council has not marked a turning point in the UN 's activities in the area of human rights .
The interests of various countries still take precedence over the defence of threatened fundamental rights and freedoms .
This can best be illustrated by the Human Rights Council 's inability to respond appropriately to the situation in Darfur .
A report on the tragic situation in that region was adopted in March , yet the Council as a whole was unable to draw logical conclusions from that report and deal with the problem of the Sudanese authorities ' political responsibility for the political situation in that country .
It is also the case that the Council has condemned Israel eight times .
This demonstrates the imbalance in the Council 's work and its political bias .
The fifth session of the Council is due to commence in a few days ' time .
A European Parliament delegation will be present .
The Netherlands , Slovenia and Italy have now joined the Council .
Another European country to become a member is Bosnia-Hercegovina .
Belarus , currently governed by Mr Lukaszenko 's authoritarian regime , has not been elected to the Council in order to avoid controversy .
We should ensure that Member States of the European Union become more involved in the work of the Council so that the latter is transformed into a body truly devoted to achieving respect for fundamental freedoms .
At stake are an effective human rights policy in the contemporary world and UN reform . So too is the credibility of the European Union itself , and we would do well to remember that .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament has always followed the United Nations reform process constructively as an advocate of effective multilateralism .
We want a strong UN , we want security and stability , we want an incisive war on poverty , and we want effective protection of human rights .
As chair of the working party of the European Parliament on relations with the UN , I also have a very personal interest in the achievement of these aims .
When the Human Rights Council was established as a new UN instrument , we warmly welcomed its creation , because it came with a set of very enticing promises : genuine election of members , rational working methods and the universal periodic review of all members .
And today ?
Our resolution is highly critical : Angola , Qatar and Egypt have come on board to join nations like China and Cuba , and elections with a choice of candidates are virtually non-existent .
We only just managed to prevent the election of Belarus .
Members of the Organisation of Islamic Countries are in the majority in both the Asian and the African regional groups .
This means that they control and effectively block the activities of the entire Council , from country reports to the universal review .
I am on tenterhooks , Commissioner , regarding the fate of the package that was presented yesterday .
I hope we have grounds for optimism .
One of your remarks was particularly significant .
You said that the European Union can easily be outvoted .
This raises the question whether the West has done its homework .
This is a question for the Council or , even better , the Member States .
They were short-changed at the negotiations and did not even notice .
This was clearly down to a lack of work on the part of our governments .
But we parliamentarians must also ask ourselves whether our scrutiny , and that of our national counterparts , was strict enough .
I believe it was not .
This further reinforces the point that we parliamentarians must not leave the United Nations to our governments .
We must strengthen the parliamentary dimension of the UN .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , I am delighted by your critical appraisal of the first year of the Human Rights Council , because that body did not fulfil the hopes which were placed in it .
But the fact is that the institution exists and is still the main international forum .
We must work on that basis , and I hope we shall succeed in backing the Council out of the present dead end .
Lastly , I am glad that we are having this debate in Brussels and not in Strasbourg .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I only intend to sum up briefly , because we are in agreement on the objectives .
I can understand your disappointment , Mr Lambsdorff , about the things you have just enumerated .
You are not the only one who is disappointed either , for all of us had quite different expectations .
I share the view of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , who said that the Council had been in existence for a year , that we had imagined everything would be different but that we should not make snap judgments about the Council .
I urge us not to drive a wedge now between parliaments and governments .
That is not helpful - quite the contrary .
Even though there is room for improvement in this or that area , the European Union - and the national parliaments , the European Parliament , the governments and the Commission are all part of the Union - must stand together and send a clear signal that we are too firmly committed to human rights to let anyone sow division among us .
I can only hope that progress can be made in one area or another during the second year , even though a sobering interim assessment is in order after one year .
But I am spreading the word that we shall succeed together with you , who so fervently champion the cause of human rights .
I hope we can draw a more favourable conclusion in next year 's report than we were able to do today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regard the Human Rights Council as a body in its infancy that is still experiencing certain growing pains .
It is not easy for the European Union to achieve any real progress in asserting our human-rights standards in the UN framework today .
Why ?
Because we have few permanent allies .
The support we receive usually comes from Canada , Switzerland , Norway , the countries applying for EU membership and individual countries covered by our neighbourhood policy , to name a few of the main sources .
This list is not exhaustive , but we are often faced with a united front of G77 countries , and we can rarely achieve anything if a confrontational approach is adopted .
We must draw our own conclusions from this .
Where does the problem lie ?
What can we do ?
We could , for example , strengthen the Special Rapporteur , support the High Commissioner for Human Rights and introduce universal reviews , but we could also condemn the most serious cases and denounce the most flagrant violations .
In other words , in specific instances we must continue to do some very plain talking on behalf of the victims of abuses .
I often wish we could respond and react more quickly to developments .
From the very beginning , for example , I have been calling for a kind of warning mechanism .
I very much hope that we can move gradually in that direction .
In the longer term , however , the achievement of the aims of the Human Rights Council will depend on the establishment of a new approach to human rights within the United Nations .
The transition to this new approach , indeed , was at the heart of the resolution on the creation of the new Council .
The resolution states that the work of the Council ' shall be guided by the principles of universality , impartiality , objectivity and non-selectivity , constructive international dialogue and cooperation ' .
We must also be aware , of course , that there will never be an apolitical UN forum .
It therefore goes without saying that we must not only promote our values but also defend all of our interests .
I have received two motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Management of Europe 's maritime borders - European Solidarity and protection of migrants ' rights ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the management of Europe 's maritime borders , European solidarity and protection of migrants ' rights .
Mr President , may I , on behalf of the Presidency , state very clearly that the latest reports on migrants who have lost their lives when their boats have foundered in the Mediterranean , the reports of tragedies that have occurred there , remind us of the responsibility that we as Member States have in this domain .
Regardless of all the tenets of immigration policy , when there is a real and present danger to life and limb , the protection of human life , as the supreme value , must have absolute priority .
This principle is not only enshrined in a number of international conventions ; it also accords with our common understanding of the values on which the European Union is based .
Irrespective of the question of legal jurisdiction , the European Union undoubtedly bears political responsibility , and we should shoulder that responsibility together .
This is why the Presidency , by agreement with the Commission , has decided that the Council of Justice and Home Affairs Ministers should debate this issue at their next meeting on 12 June .
We cannot close our eyes to the fact that there have been problems in the past in the interpretation and application of international conventions and that these problems still arise today .
We as Member States must recognise the responsibility we have to prevent such human tragedies , and the Hague Programme rightly and explicitly emphasises the need for close cooperation among all states as well as for solidarity and shared responsibility .
Besides the need to save human lives , the decisive message is that we must not let it come to the point at which unscrupulous criminal organisations put these people 's lives in danger by trying to transport them illegally to Europe .
This is why it is important that , as part of a general strategy for the resolution of the migration issue , we also achieve better cooperation with the countries of origin and transit .
It is essential to step up this cooperation in the framework of the political dialogue on migration issues with the governments of these countries , especially in the context of the Euromed partnership and the follow-up process to the EU-Africa migration conferences in Rabat and Tripoli .
We believe that our efforts of the last few months and the debates at all Council meetings during the Finnish and German presidencies have been a first step towards ensuring that the European Union will be able to deal with these tragedies more effectively and convincingly in future for the sake of the people concerned .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Altmeier , has said a great deal and I agree with the position he has taken .
I shall certainly emphasise one essentially political aspect of it , which is the requirement to tackle the immigration issue by combining the need to stop the traffic in human beings and any kind of illegal activity with the absolute need for solidarity , and solidarity means first and foremost saving human lives in danger .
When we are faced with the risk of losing even a single human life , as has quite rightly been mentioned and as we emphasise in our joint statement , strictly legal questions concerning the implementation of international conventions on maritime law - which also needs to be done rigorously and thoroughly - take second place .
Human lives in danger need to be saved first .
Of course , solidarity is not just that .
Solidarity lies at the basis of the global approach that the Commission is taking , in the wake of the unanimous support given by the European Council last December and in strict collaboration with the German Presidency of the European Union in this first half of the year .
First and foremost , there must be solidarity among the EU Member States , which means that every State in the Union , even those that are convinced that they are less affected by the daily immigration tragedy , must understand that the problem is also theirs and concerns the whole EU , with no exceptions .
It would seem to be an obvious decision , then , to provide patrols in the Atlantic Ocean to support Spain , which would otherwise have to face the enormous flow of migrants to the Canary Islands all alone , or a patrol in the Mediterranean to meet the demands of countries like Malta or Cyprus , the smallest Mediterranean members of the EU , not to mention the larger ones .
All the Member States must play their part in the patrols , and I shall very amicably tell all the ministers next week that not enough has yet been done or is being done , after the commitment to make equipment available .
That is the first aspect of solidarity among the Member States .
Then there is a financial aspect to solidarity .
The sums needed to introduce the patrols and to offer people in difficulty protection and a decent reception need to be shared .
In that respect , ladies and gentlemen , I am forced to appeal to you as well , with my usual sincerity .
This Parliament is still holding in reserve EUR 12.7 million that is vitally needed right now , not in a week 's time , if the Frontex missions are to continue .
I respect this Parliament 's decisions , but I must say quite frankly that if the reserve , which is due to be examined on about 24-25 June , is only released at the end of this month , we run the risk of having to stop the Frontex missions in the central Mediterranean and the Canaries owing to lack of funds .
Immediate steps are needed to release the funds , which are available but have been put on one side .
There is another matter that has to do with solidarity : our commitment to the other countries involved .
We have promised to work more closely with the countries of origin and of transit .
We have said very clearly that we want them to contribute effectively and that we are ready to help the countries of origin through a system of legal , regular and monitored immigration .
We put forward a clear proposal on this subject two weeks ago .
At the same time we are asking for support from the countries of origin and of transit to prevent human trafficking and to explain very clearly to all those who want to set off across the Atlantic or Mediterranean that they will be embarking on a journey not to riches but into serious danger .
What is needed before anything else , therefore , is political cooperation , not police cooperation , so as to create the conditions for providing even clearer information on this issue in the countries of origin , information that is currently lacking .
Conversely , Europe is ready to welcome people who want to work honestly and within the law .
As we all know , such people are needed in many Member States where there is a shortage of labour .
That is another aspect of solidarity .
Then there is an important form of solidarity in receiving immigrants , including illegal ones .
It is my conviction that every Member State has a duty to do all it can to save human lives at sea , but it is also necessary for the other Member States to realise that we cannot leave Malta , for example , to bear the whole burden of receiving all the immigrants saved in the middle of the Mediterranean by Maltese vessels .
The situation requires solidarity and also a politically based outline agreement to determine where we can receive the immigrants that arrive in the most exposed countries .
This is another face of solidarity : offering to receive immigrants in a broader range of Member States , and not just in those that are in the front line .
That is another point on which we have to find an agreement in principle , which sadly has not yet been found .
I think we will have to address a further issue at the Council of Ministers next week : who is responsible for patrolling the search and rescue regions on the high seas that come under third-country responsibility ?
The case of Libya has been mentioned .
According to international conventions , every country has a region of the open sea where it is responsible for search and rescue on the high seas .
What happens if a non-EU country like Libya does not carry out its search and rescue duty at sea ?
What can we Europeans do to intervene in that region ?
Who should take responsibility ?
These are rules that need to be established and do not yet exist .
The problem concerns the implementation of international conventions , not of European laws .
The time has come , however , to address this subject within the EU , and I think it will be a good idea to start debating this as well at the Council of Ministers next week .
Finally , where does the responsibility lie and what kind of solidarity is needed for the initial reception of immigrants when they first arrive and have to be received in conditions commensurate with human dignity , which are inalienable and non-negotiable ?
Who should take the responsibility and how should we share out the tasks among the Member States ?
Again , can we expect a small country in the middle of the Mediterranean to do it all alone ?
That would not be an example of solidarity among the Member States , so that is another aspect with which we should be concerned .
The European Union can do a great deal in that respect : it can help to fund and organise repatriation operations in the countries of origin in compliance with the rules that guarantee the absolute dignity of everyone being repatriated .
Of course , all immigrants , even illegal ones , have every right to respect for their human dignity , but we cannot impose our views if there are any Member States that refuse to play their part .
That is the solidarity to which I am referring , and those are the guiding principles to ensure that the tragedy that occurred a few days ago - it is not a question of accusing or blaming anyone for it , but of learning a tragic lesson - can never happen again .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( MT ) Mr President the worst thing we could do would be to point the finger at one another instead of working together to find a solution to this serious problem , a problem that , as has been said , does not simply pertain to one country , but to all countries .
To point a finger at Malta in connection with the incidents that occurred in Libyan waters and therefore not under Malta 's responsibility is wrong and unfair .
Malta is well aware of its obligations and is honouring them while maintaining full respect for human life .
So much so that the majority of immigrants who arrive in Malta every year and who are picked up from the sea are saved from death 's door .
However , the burden Malta has to carry is already disproportionate .
To cite an example , Mr Altmaier : the maritime area that Malta is responsible for monitoring is about two thirds the size of Germany or almost three quarters the size of Italy .
We are responsible for the whole of that area .
Until now Malta has patrolled this area single-handedly because Frontex has not even begun its rounds as yet .
Commissioner , this Parliament is so eager to get Frontex 's operations started that it has doubled the Frontex budget .
However , up till now Frontex has proved to be completely ineffective in the Mediterranean .
Therefore , the fact that Malta has to shoulder the blame for incidents that take place in Libyan waters is unjust and unfair .
Instead of accusing one another , we must work together to come up with a solution .
Indeed , the solution , if we want it , is a clear one .
Seeing as this is not the problem of solely one country , the burden constituted by the immigrants rescued from Maltese waters ought to be distributed between everyone : - yes , between the 27 Member States of the European Union .
This is perfectly clear .
What is not clear , Mr President , is whether national governments are willing to shoulder this responsibility and share out the burden .
Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is absolutely intolerable that , every summer , we witness human tragedies on the borders of Europe .
In spite of our indignation , every year these tragedies are repeated .
How can the European Union leave these people alone faced with their despair at the gates of Europe ?
The Commission must ask for commitments from Member States at the next Justice and Home Affairs ( JAI ) Council : we must ensure that no events of this kind can ever happen again .
It is intolerable that we should be debating the responsibilities of individuals while there were people in danger at sea and they were not rescued .
Malta bears a large part of the responsibility , that is sure .
Giving assistance to people in distress is a duty and not a choice , but they were left to die .
I believe , however , that we are all responsible for this tragedy .
I received messages from many Maltese who are people who care and who are distressed at seeing immigrants treated in this fashion and their country in this situation .
At the same time , however , they are aware that their little country has been abandoned .
I should like to say here that these events demonstrate the lack of European solidarity in relation to the management of borders and the reception of emigrants .
It is intolerable that the burden should rest essentially with the countries of the South and East of Europe .
Europe must show its solidarity and take action so that costs and responsibilities are shared by all Member States .
That is why I call on Member States to grant more resources to Frontex so that maritime missions can begin before the end of June and be broadly developed , particularly in the Mediterranean .
I was satisfied to learn that the evaluation of the Dublin II regulation is to be presented to us in the days to come .
That is what we have been told recently .
We have been asking for it for several months , even though now it is no longer an evaluation that is needed but a swift revision .
The Dublin II regulation is obviously not appropriate , especially for a small country like Malta .
Finally , we ask the Commission where the discussions with Libya have got to concerning immigration .
Recent events have shown Libya 's inability to give help to migrants and people in distress .
We have already said it and we repeat : the European Union must not shrug off its responsibilities and pass them on to a country that does not apply appropriate standards in relation to the protection of fundamental rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , illegal immigration should be addressed as a matter of urgency , because that is what it has been for a while .
The first hesitant steps have been taken .
This does not alter the fact , though , that in 2007 , there is still much interference on the line where the issue is concerned of who is responsible for rescuing people from drowning , whether they are legal or illegal .
Staggeringly , it appears that not everybody takes the moral and lawful duty equally seriously .
Of course , as Mrs Roure pointed out a moment ago , Malta has a difficult job where the large influx of illegals is concerned .
This is beyond dispute .
We should therefore get this so wished for and much-discussed solidarity underway as quickly as possible .
It also strikes me that the swift introduction of a burden sharing-mechanism is called for .
This reality , though , does not in any way justify the way in which Malta thinks it should handle its moral and lawful duty .
After all , we are talking about an EU Member State , which means that we as a Union are responsible .
While Malta and Libya cannot agree on the precise location of 27 people drowning , they hang on to fishing nets for three days .
This is not an isolated incident , unfortunately .
Absurd .
We all know that Libya is not exactly renowned for being the paradise of human rights or humane opinions , far from it .
The fact that the Union is at risk of adopting the same view on these drowning people is an outright scandal .
Yesterday in my discussion dossier for the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I came across a study on illegal immigrants at sea , the actions proposed in which should be implemented as a matter of priority .
Commissioner Frattini will need to join forces with Commissioner Barrot in this .
Money alone is not enough .
You know very well that it is precisely the Council that has the key where the conditions regarding the return of illegal immigrants are concerned .
Let it at the same time and above all be clear that nobody , yes nobody , should hide behind so-called legal loopholes in international maritime law , for example .
Where there is a political will , there is definitely a way .
I should like to finish off with a comment to the Council . Presidents of the Council , you can include Berlin declarations , in which European values are central , until the cows come home .
If nothing at all is done in practice , however , then reality gives us a totally different picture and you as President of the Council are putting the EU 's credibility in the balance .
Translate the fine words you so like to proclaim , and which you did a moment ago , into action .
I would urge you to fulfil the ambitions you enshrined in the Tampere and The Hague programmes , among others .
Deliver on your promises .
With all due respect , a debate next week is fantastic , but is really not good enough .
The issues are not new .
Action is what is called for right now .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I think many of the recent incidents and the shocking pictures that we have seen of a small boat towing people in its net , are the result - as we have been hearing - of a catalogue of failures , many of them absolutely avoidable with a bit of forward planning .
We assume that the next Justice and Home Affairs Council will be doing some of that .
It would have been avoidable if Member States had delivered on their promises regarding logistical and other support for Frontex and other measures promised in the wake of the experience in the Canaries , Lampedusa , Malta , Cyprus , etc .
It would have been avoidable , as Commissioner Frattini said , if Member States had prepared a plan B for when Libya fails to carry out its obligations .
Indeed , it appears that Libya has not clearly defined its maritime rescue area , so why are we negotiating in an emergency when we know there is already disagreement and we could have planned ahead ?
I agree with Mrs Roure : we need to beware of the agreements we negotiate with a country which has such a poor record on human rights .
That covers many of the transit and origin countries too .
Such agreements have to be in the public domain , whether multilateral or bilateral , and this Parliament has yet to receive documents promised by the Italian authorities after our visit to Lampedusa .
My group believes we need an asylum agency to organise expert teams to help countries under stress assess claims .
With reference to Dublin II , we are also aware that the fear of consequences makes some states reluctant to act and assume responsibility because they feel they are on their own .
But there is also an issue about the reception and procedures directives and the quality of their implementation .
The EU must again provide support to ensure a quality procedure : another task for an asylum agency .
But we also have to provide back-up in other countries to deal with the processing of arrivals .
We also need to be clear that we do not penalise those who carry out rescues , so we have no more Cap Anamur-style prosecutions .
We are told that the law of the sea is clear : people in distress should be rescued regardless of their status .
I am absolutely certain that , had those people pictured in our media been cruise-line passengers , they would have been picked up far more quickly than was the case .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Frattini was right to talk about solidarity , but for us the first solidarity that we should show is to the families of the people drowned in the Mediterranean , solidarity to explain to ourselves as well that we should stop calling them illegal immigrants but should probably refer to them as shipwrecked people .
That is in fact what they are : people - men and women - who drowned in the Mediterranean while trying to reach Europe and who were not even given a chance of being saved or rescued at sea , but were actually left for three days clinging to a tuna net .
It has to be said quite plainly : someone has to take serious responsibility for that !
Mr Frattini said so clearly in an interview to an Italian newspaper , when he mentioned the serious responsibility of the Maltese Government .
That needs to be repeated here in this Chamber , as well as the fact that they did not even have the decency to bury those people ; even the idea of taking them in after death was rejected .
Therefore we ought seriously to consider the fact that , although Frontex may have a specific task to perform , its priority must be to rescue people at sea .
That is something we said a short while ago when we were debating the Rapid Border Intervention Teams .
This , sadly , was by no means the first tragedy ; over the last ten years more than 9 000 human beings have drowned while trying to reach Europe , but this was the worst tragedy in the last ten years .
We should also carefully consider the need to expand the legal channels for people to enter legally and also the possibility of reviewing the Dublin II regulation in order to prevent what has been happening .
Look , in my view something serious is taking place : we are losing sight of the guiding principles of Western civilisation , which is based on hospitality and the right to burial .
As the great tragic playwrights of ancient Greece taught us , we ought to start afresh from that point , not least so that we can develop a new idea of reception and hospitality for Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Gloser , Commissioner , it is important to recall today the pictures we have all seen in the newspapers and on television .
A boat would be spotted from the air , and by the time the local rescue operation was launched , the boat was no longer there , and 53 to 57 people had drowned .
We are talking today about other cases too , in which almost everyone found on these boats was dead . We are talking about children , about babies , about many unknown people - in short , about an appalling tragedy which must surely horrify us .
Allow me , therefore , to say first of all on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats that this issue goes right to the heart of Europe .
It is about fundamental rights , about the very foundation stone of our values , namely the right to life .
Today 's debate is not about the immigration argument , about whom we let into Europe and whom we exclude , but about quintessentially humanitarian matters .
I must therefore stress that values do not stop at borders ; we Europeans believe that values are indivisible , and we must apply them .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise that , as many of my honourable colleagues have said , there is now a pressing need for European solidarity .
Leaving a tiny country like Malta and other countries along our southern rim to their own devices and then pointing an accusing finger at them is not the way to act .
No , this is a European issue .
I find it a great pity that this tragedy has had little media impact in central and northern Europe and that people in those parts have shown no interest in it .
Action is needed now .
For that reason , Commissioner , I gladly embrace , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , the idea that we should discuss a spending freeze if funds are needed for this purpose .
I ask the Council through you , Peter , not only to adopt decisions but to take long-overdue action now .
Decisions will not save people 's lives ; only practical measures can save lives .
That is why I am calling quite specifically for this humanitarian disaster to be one of the main items on the agenda at next week 's meeting of the Council .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have once again had pictures shown in our homes of desperate situations and deaths of emigrants .
These pictures once again show the most dramatic and visible face of illegal immigration .
They once again illustrate a repeated humanitarian emergency that requires an immediate and vigorous response .
This situation will not come to an end on its own .
More than 9 000 people have already died trying to cross the Mediterranean and , with the arrival of the good weather , this figure will continue to grow .
Last week , the authorities of a Member State failed to comply with their fundamental international obligations with regard to the rescue and reception of shipwrecked people .
Well , it is not sufficient to condemn that State for its unacceptable attitude and ask it to take on its responsibilities in order to ensure that that situation does not arise again .
Nor can we delegate the fight against illegal immigration to captains of fishing vessels .
We are not talking about a Maltese problem .
It is a European problem that requires a generalised response based on solidarity amongst all of us .
I shall insist : all of the Member States , shared responsibility , transparency and mutual trust .
For all of these reasons , I would like to call upon the Council , the Commission and this House immediately to adopt specific measures to put an end to this unacceptable situation .
Frontex must cease to be a mirage and it must be provided with the resources necessary for joint monitoring patrols to operate permanently throughout the year in the high-risk areas .
Ladies and gentlemen , we Europeans cannot carry on debating and squabbling amongst ourselves while immigrants are still drowning .
Let us act now .
( ES ) I would like to begin by congratulating the Commissioner on taking on her responsibility in relation to this issue .
I hope that they are not just words , though it is of course good to begin with words .
It is absolutely intolerable that we should leave a group of human beings to die while the governments and bureaucracies of various Members States argue about who is obliged to rescue these shipwrecked people who are dying from starvation , from drowning , from exposure to the sun ...
Malta has its obligations and its attitude has been intolerable and deserves to be condemned .
The Union , however , must of course be in a position to support Malta today , Spain , in the Canary Islands , yesterday , and wherever else tomorrow , when it comes to saving the lives of people who wish to enter the European Union .
The summer is beginning and , with it , we are once again seeing the human flow of people who wish to live out their dreams in London or Hamburg , but who are destined to die on the beaches of the south .
That is the message that we must send .
We are currently in the midst of a debate on the future of Europe , on what we want and what we can do together .
Well , it is in fields such as this that the European Union can find its legitimacy .
I am not just talking about credibility . I am talking about legitimacy .
The European Union can also lose its legitimacy in this area , however .
What kind of Union do we have amongst us that can organise and regulate all sorts of things - some of which many of our citizens consider to be absurd , and even idiotic - but which is incapable of organising things in such a way that people who are trying to reach our borders do not die , that people trying to reach our castles are not doomed to die at the castle gates ?
Mr Vice-President , you have an historic challenge , a political and historic challenge .
You have the responsibility to promote solidarity , but if solidarity does not emerge , you have the responsibility to impose it .
You have the power to do so .
If solidarity does not emerge , you will have to impose it . Impose it politically , shaming those States that do not take on their responsibilities , and impose it by force by means of legislative proposals so that everybody assumes their responsibility towards the present and the past , with so many deaths attributable to governments that do not play their part .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , every day more would-be illegal immigrants try to reach the European continent , and every day we experience intolerable situations and intolerable tragedies in southern Europe .
The European Union has created Frontex .
The European Parliament was prepared to double the annual budget for border surveillance .
Frontex now has a budget of 35 million euros .
Nevertheless , more illegal immigrants are entering the European Union daily .
The plain and simple fact is that border surveillance is not working .
The assistance to Member States and the coordination that Frontex is supposed to provide are not working .
If the coordination is defective , the work of Frontex invites criticism .
If , however , the Member States do not deliver the manpower and equipment they promised to provide , it is they who must be held to account and made to honour their obligations .
In no circumstances should we put the entire onus on the countries of southern Europe .
In this context I have a question to put to our Commissioner .
In a press release on 24 May , the Commission reported that the number of aircraft , ships and other items of equipment made available to date had been satisfactory .
Today , in another report from the Commission , we learn that it is criticising the Member States , which have delivered only a tenth of the promised aircraft , ships and helicopters .
So which version is correct ?
Can you please put the record straight , Commissioner ?
If the Frontex agency has been set up by us and is so well funded , it must perform .
If that is not the case , let us please abolish it and explore other avenues .
One way or the other - and I appeal here to everyone in a position of responsibility - the European Union , as well as monitoring our own borders , must provide assistance for the establishment of a functioning system of border surveillance in the transit countries - that is a form of local assistance which will help us in turn - as well as granting stabilisation aid and conducting local information campaigns in the countries of origin .
It is certainly high time we took action instead of continuing to discuss an intolerable situation .


( IT ) Mr President , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , I endorse what Mr Frattini has said here today and in the interviews he has given in recent days , but someone who does not endorse them at all is the Maltese Minister for Foreign Affairs .
In a statement this afternoon he explained that Malta cannot take charge of illegal immigrants who legally do not come under its jurisdiction .
Twenty-one people who drowned are not a legal matter , and somebody at the forthcoming meeting of the Council of Ministers , either the Presidency or the Commission , needs to explain to the Maltese Government the difference between illegal immigrants and shipwreck victims .
Somebody needs to remind the Maltese Foreign Minister that a fishing boat flying the Maltese flag decided to leave 27 people clinging to a tuna fishing line because they thought it was more important to save the tuna they had caught than human lives .
Somebody needs to explain to the Maltese Minister and all the rest of our ministers that humanitarian law has nothing to do with legal obligations or the conventions signed by our countries .
Since I believe that it is important to put words into deeds , I agree with you , Mr Frattini , that the Frontex funds need to be released and that all countries need to take this requirement on board but , at the same time , allowing Frontex or the European repatriation fund to receive these funds must be made conditional on fulfilling their duty to assist anyone in distress at sea , in whatever circumstances and no matter what the legal status of the shipwreck .
That is one of the working hypotheses that can be used to tackle this problem over the next few days with the other ministers .
( MT ) Mr President , it is a disgrace that , once again , so many people had to lose their lives before the European Union 's lack of concrete action on immigration was exposed .
Although I believe that all the Member States must shoulder their burden of responsibility , especially when it comes to life or death situations , the Commission and , especially , the Council must also share part of the responsibility .
In my opinion , the Commission and the Council are not treating the situation with the urgency it deserves or giving it the commitment it merits .
Looking back at what has been done during these past four years , it is easy to see that , if you eliminate the meaningless buzzwords of ' solidarity ' and ' mobilisation ' , few measures have actually been taken to address this alarming situation .
We expect immediate action to be taken on the burden-sharing principle , on the revision of Dublin 2 and on logistical and administrative assistance in order to effectively coordinate the joint patrols , which up till now have been practically ghost-like and which were promised to us long ago by Frontex .
Until now , it seems that Frontex has simply been an agency that has been too stunned to take action , due to the enormity of the crisis facing it .
Yet , no country can go on trying to cope with this tragedy alone , especially one as small as Malta and one that is already carrying a far greater load than it can bear .
At this stage the priority should be the actual crisis and not identifying those who are to blame .
We have to carry out an emergency Marshall-type plan before we find ourselves obliged to repeat the same speeches again when another tragedy takes place .
We have no time to lose ; too many lives have been lost .
I hope that the definition of solidarity given by Commissioner Frattini will in fact be implemented .
Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with all those who have said that we need action rather than mere words .
And the Council has indeed been taking action in recent months .
The Council ensured that the centralised record of available technical equipment , the Frontex toolbox , was stocked up and that Frontex , at least in principle , has more than 100 ships , aircraft and helicopters at its disposal .
With the support of this Parliament , the Council ensured that the Regulation on the RABITs , the Rapid Border Intervention Teams , could be adopted .
There will be a Frontex operation in the waters around Malta , where we shall try , with the assistance of experts from the Member States and the support of helicopters from the Member States , to put an end to this human tragedy .
I must say , however , that it would have been better if we had been able to launch these operations a few weeks earlier .
That is a responsibility we must all accept collectively .
In the past few months we also agreed , in response to a proposal from the Commission , to implement regional protection programmes in countries of origin and transit .
We took positive action by agreeing on the conclusion of partnership agreements and by discussing incentives for legal immigration and circular migration .
We are engaged in negotiations on the subject of readmission agreements with countries in Africa and elsewhere .
All of these things are taking us in the right direction .
It is nevertheless true that many of these measures have come too late and that it would have been better for the people concerned if more rapid and efficient action had been taken .
( NL ) Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , I think this is also attributable to the lack of efficiency in the Council 's decision-making procedure .
It is unfortunate that the European Constitution has not yet entered into force , because the European Constitution and the reforms it provides for would enable us to take the necessary decisions much more swiftly and much more efficiently .
In the coming days and weeks we shall have to ensure that we live up to our humanitarian responsibility for the people in distress .
We shall also have to ensure that we do not leave Malta in the lurch .
Malta is a small country with a great responsibility in the area in question .
For this reason Malta is entitled to the solidarity of the European Union .
Thirdly , we shall have to ensure that none of the action we take creates new pull factors that lead to more and more people trying to make their way to Europe , because we shall otherwise run the risk of multiplying rather than alleviating the human misery .
This is why I firmly believe that the Council will summon up the strength to send out a clear signal at its meeting next week .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I endorse what Mr Altmaier has said .
Next week the Council of Ministers will certainly address this issue candidly in a truly political debate .
I shall not , therefore , repeat the references to the many positive measures that have already been taken .
All of you will remember that just two years ago there was not a single document on joint European action on immigration ; today we are talking about how to apply the documents and principles that have emerged from a political consensus that used not to exist but now does .
Steps forward have been made , but not everything has been done as quickly as it should have been .
As somebody mentioned , we have had a major increase in funding for Frontex : EUR 35 million for 2007 .
However , EUR 13 million of that has been withheld and therefore cannot be used , and the corresponding spending cannot be undertaken .
I am grateful for what has been said about Parliament 's commitment to getting this sum released to Frontex straight away .
The toolbox made available to Frontex has been sufficient .
I said the same thing a few weeks ago , after reading the commitment statements by the Ministers for Internal Affairs of at least 19 European countries .
What I said then , at the end of May , was that for this summer we have over 100 boats , over 100 patrol vessels , 25 helicopters and 20 aeroplanes .
What I have said today , however , is also true : since the formal commitment was adopted until now , we have only received one tenth of the equipment promised .
I shall tell the Ministers and their colleagues in the Council quite amicably that what they committed themselves to providing needs to be made available straight away .
Had we had not five but 50 patrol vessels , perhaps a vessel might have arrived sooner to save those people from drowning .
An Italian vessel could have intervened , and then a French one to recover the bodies of the victims and take them to France .
Perhaps if we had had a greater presence we could have dealt with it sooner .
That , you have to admit , would be solidarity in practice .
We also have to remember that in the areas where Frontex has operated - I mean in the Canary Islands last year , for example - it has had a positive effect overall .
I cannot forget that the Spanish Minister for Internal Affairs stated at the end of autumn last year that migration to the Canaries had fallen by about 30 % , thanks to Frontex patrols in collaboration with a third country , in this case Senegal .
When the operations work , the results are obvious .
As regards the central Mediterranean , Libya had a visit from us a few days ago .
A Frontex mission went to Libya to explore the possibility of providing aid to Libya to control its southern desert border with Niger .
We told Libya quite clearly that we expect it to carry out more controls and above all to observe its territorial search and rescue region on the high seas , which Libya is bound to observe , like any other country .
The mission will be called Nautilus II and will be sent to the central Mediterranean ; it will depart as planned within a few days , and of course I hope as many Member States as possible will take part in it , not just the Mediterranean countries .
The German Government has indicated that it will take part in the central Mediterranean mission , even though it is not a Mediterranean State , and then there will be some Mediterranean States too .
I would like to see my country , Italy , take part for example , although so far it has not given any indication that it wants to take part in this mission , which is going to operate precisely in the area between Sicily , Malta and Libya .
This is a concrete example of the appeal for solidarity that I shall , of course , make to the Ministers , but I am also appealing to you .
The final topic is the Dublin regulation , which was mentioned by Mrs Roure , among others .
The report was published today and has been adopted by the Commission .
It shows how well the Dublin regulation mechanism has worked .
The regulation has worked properly , but the Commission suggests certain additions .
It suggests considering whether the principle whereby only the country of initial destination is required to receive immigrants can be the only fair solution or whether a better way of sharing the burden could be incorporated .
That is also the subject of a proposal adopted today by the Commission , a Green Paper on asylum policy from now to 2010 , as this Parliament requested .
The proposals are there , and I am still expecting a gesture of solidarity .
Clearly , if a large majority of the Member States says that the system is working well as it is , that means that the country of first destination will still have to bear the whole burden , and that is not solidarity .
That is another example of how even the Dublin regulation needs to be interpreted correctly , not to point the finger at anyone , but to ensure that everyone works together .
The debate is closed .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) How many corpses will we have to fish out of the Mediterranean Sea before effective solutions are put in place ?
Let us stop pointing the finger at small countries like Malta that can no longer manage the constant flood of immigrants who are washed up daily on their beaches .
This is not the way to fight illegal immigration .
There is no barbed wire , no barrier that will stop these men and women , who are prepared to do anything to provide life 's essentials for their families , from crossing the seas .
In September 2006 , Parliament launched an appeal to Member States and to the Commission in a resolution adopted by all the political groups .
We were insisting on the need for strengthening partnerships and dialogues with the countries of origin .
We also asked for revision of the Dublin II regulation which puts too heavy a burden on the countries in the South and East of the Union .
It is of the utmost urgency to establish a fair mechanism for solidarity and for sharing responsibilities between all the Member States .
What is more , we have to recognise the lack of results from Frontex .
Genuine political willingness is fundamental if Member States are to give adequate resources to this agency to enable it to function effectively in the future .
Prüm Treaty : cross-border cooperation in combating terrorism and cross-border crime - Visa Information System ( VIS ) - Consultation of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) - Protection of personal data ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Fausto Correira , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative by the Kingdom of Belgium , the Republic of Bulgaria , the Federal Republic of Germany , the Kingdom of Spain , the French Republic , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , the Kingdom of the Netherlands , the Republic of Austria , the Republic of Slovenia , the Slovak Republic , the Italian Republic , the Republic of Finland , the Portuguese Republic , Romania and the Kingdom of Sweden on the stepping up of cross-border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime ( Prüm Treaty ) [ 06566 / 2007 - C6-0079 / 2007 -
the two reports by Sarah Ludford , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , one on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the Visa Information System ( VIS ) and the exchange of data between Member States on short stay-visas - C6-0004 / 2005 - and the other on the proposal for a Council decision concerning access for consultation of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) by the authorities of Member States responsible for internal security and by Europol for the purposes of the prevention , detection and investigation of terrorist offences and of other serious criminal offences C6-0053 / 2006
the report by Martine Roure , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Framework Decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ( renewed consultation ) [ 07315 / 2007 C6-0115 / 2007 .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing today with three matters that mark very significant progress in cross-border police cooperation in the realm of European home-affairs policy .
The first of these matters is the Prüm Convention , an international agreement that was originally concluded by a small number of Member States - there were initially seven , but a further ten states have subsequently acceded to it .
The Convention paved the way for Europe 's first network of national DNA and fingerprint databases and vehicle registers .
In this way we laid the foundations for a modern information exchange for police forces in Europe while applying high standards of data protection .
This Convention that was concluded by some of the Member States is now to become an EU-wide instrument .
It is to be incorporated into the legislative framework of the European Union , and its core provisions will apply in all 27 Member States .
We are thereby contributing to the security of the people of Europe , because DNA-matching among a small number of countries has already resulted in the identification of criminals and in convictions for serious crimes .
We are also helping to enhance the capacity of the European Union to act , for it is only right that this Convention should no longer be treated as an instrument of international law but as part of our common European legal framework .
I should like to thank all Member States , as well as the European Commission and the Members of the European Parliament , for having helped to clear the way for the replacement of the Convention in spite of a very tight time frame .
In converting the Convention into a Council Decision and in implementing that Decision , we shall also take due account of the opinions of the European Parliament .
We shall decide next week on the visa-information system on which we reached political agreement with the European Parliament back in May .
Now that an agreement has been reached in Coreper , there is a good chance that the Council will confirm the decision on access next week .
A formal agreement will then be concluded once the wording has been checked by the lawyer-linguists .
The visa-information system is a particularly important means of consolidating the area of freedom , security and justice .
It will mean that alphanumerical and biometric data can be stored and retrieved during visa procedures .
This will help to ensure that we are able to combat multiple visa applications , identity frauds and other forms of deception more effectively than hitherto .
The decision on access to the VIS will also enable security authorities to search the VIS for the purpose of preventing , discovering and investigating terrorist crimes and other serious offences .
These new research facilities for the security authorities will be a vital step forward in efforts to protect the public , especially from terrorism and organised crime .
Let me stress that the agreement we reached with the European Parliament is a very balanced and sound agreement which reconciles the diverse arguments that have been advanced .
If we manage to improve police cooperation in Europe as these two measures are designed to do , thereby creating more security for our citizens , we must also ensure that data protection is given a high profile in the European Union and that the abuse of data transmitted between Member States is prevented and effectively combated .
For this reason I am delighted that major progress has been achieved in recent weeks on the assignment of the framework decision on data protection to the third pillar , that we were able , with the agreement of the rapporteur of the European Parliament , to deal with a new draft in two readings within the Council working group and that we have sharply reduced the number of the reservations which have been a barrier to rapid progress in the past .
This new revised draft guarantees a high level of protection .
The protection level prescribed by Council of Europe Convention No 108 of 1981 and by the additional protocol of 2001 will be fully guaranteed .
On the issues of the scope of the decision and the rules relating to non-EU countries , we shall also find sound solutions .
The European Parliament has made a very important contribution in this respect , and I should like to thank you most sincerely again on behalf of the Presidency for your extraordinarily rapid treatment of the revised draft .
Particularly with regard to the adequacy of the protection afforded by states outside the Union and the inclusion of a provision on the forwarding of data to non-public bodies , we are on the way to finding effective solutions .
I also believe that the evaluation clause proposed by the European Parliament with regard to the scope of the decision is a thoroughly constructive solution , and we shall use the remaining term of the German presidency to achieve further progress .
With his fifteen principles for data protection , Commissioner Frattini helped to ensure that we were able to frame the key provisions in this area .
At the Council meeting we shall propose a Council statement and press for due adherence to these principles in subsequent deliberations .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not have much to add after the considerations put forward by Mr Altmaier on behalf of the Council .
Concerning the first of the topics being debated , we have from the outset supported the German Presidency 's initiative to transfer most of the third-pillar provisions of the Prüm Treaty into European legislation .
That will facilitate and strengthen cross-border cooperation among police authorities and will certainly facilitate one factor that is absolutely essential if we want to enhance security in the European area , and that is the exchange of information needed to prevent and suppress crime .
This exercise is of course also based on the fact that the provisions of the treaty have been shown to be useful where they have already been applied .
We have had the opportunity to read an interesting report supplied by the Presidency on how application of the Prüm Treaty between Germany and Austria has produced some positive and surprising results .
It has led to the detection of serious criminal acts precisely because certain provisions of this treaty have been used .
There is an important aspect to this : the application of the principle of availability - that is , the exchange of information , which promotes a flow of information - has to be accompanied by adequate protection of personal data .
In the event of improper use , there need to be clear rules on prevention that can stop all that happening once and for all .
In my view , it is vital that the Council 's decision , already given by the Presidency , is confirmed , and I strongly hope it will be .
I am confident that it can be adopted in Luxembourg next week .
It contains a clear reference to personal data protection , because unfortunately we do not yet have a framework decision on data protection in this area .
This Council decision transferring the articles of the Prüm Treaty into the European acquis therefore clearly has to deal with data protection , as a precondition for making the exchange of information compatible .
A final aspect of the decision concerns periodical assessment .
This will be an important assessment of both operational effectiveness - in other words , how this series of measures will work - and the operation of the safeguard clauses .
The assessment will also be useful for Parliament , which will of course receive a copy of it .
On the Visa Information System , I have to congratulate the rapporteur , Baroness Ludford , and the Presidency , and also commend them on their joint efforts to reach a good agreement .
A good agreement may in any case be useful to ensure that both the security requirements demanded by many governments and the demands for personal data protection are met .
These are non-negotiable rights for the European Union .
In our consulates and at our border posts we will have better instruments that will work more effectively and will be made available to honest travellers , while they will also enable the police to detect serious infringements of the law .
Data protection rules have been firmly incorporated into the VIS .
These rules , including those on fingerprints , were absolutely crucial .
Thanks to this agreement the Commission can now develop the technical application that will be needed , because , as you know , our aim is to have the VIS up and running by the spring of 2009 as planned .
There is a specific requirement regarding the operational management of the system , which is that the operational management should be entrusted to a technical body , after an impact assessment has been carried out .
This technical body may be proposed operationally within the first two years of operation of the VIS , either because of the economic implications that are yet to be assessed or because of the technical impact assessment that is to be performed .
I can give you my personal assessment now : if there is going to be an operational management body , it should not be limited just to the VIS , but there should be a single operational body managing both SIS II and VIS together , so as to make the best use of the resources and its capacity for work .
The third topic is the framework decision on data protection .
Here again I must thank Mrs Roure for her report , which gives the Council some encouragement .
I put forward the proposal way back in 2005 ; since then I have appealed to the ministers in Council on several occasions ; and today we are getting close to a joint solution .
On one aspect , I shall repeat my views , which are well known : I would have liked these data protection rules , which are under the third pillar , to apply to the Member States ' internal legal systems and not just to cross-border exchanges of data and cross-border cooperation .
I therefore agree with Mrs Roure 's proposal that , no more than three years after the framework decision is adopted , we should re-examine the purpose and scope of these rules and therefore perhaps also the possibility of extending them to the countries ' internal legal systems .
Three years is a long enough time .
Mrs Roure mentions an assessment , precisely the one that we are talking about , in order to harmonise the rules on data protection even more .
One thing does not rule out the other : both can be done if we use the report which , three years after the system enters into force , should say whether the mechanism is working , where it can be improved and where further harmonisation is possible .
We all ought to agree on one thing , which is the need to rule out any use of the data for purposes not specified in advance ; in other words , personal data may be used for police and security purposes only if the categories of purposes for which the security authorities may use them have been set out first .
That is a key principle , on which we should stand firm .
A debate has yet to be held on the data protection supervisory authorities .
Some very careful consideration will certainly be necessary , because the current authorities and the future European authority will have very different attributes , and so more thorough deliberation is probably needed .
I have put forward an idea of 15 basic principles to help facilitate agreement .
I am very pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council considers the exercise of examining the 15 basic principles that I have proposed to be useful .
To conclude , we can make up for lost time , but on this topic we are a long way behind .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Frattini , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , if I may , to make a few brief personal observations on the Prüm Initiative , which Parliament is debating and scrutinising today and tomorrow , and on which I was rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The Council 's proposal , presented by Parliament three months ago in almost forensic detail , was debated and analysed with bewildering speed by the committee .
To this end - with the constant and total commitment , skill and dedication of the Committee 's secretariat - the idea of a public hearing was proposed , involving all public and private actors , in order to gain a suitable understanding of their concerns .
This is a process that seeks to strike the right balance between the demands of effective police cooperation and the defence and promotion of fundamental rights .
This exercise in reflection is extremely important given the nature of this proposal , which establishes mechanisms facilitating action on criminal matters and criminal investigations , but which is potentially damaging to the citizens ' rights and freedoms , an aspect that cannot and must not be overlooked .
As rapporteur dealing with an initiative of such importance and visibility , my main concerns were , accordingly , to strike a balance between , on the one hand , the demands of effective policing in the fight against the main threats to the very foundations of the EU , namely terrorism and crime , and , on the other , the protection of people 's fundamental rights .
Clearly , striking such a balance and transposing it into a text to be accepted by an overwhelming majority of MEPs represented in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , who come from a range of political backgrounds , was no easy task , but was certainly a rewarding one .
I honestly believe that the proposals to be put before this Chamber substantially improve upon the draft submitted by the Council .
I therefore welcome the fact that the amendments we agreed on , which were the result of a broad consensus among the various groups represented in Parliament and of close collaboration between the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs , were adopted almost unanimously by the committee , with just one abstention .
I now hope that they will receive a similarly positive response from this Chamber .
Among the amendments that have been tabled , I should like to highlight the following amendments for their importance to the economy as distinct from what I feel should be subject to a formal framework decision : greater harmonisation of the conditions of access to biometric databases , ensuring that such access is limited to investigations , and , in the case of fingerprint data , to the prevention of serious criminal offences ; clear definition of rules applying to joint operations ; establishment of strict necessity criteria so that the transmission of personal data is legitimate , especially when it comes to the most delicate situations , major events and preventing terrorist attacks ; extending the scope of the chapter on data protection to all forms of processing data , ensuring compliance with all recommendations put forward by the European data protection supervisor ; implementation of a maximum period for keeping personal data ; establishment of specific safeguards prohibiting the processing of sensitive data that may be used for the purpose of ethnic profiling ; strengthening Parliament 's role in following up the proposal for a decision , in particular when implementation and assessment measures are adopted ; and lastly , clarification of the relationship between this proposal for a decision and the proposal for a framework decision on data protection under the third pillar , the latter always being a general regulatory framework in the matter , in any situation .
Lastly , I should like to acknowledge the importance of integrating intervention mechanisms introduced by the Prüm Treaty - undeniably important mechanisms in the fight against terrorism and organised crime - into the EU 's body of law .
I must say , however , that I am worried about how the Council will vote on Parliament 's opinion .
I should like to conclude by saying that the adoption of the framework decision aimed at stepping up cross-border cooperation , in particular in the fight against terrorism and crime , will clearly lack democratic legitimacy if Parliament 's role is either partially or totally ignored .
That would do nothing to enhance the citizens ' trust in the Union when it comes to the process of building the Community ; in fact , it would have quite the opposite effect .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , if you will allow me , I would like to point out that a group of guests have been in the gallery , a group of men and women who are known in my country as ' war children ' .
They were children who , between 1936 and 1939 , fled Spain , the fascist bombardments , who were evacuated and who found solidarity and care in families in Belgium and the United Kingdom .
Today , with all of them over 75 years old , they have come to visit Parliament , to be amongst us , and it is very important and very moving for us to pay tribute to them and , in particular , to pay tribute to the solidarity of the British and Belgian people , who took them in and provided them with the families that they had been denied in their own country .
Baltic Sea cod ( debate )
The next item is the report by Zdzisław Kazimierz Chmielewski , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing a multi-annual plan for the cod stocks in the Baltic Sea and the fisheries exploiting those stocks - C6-0281 / 2006 - .

Mr President , firstly I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Chmielewski , and to both the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for the report .
The objective is to have the proposal agreed at the June Council next week .
During discussions held in the context of the Council preparations , many changes have been introduced to the original proposal , some of which go in the direction of your suggested amendments .
As you are well aware , both cod stocks in the Baltics suffer from over-exploitation , with the eastern cod stock falling so far below safe biological limits that it may be in risk of collapse in the near future .
At the same time , ICES has indicated that misreporting of catches occurs in 35 to 45 % of cases in the eastern Baltic , which not only results in an additional unaccounted fishing impact on the stock but also affects the accuracy of scientific advice .
The current situation not only harms the cod stocks in the Baltic but is also threatening the fishing sector reliant on this resource .
Cod is one of the most important fish stocks for the industry in the Baltic .
It is therefore crucial , not only from an ecological but also from a social and economic perspective , to bring fishing into balance with resource availability as soon as possible , so that fishers can once more count on stable and high catches .
The multiannual plan presented by the Commission has been developed on the basis of past experience with managing cod fisheries in the Baltic and on several consultations held with stakeholders , Member States and scientists .
It aims at rebuilding the stocks not only towards safe biological limits but even beyond , to levels that will provide the highest sustainable catches , thus providing stability in the long term for the fishing sector concerned , by reducing total allowable catches and fishing efforts step-by-step to the levels corresponding to this objective .
Turning now to the report , the recitals of the plan correspond to the measures that are later outlined in the actual provisions .
I can therefore only accept Amendments 1 and 5 , which correspond to the provisions of the plan , such as the request to specify the status of the eastern cod stock in the first recital .
Amendment 4 is acceptable in principle . However , the split into western and eastern parts is determined by scientific evidence that there are two separate cod stocks in the Baltic , and not by the ecological features of the two areas .
The report proposes several amendments to the rules outlining the procedure for reducing total allowable catches and fishing effort to sustainable levels .
Amendments 8 to 11 would result in a mitigation of the reduction process and would limit its application .
In view of the serious situation of the stock and the need to limit all types of fisheries catching significant amounts of cod , I cannot accept these amendments .
I am , however , aware of the need to define a system that the industry can deal with .
The Commission has therefore changed its plan by combining the summer ban and the days absent from port .
This will increase flexibility for the industry , and will thus particularly benefit small-scale fleets , for which a fixed and rigid system is more difficult to work with .
Moreover , an article on the European Fisheries Fund has been included in the plan to ensure financial compensation for the industry .
Changes to the effort system mean that several of the provisions on control and monitoring have also been changed .
The margin of tolerance has been raised to 10 % , except for cod , and the rules on discharging have been deleted , which should correspond to the provisions of Amendments 14 and 16 of the report .
Concerning Amendment 15 , the rules on entry and exit from the area have been changed as well , meaning that the specified requirements apply only where the vessel is leaving the area in which it has been fishing .
As misreporting is presently one of the key problems in the management of the Baltic cod fishery , it is crucial to improve these rules to monitor comprehensively how much is taken from which cod stock , and when .
For similar reasons , I cannot accept Amendment 13 , which limits the requirement for a log book to vessels with a special permit for cod fishing .
The report proposes to reduce the valuation period from three to two years and to introduce a provision on the monitoring of the socio-economic impact of the plan in Amendments 17 to 19 .
New cod recruits enter the fishery at the age of two to three years on average .
If an evaluation began during the second year , it would be very difficult to detect any effects on the stock and , consequently , on the industry .
The Commission is , however , planning a project that will monitor not only the ecological but also the socio-economic impact of the plan as a first step towards the impact assessment to be made in the third year of the application of the plan .
Finally , I turn to the three amendments tabled by Mr Schlyter last week .
They are not acceptable to the Commission for the following reasons . The objective of the basic regulation for the common fisheries policy is to ensure sustainable management in ecological , social and economic terms .
It is therefore the Commission 's responsibility to strive for a balance between these three pillars , albeit based primarily on scientific advice regarding the stocks .
I thus consider a gradual reduction of TACs and fishing efforts until target levels are met , as advised by ICES , to be a good balance in this respect .
ICES also recommended using relative targets such as fishing mortality instead of fixed ones such as biomass , because they are less sensitive towards scientific uncertainty and the environmental variations affecting the stock .
In the current situation whereby a high level of misreporting is interfering with management and scientific advice and in view of the possible upcoming revision of the biomass reference points for the eastern stock , the inclusion of biomass targets is not appropriate .
However , as an expected outcome of the plan is the improvement of the basis of scientific information , the inclusion of biomass reference levels could be considered in the course of the revision of the cod recovery plan , which is envisaged to take place after the plan has been in force for three years .

rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Council regulation which is the subject of this report is a long-awaited important legislative proposal , and constitutes an attempt to deal with the very considerable needs of the fisheries sector in one of the most significant bodies of European water .
This in itself is good reason to congratulate those responsible for the report .
They have tackled the difficult challenge of drafting a long-term programme for the regeneration and catches of Baltic cod .
Cod is a fish that provides many families with their livelihood .
It is the most important fish in the Baltic and therefore generates great interest amongst those involved in fisheries .
Emotions are running high in the Baltic region concerning Parliament 's opinion and subsequent Council rulings .
A report referring to verified data taking scientific forecasts on the development of cod stocks and fishing possibilities as a content-related starting point represented an opportunity for achieving satisfactory compromises in these circumstances .
It was essential for the Committee on Fisheries to intervene with regard to the Council 's legislative proposal because it was necessary for the document to take account of the inevitable socio-economic consequences of the planned catch restrictions .
I am glad the Commissioner mentioned this .
One of the amendments adopted was tabled by the rapporteur and bound the European Commission to monitor these consequences and propose essential management measures to Parliament .
Another amendment adopted involved reducing the restrictions on fishing days laid down in the regulation from 10 % to 8 % and increasing the so-called reporting limit from 100 kg to 300 kg .
I am referring to the Committee on Fisheries .
The Committee on Fisheries also adopted the suggestion made by the Council of Ministers regarding adjustment of the margin of error in fishing log book entries from 8 % to 10 % .
The proposal on increasing the minimum size of cod caught in the Baltic to 40 cm was endorsed too .
It is difficult to avoid the impression that report was strongly influenced by the view that the fishing capacity of the Baltic cod fleet is currently far too large in relation to the available fishing quotas .
There is still no proposal for a systematic resolution of this problem at the level of the Union and the individual Member States .
Stronger and stronger warnings are being voiced urging great caution with regard to automatic decisions on scrapping the fleet .
It would be preferable to seek solutions allowing the fishing capacities defined to be retained until stocks are replenished .
We shall obviously need something to fish with when that time comes .
I believe that sooner or later the issue of the length of the summer bans will become part of the debate on the plan for rebuilding cod stocks .
The Commissioner referred to the bans today .
It should be noted that a tendency to favour so-called days absent from port rather than the bans used to date is gaining strength in those Member States seeking ways to further reduce the fishing effort by introducing additional days when fishing for cod is banned .
The scientific advice accompanying the general discussion on the Council regulation has indicated the need to review the assessment of biological reference points used to date , and I am glad the Commissioner mentioned this today .
It should be added that none of the Baltic countries queries the introduction of fishing mortality as a method of defining the achievable aims of the multiannual plan for rebuilding Baltic cod stocks .
I refer to Article No 4 of the plan .
It does seem essential , however , to launch an in-depth debate on the subject of appropriate values of biomass reference points adjusted to the actual state of the stocks and the current general situation of the Baltic Sea ecosystem .
This will be in line with the Community 's commitment to introducing the ecosystem approach to fisheries management .
I refer to Recital No 5 .
I should emphasise that the biomass limit values currently in force were adopted in 1998 on the basis of data gathered in the 1960s and 1970s .
They cannot therefore be appropriate to the current condition of stocks .
In conclusion , it should be pointed out that the intention of the earlier Council Regulation 2371 / 2002 mentioned in the document dealt with in the opinion was to retain the precautionary principle in connection with the introduction of fundamental changes to the fisheries policy .
The precaution applied to both management of the stocks and assessment of the socio-economic impact of the changes .
This principle should remain in force following the accession of the four Baltic countries to the Union .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
As the person in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety responsible for cod fishing , I wish to begin by complaining that so few of our views are included in the report on which we are to vote tomorrow .
We have a shared responsibility for ensuring that it is possible to fish for cod in the Baltic Sea in the future too .
The situation where cod is concerned is a serious one .
In spite of reduced quotas , cod stocks are close to critical level .
If we are to prevent stocks from collapsing completely , we need still stricter distributions of quotas .
These quotas need to have a scientific foundation rather than be based on long drawn-out political wrangling , as the focus in fishing must in the first place be on the environment and on a long-term approach , not on short-term labour market policy objectives .
I am only sorry that the Committee on Fisheries appears to think in precisely the opposite way .
The Commission 's proposal for reduced fishing quotas is a step in the right direction , but it will be of no help if we do not make sure that it is complied with , because the greatest among the many threats to cod is illegal fishing .
It is said that between 35 % and 45 % of the total share of cod landed has been fished illegally .
What is most important , therefore , is not new rules but guarantees that the existing rules are complied with .
It is therefore incomprehensible to me why the Committee on Fisheries refuses to accept , for example , my demands that strong measures be taken against those countries that close their eyes to illegal fishing .
What , moreover , is most terrible of all is that we know which countries they are .
I am convinced , however , that , in the long term , we need an entirely new system for fisheries policy - one that makes fishermen themselves have a sense of responsibility for the survival of cod .
One system that has shown itself to be effective is that involving individually transferable fishing quotas .
Fishermen should be given an incentive of their own to take responsibility for the survival of the stock .
I believe that , in that way , we can obtain a better fisheries policy in the EU .
Annoying as it is that the Committee on Fisheries does not appear to want this system , it is gratifying that the Commission seems to take a positive view of the possibility of introducing individually transferable quotas .
In conclusion , I would just point out one thing I do like about the report by the Committee on Fisheries , namely that it incorporates my proposal for an increase in the minimum size of the cod that is caught .
This would give the fish more scope to reproduce and would make for more stable stocks .
In common with my fellow Swedish Conservatives , I unfortunately cannot , however , vote in favour of the report before us today .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , against the backdrop of the decline in Baltic cod stocks identified in the ICES studies and of demands from the relevant fishing crews for operating conditions that will enable them to preserve their livelihood , I would like to commend the work of my honourable colleague , Mr Chmielewski .
He has had to do the splits in order to reconcile the Commission 's proposal and sustainable fisheries on the one side with the resolute demands of the fishermen on the other .
If sustainability is to be more than an empty word , however , it must be reflected in working practices on fishing vessels and in personal attitudes to scientific prescriptions .
Accepting catch quotas is one side of the coin .
In particular , this means not only fulfilling the prescribed basic conditions but also supporting the new measures to improve stocks and more effective supervision by the Member States .
Unfortunately , supervision is a weak point in some Member States .
There is sufficient untapped potential in this area .
The involvement of regional advisory bodies is not only helpful ; it is also an urgent necessity .
The proposal from the Commission therefore points in the right direction , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament supports both the proposal and the rapporteur 's efforts to strike a fair socio-economic balance .
I appeal to all those in positions of responsibility to take good heed of the information provided by ICES and other scientific bodies when fixing the total allowable catches and quotas for cod and devising measures to halt the decline in cod stocks .
The Baltic is a sensitive sea , and we should bear that in mind whenever we consider any measure .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
The situation for cod in the Baltic Sea is a very serious one .
For 2007 , the ICES has recommended that no cod be fished in the eastern part of the Baltic , yet in spite of these recommendations a considerable quantity of cod will be landed .
Where western stocks are concerned , 30 % more than the recommended number will be fished , and in addition there will be unreported and illegal fishing .
The Committee on Fisheries is trying to water down the Commission 's proposal , which basically does not consider the consequences for biological diversity , either .
As always when fisheries issues are debated in this House , the socio-economic consequences of fishing are referred to .
Certainly , a ban on fishing for cod may harm professional fishermen .
However , overfishing means that , before long , there will be no fish left to catch .
In the era of globalisation , it is necessary to be flexible and to be prepared to make structural changes in society .
Tomorrow , I shall vote against Parliament 's proposal , even though I believe that the Commission 's proposal is unsatisfactory too .
( SV ) Mr President , I myself live on the Baltic Sea and have therefore been able to monitor at close quarters how bad things are there .
The situation not only causes a deterioration in people 's quality of life , but also , as Commissioner Joe Borg himself pointed out , threatens economic development along the whole of the Baltic Sea coast .
People throughout the EU expect us , in this House , to make vigorous efforts to save the eco-systems in our seas .
I should therefore ideally have liked to have seen the House support a ban on cod fishing , as proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in its opinion .
A ban would also have made it simple to get to grips with the illegal fishing that quite a few Members have talked about .
There is obviously no majority in favour of this in the House at present , but I nonetheless hope that a majority is able to support Amendments 20 to 22 , one of the provisions of which is that the largest permitted catch shall be based on advice from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea .
That really should go without saying .
The fact that we do not act on the basis of existing scientific knowledge is one of the reasons for the current threats to cod and to the whole of the Baltic Sea 's eco-system .
( ET ) The Baltic Sea is an inland sea and , thanks to its poor connection with the open seas and oceans , it is a very distinctive sea .
The limited water exchange with the Atlantic Ocean unfortunately also means that the Baltic Sea is very vulnerable - the sea lacks the ability to dilute large quantities of pollution and , what is more , fish stocks recover very slowly there after overfishing .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , we discussed at great length the topics of overfishing for cod and illegal fishing in the Baltic Sea .
The committee agreed that cod fishing should be prohibited for some time in the eastern part of the Baltic Sea or that a zero fishing mortality rate should be established .
The objective of this would be to permit cod stocks , which are in very bad condition , to recover , so that they might later be managed sustainably once again .
I regret that the Committee on Fisheries has not taken that one key position of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety into consideration in connection with managing the cod stocks of the Baltic Sea .
It should also be in the long-term interests of fishermen to halt fishing at the moment , so that cod stocks , which are in a critical condition at the moment , might recover .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank you for the number of points that have been raised .
I think it is clear that we share a common objective , that of ensuring the long-term sustainability of cod stocks in the Baltic and thus the livelihood of the fishers in the region .
While we may differ on the means of achieving this objective , I have no doubt that our aim is the same .
On the specific points raised , I would like to make the following points .
Firstly , we must propose schemes for effort limitations and take into account the effort exerted by small-scale fleets since their catches represent around 50 % of total catches .
We are , however , ready to consider flexible mechanisms in order to enable them to apply the plan without it being too much of a burden .
I would like to stress that the eastern cod stock has been declining continuously over the last decades , as has the average catch size .
The serious situation of this stock is therefore self-evident and , while it is crucial to take account of the socio-economic perspective , it is primarily the ecological status which requires recovery , that is of paramount importance .
In this regard , an annual reduction of 10 % has been identified as the minimum in order to be able to detect changes in the development of the stock status or the sector deriving from the plan .
A decrease of the annual reduction would also confront the sector with a longer reduction period and therefore delay the benefit of bigger and more stable catches and would make it unlikely that the MSY levels can be reached before 2015 , as is required under the Johannesburg Commitment .
Finally , it is important to underline that control is the key issue , particularly in this fishery .
We hope to reach a solid and workable solution to this issue in the Council next week .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Specific rules as regards the fruit and vegetable sector ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the report by Mrs Salinas García on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down specific rules as regards the fruit and vegetable sector and amending certain Regulations . C6-0075 / 2007 .
Mr President , we are currently in the final and decisive phase for the approval of the reform of the fruit and vegetables sector .
We launched the debate on 24 January 2007 and since then we have received lots of very valuable input , not least from the European Parliament and the report of Mrs Salinas García .
I thank you for this and for your constant support for the general objectives and the general principles of the Commission proposal .
When considering the substance of your opinion , I have chosen to focus on a few issues to which you have given very special attention .
Firstly , on producer organisations , it is clear that both the Commission and the European Parliament believe that producer organisations should be maintained and even further reinforced in order to increase the degree of the concentration of the supply .
This is absolutely fundamental if the sector is to match the huge concentration that we see these days in the retail sector .
As you know , we have proposed a number of new initiatives in order to make our producer organisations much more attractive .
We have proposed additional Community financing of 60 % : firstly , for mergers between producer organisations and associations of producer organisations ; secondly , for regions where the level of the concentration of the supply through producer organisations is below 20 % ; thirdly for organic farming ; fourthly for new Member States and , finally , for the outermost regions .
I am aware that you have requested even more action to be included in the additional Community financial assistance of 60 % to the operational funds , such as joint action between producer organisations or integrated production .
However , what we have proposed will already make a very positive difference .
I should like to stick to these measures in the first place .
As you surely know , we also need to be attentive to the budgetary constraints .
On crisis prevention and management , I agree with you that it is one of the most sensitive points of the reform and I should like to thank you for the ideas that you propose in your opinion .
However , I cannot accept the idea of a separate fund for crisis management and the need to define what we actually mean when we talk about a ' crisis ' .
A separate fund would result in a substantial budget increase and , moreover , will not contribute to further simplification .
With regard to the use of a percentage of the national reserve for crisis management , this is not acceptable either .
The national reserve was created at the very beginning to accommodate particular situations in the framework of the single payment scheme and it is not appropriate to devote this budget to another objective or other measures .
However , I understand your call for more flexibility in order to facilitate crisis management .
Rather than making a completely separate structure , I should therefore positively consider adding more flexibility to the structure proposed in our initial Commission proposal in order to make the scheme as efficient as possible and to avoid a major decline in prices .
Nevertheless , I want to underline that we also need to bear in mind that any modification of the current proposal has to respect the overall budgetary constraints , as well as the need for simplification .
On the inclusion of fruit and vegetables for processing in the single payment scheme , you have requested an optional transitional period , in particular for tomatoes .
You are also in favour of a separate payment for tomatoes for historical producers in the new Member States .
I am open to accept a short transitional period in which Member States could decide to grant aid per hectare .
Nevertheless , one should bear in mind that full decoupling must be both the precondition and the end goal - so final decoupling at the end .
I am also aware that the soft-fruit sector is facing difficulties .
The Commission analysis has shown that fragmentation of both production and marketing has contributed to the difficulties faced in recent years by the soft-fruit sector .
On the basis of this report we have considered that the best way to address the problem is to add incentives to increase the number of producer organisations in the new Member States , which is what we did in our original proposal .
Nevertheless , taking into account the sensitivities of this soft-fruit sector , I am open to considering specific smaller support , but I want to make it absolutely clear that it must be transitional and limited to certain products .
Finally , on promotion of fruit and vegetables , I fully agree with you that this issue is of huge concern not only to agriculture but also to health and to consumer policies .
We produce plenty of high-quality fruit and vegetables in the European Union , but our citizens do not consume enough of them , with growing consequences for their health .
I would be in favour of a school fruit scheme to be implemented in line with the position taken by the Commission on 13 May 2007 in the White Paper on a strategy for Europe on nutrition , weight and obesity-related health issues .
However , before doing this we would need to carry out the necessary impact assessments of such a measure .
I have asked my services to undertake such work immediately .
Those are my first comments and I am looking forward to a constructive discussion with the honourable Members of the European Parliament .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking you , not just for being here , but also for your cooperation and willingness to work with me .
The truth is that we are dealing with the reform of a very important sector , which you know very well .
It represents 17 % of our end agricultural output , but it only receives about 3 % of the aid .
It is true that the sector that we are discussing today is very dynamic .
It is also , however , a very fragile sector , with structural problems , exposed to increasing external pressure and the pressure of large-scale distribution .
The report that we are debating today and that we will vote on tomorrow is the result of a long period of work .
It is an open report , and I believe that this Parliament 's position has always been open with regard to the Commission .
We have always sought agreements , but at the same time it is a realistic report .
It is complicated , because we are dealing with forty different products for twenty-seven countries .
It is no surprise that it received more than 380 amendments in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but it is also the case that there were only two votes against it .
Not everything in your proposal , in the Commission 's proposal , seems to us to be negative , by any means .
It is very important that producer organisations should be seen as the cornerstone of the reform from the outset .
The truth is , however , that in Parliament , and in the whole of the European Union 's sector , there are certain problems that , in all of the Member States , we have seen as priorities within the reform .
Firstly , the decoupling of aid for processed products , as the Commissioner has quite rightly pointed out .
The second problem is the lifting of the ban on growing fruit and vegetables in areas eligible for the single payment .
And , above all , we in Parliament would stress the lack of a genuine crisis management mechanism .
I believe that the European Parliament has made a great effort to achieve consensus with a view to reaching agreements on these three issues .
Firstly , we are in favour of maintaining the current marketing rules .
It is true that they should be rather simpler , but we are in favour of maintaining those marketing rules .
Parliament has expressed , and will express tomorrow , its opposition to the lifting of the ban on growing fruit and vegetables in eligible areas .
At least until the Commission presents an impact study , as demanded by the Court of Justice .
We are calling for the strengthening of producer organisations , in the way that has already been mentioned : increasing their funding to 6 % .
And in cases of the 60 % increase in assistance , as the Commissioner has quite rightly said , I hope that certain requests will be taken into account , such as integrated production or designations of origin .
Where we have achieved a great compromise , because it is very important , because it is a fragile sector , is on the need to create the Security Fund for crisis management .
Having heard what you have said , I believe that , right now , this is where Parliament 's almost unanimous position differs most from that of the Commission .
We have expressed our support , and we continue to do so , for a crisis Security Fund that is open to all producers - including non-associated producers - and two-thirds funded by the European Union and a third by producer organisations .
We also stress the need for a price observatory .
Our future in this sector does not lie in subsidies , but in the market .
And we must have reliable and up-to-date information on the evolution of the markets .
Finally , decoupling , I am delighted to hear that there is at last a glimpse of the possibility of a transitional period .
There are certain dual-use products , such as tomatoes and citrus fruits , which , under the initial proposal , could lead to the abandonment of production .
We therefore firmly advocate a transitional period , and let us hope that it is not as short as has been suggested here this evening , but sufficient for the sector to be able to continue adapting to the single payment scheme .
I hope that that voluntary transitional period can allow for some kind of partial decoupling that could be a transitional measure .
We also stress the need to strengthen aid for red fruits .
I am also delighted to hear what you have said , because I believe that this is clearly a need that Parliament has indicated and the Commission has considered .
I would like to end by thanking everybody who has helped me during this year of work , the shadow rapporteurs and all of the officials from the European Commission for their contributions , for cooperating with me , the committee secretariat and everybody , because I believe that the report that we will vote on tomorrow , which is the result of a broad consensus , has also been enriched by the contributions of the other groups and of the whole of society .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Ladies and gentlemen , today , the fruit and vegetable sector is one of the most dynamic sectors of European agriculture , thanks in particular to the efforts of the farmers , the producers , to improve the marketing networks and to increase the quality of their products and concentrate supply .
In no way can it be argued that the fruit and vegetable sector relies on aid from Brussels .
In fact it succeeds in a very aggressive market , owing to the fact that the people participating in it work hard , and the money they receive represents no more than 1 % of the turnover of farms .
The great majority of these producers are not currently asking for subsidies or early retirement aid .
What they are asking for and demanding are mechanisms for tackling the current problems , which can only get even worse in the future .
I hope you will allow me to remind you all that the fruit and vegetable sector is the great bargaining chip in the European Union 's agricultural negotiations within the World Trade Organisation .
In the future , the current pressures in the market will get worse as the existing tariff barriers are dismantled .
I would therefore like to call upon the Member States to draw up appropriate crisis management mechanisms within the context of the reform of the sector that will probably be adopted next week at the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
As the rapporteur has already said , and as many of you also know and acknowledge , crisis management is a fashionable topic and it will be important in the future for all of the sectors of the common agricultural policy as a result of the dismantling of intervention measures .
In the case of fruit and vegetables , however , this problem also needs to be resolved urgently in view of the strong competition from third-country imports and the pressures resulting from large-scale distribution .
An imaginative solution needs to be found to help the sector to deal with the critical times ahead , and this Parliament is offering the solution in the report by Mrs Salinas .
This involves a specific fund for serious crises intended for the implementation of certain actions such as pension funds and to which the whole of the sector would have access . This would represent a very positive step , bearing in mind that we are not deviating from what we have done until now , which is co-responsibility for the producer .
I believe that , for the fruit and vegetables sector , this report proposes a pioneering form of crisis management that other sectors will have to copy in the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , reform of the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables is one of the last to be undertaken .
It has still not been covered by the 2003 reform .
It is also one of the most significant market reforms in the current Financial Perspective .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Salinas García on a very objective report , which covers many issues of importance for both old and new Member States .
As my colleague has already dealt with all the points we wished to make in the House , I shall refer only to the soft fruit sector , which is of vital importance for the new Member States .
The reform must include effective solutions for this sector , bearing in mind the need to ensure that growing this fruit in the Community will remain profitable and that Community growers can obtain a suitable level of income from it .
Soft fruit is a delicate product and should be dealt with in the same way as other Community products considered delicate .
It is essential to apply different payments to the soft fruit sector beyond the SAPS financial envelope .
Such a payment would be directed exclusively to soft fruit producers .
Support in the form of separate area payments would lead to restructuring and improve the effectiveness and competitiveness of this sector .
It would therefore stabilise the income of soft fruit growers .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur .
I admire her for the way she has fought her way through the many amendments that have been tabled .
We as the ALDE Group support the result as a whole , and hence the gist of the Commission proposals .
Making producer organisations stronger is a good thing .
The market of horticultural products is increasingly being dominated by large supermarkets and other trade organisations , and producers must combine forces in order to form a counterweight .
Most of the ALDE Group would beg to differ with the rapporteur and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the already much-debated crisis fund and crisis management in general .
We think the Commission proposals are better .
For starters , I would not know where the money would come from .
Also in the long term , it is impossible to assume that any authority could be responsible for crisis management .
The authority will always make a contribution - this has been provided for - but the producers will need to shoulder the lion 's share of the responsibility .
If , moreover , we encourage crisis management to be taken care of via the producer organisation , this will also draw in more members , which will at the same time mean that producer organisations will gain more power compared to traders and supermarkets .
Our vote will therefore be different from what the Committee on Agriculture proposed in this respect .
I should once again like to stand up for quality policy .
The Commissioner knows that this is a subject that is very close to my heart .
After the last conference on this subject , I left in a frame of mind that was anything but optimistic , but I am heartened by the fact that an amendment concerning the need for a quality label for horticultural products , tabled by the ALDE Group , was adopted unanimously in the Agricultural Group by all parties .
This is quite unique .
With this support from the Committee on Agriculture , the Commissioner may therefore want to reconsider a quality policy for certain agricultural products , because we still believe that this is called for .
I am unaware of the latest developments as regards school fruit , but we thought the Commissioner 's idea in this respect was endearing .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , this reform is justified but it is unfair .
The principles laid down five years ago at Copenhagen are unfair to the new Member States .
It was established that farmers in the new countries would receive several times less aid than those in the old Union .
We agreed to this hoping that we would come to receive equal treatment in due course .
Subsequent reforms of the common agricultural policy have perpetuated the division into more and less favoured countries , however .
The reform of the fruit and vegetable market is one example of this .
The old Union was receiving hundreds of millions of euro and will continue to do so .
The new Union receives token sums .
Allow me to pose the following questions : where is the actual aid for soft fruit producers in the new Member States to be found ?
Why has the Commission not responded to the European Parliament resolution of October 2006 ?
Much has been said about supporting the European Constitution and the danger that failure to do so will lead to the emergence of a two-speed Europe .
In fact , as far as agriculture is concerned we already have a two-class Europe , namely the more favoured old Union that retains the status it created for itself in the past and the less favoured new Union that cannot expect equal treatment .
We tabled an amendment that would include cherries and apples for processing in the reform of soft fruit production , accompanied by a EUR 148 million increase in the national envelopes .
I call on the House to support this amendment .
At the level of the Union as a whole , it does not represent much money . It is a matter of principle , however , not of money .
There must be an end to this division into better and worse Member States .
We respect the Accession Treaties , but new principles must be introduced , transcending the division into 15 more favoured Member States and 12 less favoured ones .
All 27 Member States must enjoy the same rights .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group , bringing together members from both old and new Member States , is resolute in its demand for this .
We call for a reform that is not only justified but also fair .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I in turn must especially thank the Commissioner and the rapporteur of the report that we are about to examine in this Chamber , but my group is unlikely to vote for it because of two points that I should like to highlight .
The first is that this reform , which is so important for a sector that employs thousands , if not millions , of workers in both agriculture and processing , may change the landscape completely once we have directives on climate change .
If it is true that Europe is rightly starting to expand alternative forms of production - biodiesel , biofuels , and the production of mass and biomass from wood - then it means that several million hectares will be taken out of agricultural and food production for human and animal consumption .
That is already happening in large countries like China : it was in the news a few days ago .
The second point is the fact that the reform in question does not address one of the problems raised in this Chamber , which is that in recent years the profit from agricultural production has all gone to commercial businesses and large multinationals .
According to some statistics , between 60 % and 70 % of agricultural profit is kept by the distribution chain .
The reform we are examining does not address this problem .
Those are the basic reasons that we want to raise , and we are therefore unlikely to vote for the report in this Chamber tomorrow .
( SK ) I would like to praise the efforts of my colleague , Mrs García , in drawing up her report into the proposal for a Council regulation for establishing specific provisions in respect of the fruit and vegetable sector .
The heated debates within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development about this proposal identified certain risks associated with the substance of the proposal and , in particular , risks arising from the philosophy behind this piece of legislation .
The most serious risks concern the early practical implementation of some of the regulations and the low level of EU budget participation .
At stake is a mere 3.1 % of the budget , while the sector accounts for 17 % of the EU 's total agricultural output .
In marketing terms , lettuce , radishes and small fruits - virtually the entire fruits and vegetables mix - are the most sensitive of agricultural commodities , and ensuring their smooth transfer from the farm to the table is a daunting logistical task .
Therefore , the European Commission should not delude itself into thinking that in future it might be able to transfer to farmers the entire responsibility for fruit and vegetable CMO .
Another major risk of the proposal under consideration is the fact that it puts the new Member States at a disadvantage .
The problem is that the new Member States do not have functioning producer organisations , and it will take several years for them to become fully operational .
Fruit and vegetable producers in the EU-15 have over the decades gradually learned to interact with trading systems and have become trading partners of equal standing .
One can reasonably expect that if the proposal were implemented in its present form , the output of the new Member States , already massively reduced , would shrink still further .
This is why I believe that the outlined risks should be addressed as a matter of priority when amending the proposal .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me add my thanks to the rapporteur , for the reform of the fruit and vegetable sector was truly not an easy subject .
As the previous speakers have pointed out , fruit and vegetables account for a very large share of our agricultural output .
These reforms will enable us to take a major step towards the modernisation of European agriculture in this sector too .
Particularly in view of the increasingly fierce international competition resulting from globalisation , it must be our prime objective to enhance the competitiveness of European fruit and vegetable growers while safeguarding the availability to consumers of high-quality European produce at reasonable prices .
One means of doing this is the creation of producer organisations , which enable growers to market their products more effectively .
Measures to promote fruit and vegetable consumption are particularly worthy of support , because they are also beneficial to public health .
Mrs Gräßle of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will table an oral amendment tomorrow in which she will ask the Commission not to wait until the scheduled date of 2013 before compiling an initial report on the execution of the title covering producer organisations , the operating fund and the operational programmes .
In fact , we want to have that first report by the end of 2010 , followed by progress reports at three-yearly intervals .
We seek transparency , and we would also like to be sure that support is actually reaching our intended targets .
Seven years is too long to wait for that assurance .
It is therefore our responsibility to safeguard the future of Europe 's fruit and vegetable growers by creating a safety net with the aid of targeted assistance in order to combine sustainable production with high quality and a healthy environment .
( EL ) Mr President , first I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Salinas Garcia , on her exceptional report , and the Commission , which truly has made a serious and brave proposal in the fruit and vegetable sector .
I say ' brave proposal ' , because it is a sector which has a clear structure with the producer organisations and operational programmes and the main issue raised is that of decoupling .
I should like to highlight , both at a personal level and on behalf of our group , the two basic issues which we shall support .
Firstly , a stable financial budget and , secondly , a stable timeframe for reform up to 2013 .
Subversive policies seeking a transitional reform period in fruit and vegetables , which is something which has not happened in any other product , will I am absolutely certain - from the point of view of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - not be accepted .
I have just two comments : you know very well , Commissioner , that Mrs Salinas 's proposals are not a very far cry from the Council 's proposals and I shall come to the specific issue of the crisis management fund , which I would like you to think about much more positively .
The crisis management fund does not need additional resources , but it does need to be outside the operational programmes , otherwise there will be total confusion .
( LT ) It is understood that reform of the common agricultural policy is essential ; however , implementation of the reform is being applied to EU Member States with different levels of agricultural subsidies .
New Member States , which get almost three times less in payouts than the old Member States , and having significantly worse exit situations , are obliged to reform their agriculture by further worsening the state of it .
A general payout scheme is being offered as a proposed solution for reform of the fruit and vegetable market .
For the new Member States this will mean even smaller subsidies than there have been to date , and even less chance of competing in the market .
The requirement for fruit and vegetable producers to establish producer organisations in order to receive EU subsidies seriously distorts the fruit and vegetable market .
Retail networks may dictate their terms and refuse to accept for resale the produce of small producers .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the regulation proposes to increase consumption of fruit and vegetables by encouraging their use among certain sectors of the population - young people , school-age children and teenagers .
What about the rest of the population ?
( PL ) Mr President , some appropriate action has at last been taken with regard to the situation in the fruit and vegetable sector , which is generally perceived to be unfair .
Following lengthy discussions , an anti-dumping price for Chinese strawberries was introduced .
It was unfortunate that it only applied to such a short period of time though .
Next , a minimum price was introduced .
Again , it is unfortunate that this price was so low .
We are now presented with an opportunity to allocate additional payments to cherries and sweet cherries , and also to soft fruit such as raspberries , strawberries , blackcurrants and gooseberries .
Without these payments many growers affected by the severe frosts will most certainly be bankrupted .
In its Amendment 116 to the regulation the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development suggests aid amounting to EUR 120.77 per hectare .
In my view this is too low a figure .
It will not deal effectively with the growers ' problems .
Aid should be increased to EUR 400 per hectare .
Apple orchard owners were affected by the severe frosts too .
Their predicament is also a difficult one , and they are hoping for some aid .
That is why I urge the House to adopt Amendment 113 , which constitutes a response to all those hoping for aid .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am delighted that you are here and I thank you for the efforts you are making .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on a job very well done .
The fruit and vegetable sector is extremely important for us .
However , I should like to highlight certain points :
Firstly , in a sector such as the fruit and vegetable sector , which includes the most sensitive agricultural products , financing crisis management is extremely important .
If it is to be integrated , it should not be included in the operational programmes and be cofinanced by producers ; it should be financed from additional Community resources and be extended to the field of prevention , as I also requested as shadow rapporteur when we debated future support measures for agricultural production eighteen months ago .
Secondly , the obligatory inclusion of agri-environmental actions in the operational programmes of producer organisations , as a precondition to their approval , is a positive move .
However , setting compulsory expenditure at one-fifth of the budget for the actions is excessive and should be reduced .
Thirdly , we should at some point perhaps turn our attention to small crops , to small-scale producers , such as those growing saffron and mastic in Chios .
We must also look at small-scale producers .
Fourthly , for producer organisations , financing at a rate of 60 % in under-organised areas is positive , but capping at 4.1 % of the value of the marketed production is marginal and will not allow them to honour the new , important duties they are taking on .
On the same subject , we should also refer to the difficulties faced by the Aegean islands , which is why they need to be treated with a certain degree of flexibility .
Fifthly , information and promotion campaigns aimed at our youth in the European Union are not just to increase the consumption of fruit and vegetables ; we have a very poor diet and our youth must adopt a healthier diet .
Finally , I have the following to say : I should like to point out that we are totally against the oral amendment which may be tabled tomorrow calling for a report to be drafted in 2010 on the operation of the new COM , because this means a different approach to fruit and vegetables , while the other COMs have been regulated quite differently .
This is unacceptable under the principles of the European Union .
( HU ) The excellent report by Mrs Salinas García indicates that this is fundamentally a good report .
I will mention four positive points : the national envelope system , support for producer organisations , risk management and the school fruit scheme .
This would be a very good reform if I did not come from one of the new Member States .
But this reform is discriminatory in several areas against the new Member States .
On the one hand it is discriminatory as regards direct payments .
For example , Hungary provides 2 % of the Union 's vegetable production , and receives 0.61 % of the costs of vegetable production .
The other area of discrimination has to do with processed products .
Neither Polish berry fruit , nor sour cherries , nor the products of the new Member States have been included among the produce that is to be processed .
And now these monies will be distributed on a historical basis , and it will be primarily three of the old Member States who will receive 800 million of the 1.4 billion .
This is a very great injustice toward the new Member States , and I ask that it be rectified .

( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Salinas García 's report is very significant for the agricultural production sector . Unfortunately , however , it does not apply equal terms to producers in the old and new Member States .
Supporting farmers by way of direct payments is particularly important for countries where the structure of agriculture is fragmented , with small holdings and monoculture , and where the income barely suffices to sustain farming activities .
These holdings operate in a traditional and environmentally-friendly manner .
The amended regulation should even out the opportunities for payments to farmers in the old and new Member States .
It is hard to anticipate the effectiveness of fruit and vegetable production .
Products of this nature can easily be damaged , prices fluctuate and there is competition from third countries .
Climate change and increasingly frequent natural disasters also impact on effectiveness .
By way of example I could refer to the spring frosts in Poland which affected 70 % of currant , plum , pear and sweet cherry blossom .
Polish fruit growers and market gardeners estimate that this year 's losses will amount to 60 % .
Amendments 6 , 7 and 12 to the regulation concerning Recitals 11 , 13 and 18 and also Amendment 113 are particularly worthy of support .
( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate on the report concerning reform of the fruit and vegetable market and tomorrow 's vote on the matter bring to an end several months of work within the European Parliament .
I believe that during this period we have succeeded in raising awareness of the problems affecting the Polish soft fruit market and convincing most Members of the House of the need to introduce appropriate support mechanisms .
Such mechanisms would serve to restructure the sector and improve its competitiveness .
Two features of this sector in the new Member States are the fragmentation of production and the fact that there are no strong groups or associations of producers .
In addition , the sector is particularly vulnerable at times of crisis .
The existing support instruments and those proposed in the draft reform of the COM of fruit and vegetables do not provide sufficient aid and do not offer effective solutions to the problems arising in those markets .
We are therefore requesting special payments for growers of soft fruit and cherries intended for processing , so as to improve incomes and stabilise the fruit and vegetable market .
I urge the Commissioner to study Amendment 132 , which I tabled jointly with Mrs Herranz García on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I also ask for support for Amendment 122 , on aid for the market of tomatoes for processing in the new Member States under the SAPS system .
Adoption of this amendment would ensure that tomato producers in those countries retained the aid they are currently receiving .
Commissioner , there are two issues Polish soft fruit growers cannot understand .
The first is why they have to wait so long for relevant proposals .
The second is why the Commission cannot even come up with a few tens of millions euro to support the soft fruit sector , when it has an annual budget in excess of EUR 1.5 billion .
Strawberries , raspberries and currants are just as important for Polish farmers as oranges , mandarins and figs are for their opposite numbers in southern Europe .
Commissioner , we earnestly hope that at the forthcoming Council of Agriculture Ministers of the 27 Member States of the European Union you will propose appropriate support for this group of farmers .
I trust the negotiations will prove fruitful .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the support given by Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to the proposals contained in the Salinas García report is proof of , firstly , the rapporteur 's excellent work - and I add my own congratulations - and , secondly the very positive spirit of compromise displayed by MEPs from almost all of the political groups .
I particularly welcome Parliament 's recommendations on crisis management and on strengthening producer organisations .
I welcome the adoption of my proposal to establish a transitional period aimed at ensuring the continued viability of tomato cultivation in some Member States , in particular my country , Portugal .
I hope the Commission will take this on board .
I am disappointed , however , that it was not possible to go further on other equally important issues , such as greater flexibility in the management of financial resources earmarked for operational programmes and positive discrimination , which should have been given to the Member States in which those programmes are particularly poorly organised .
Your speech at the start of this debate , Commissioner , made me fear that the aspect of Parliament 's political support for the proposals has not been correctly interpreted , but I trust that common sense and a spirit of compromise will ultimately prevail in the Council and the Commission .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the fruit and vegetable sector is very important for the agriculture of the Union in general and of countries like Poland in particular .
Unfortunately , the proposed solutions are not beneficial for us .
Firstly , as part of the significant changes to be introduced in this sector , it is proposed that the existing support for the old Member State be maintained , but the new ones are to be treated as if they were not actually Members , but still mere applicants .
Supporting the national envelopes of countries such as Italy , Greece and Spain with sums of between EUR 316 million and EUR 167 million , whilst Poland 's envelope is to be increased by barely EUR 6.7 million even though it has a large fruit and vegetable sector must surely run counter to the principle of European solidarity .
Secondly , there is no tradition of producers ' groups in the new Member States .
This is bound to mean that a sum of almost EUR 700 million a year will go mainly to producers ' groups and associations in the old Member States .
Finally , the reform fails to deal with the issue of the Union 's market becoming increasingly open to imports of fruit and vegetables from third countries .
The European Union has an annual trade deficit in excess of EUR 8 billion in this sector .
These imports are often sold at dumping prices , which is detrimental to the production of fruit and vegetables within the European Union .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on her report .
From my point of view there are still some outstanding issues to be clarified .
We must be able to ensure that the impact within different regions in Member States is not too harsh .
The mechanism of this proposal is complicated for those regions that applied the hybrid area-based model for the single farm payment , including my own area , and this , in particular , must be resolved .
This is a difficult , complex area that must be addressed .
There are many different outside pressures that impinge on the marketing process .
High among those is the purchasing power of the large supermarket chains , where one supplier or producer is put against another to drive the price down .
There are also those who import cheap produce , turn it around and add value to produce of unknown origin .
We seem to be unable to stop this .
I am now going to be rather parochial .
Last week I led a delegation to my local minister in Northern Ireland to raise the plight of mushroom growers in that area .
Four years ago in Northern Ireland we had over 226 mushroom growers , today we have 40 - an 80 % drop in those involved in the industry .
I have to ask whether anyone cares , and I have come to the conclusion that the answer is no .
Farming families have been destroyed and their incomes done away with .
They have been totally disregarded by those capable of importing cheap mushrooms , adding value and selling them to the supermarkets , which pretend that they are local .
If we stand back and allow such a situation to continue in this and other areas , we will totally destroy the fabric of rural society as we know it .
These commodities keep families and communities together .
We destroy them at our peril ; we must defend rural society .
Mr President , my thanks to the rapporteur .
My colleague Mr Nicholson has not exactly stolen my thunder , but I want to repeat some of his thunder , and the Commissioner will know that I am like a long playing record .
I support the idea of producer groups but I am not at all convinced that we will ever have the matching power of the retail sector .
I have said it before and I repeat it now that the Commission is unwilling to take on the elephant in the room , i.e. the very powerful retail sector in Europe which is particularly powerful in the UK and in the Republic of Ireland .
After you launched your debate on this particular subject we had farmers in Ireland on television declaring that they would no longer grow fruit and vegetables because there was no profit to be made in it because they could not get the prices they needed .
However , let us see what happens from this reform .
I hope that this report which we propose for 2010 will look at the impact in terms of the balance of power , which currently lies in the wrong direction .
The idea of consumption and health is a very positive one but I think every time we tell the European public that it is healthy to eat fruit and vegetables they seem to eat less of them , so we need to think of a different message .
I like the idea of school fruit schemes and I would ask that your impact assessment take into account the many pilot projects .
There is one in particular in Ireland that works and you probably have details of it , but good luck with it and I hope it works for the fruit and vegetable producers of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to conclude quickly , because it is late .
I would like to stress again the very constructive cooperation that we have had on the food and vegetable reform .
I think your opinion supports the general line of the Commission proposals and the improvements that are being contemplated .
I would like to make a few comments because I am sure that some Members of this Parliament did not listen to my first speech , when I talked about the soft fruit sector .
I made it clear that I am aware of the difficulties in the soft fruit sector within the European Union .
I am ready to take into account the sensitivity of the sector and to try to find money within the budget to support this sector for a transitional period .
But do not expect the figures that you mentioned .
I think you said EUR 800 .
This cannot be achieved within the budget .
However , I have clearly said that I will do my very best to find a solution .
I believe that the anti-dumping measures taken in April have clearly been a step in the right direction .
Problems faced due to frost will be handled separately .
It is possible to deal with specific situations involving climatic catastrophes within the state aid rules , so we will try to handle this issue separately .
A question was raised on funding .
In my opinion , trying to create a fund outside the producer organisations is not really simplification .
As you know , simplification is very high on the Commission 's agenda .
It will be a very complex instrument and we have to take into account the fact that we have to act within an annual budget .
We could lose quite a lot of money on the fund 's construction because it is multi-annual , but I am sure that we will find a decent solution and a crisis management tool that can work efficiently .
I hope that it will be possible to achieve a political agreement at the Council meeting next Monday and Tuesday .
I am quite sure that we will manage to find a political agreement that will benefit the whole fruit and vegetable sector within the European Union , so that it will have a sustainable future , which , I presume , is what we all want .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) It is now three years since the new Member States acceded to the European Union , but they are still being discriminated against in terms of budget appropriations for the fruit and vegetable market .
This is clear from the size of the payments allocated per hectare of land devoted to growing fruit and vegetables .
In 2005 , the old Member States ( EU-15 ) received EUR 561 per hectare , whilst the new ones ( EU-10 ) only received EUR 20 per hectare .
The poorer countries therefore receive 28 times less support than the richer ones .
There is no reason for such discrimination .
The new Member States have introduced many important and specific products into the Union .
At the same time they experienced and are continuing to experience problems regarding the profitability of these types of products .
Amongst other reasons , the problems are due to cheap imports from third countries and the fragmentation of production .
The new countries therefore had good reason to expect that their difficulties would be recognised and that they would be able to benefit from the same wide range of support as the old Member States .
The European Commission has conducted missions and undertaken a series of consultations and studies .
Nonetheless , the Commission 's proposal for reform of the market still discriminates against the new Member States .
The Commission has also disregarded Parliament .
In its resolution of 11 May 2005 this House called for Union support for soft fruit , cherries , sweet cherries and apples intended for processing to be provided at the earliest opportunity .
Discriminatory action against the new Member States on the fruit and vegetable market is detrimental not only to growers in the new Member States , but also to the Union as a whole and to its consumers .
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 00.05 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 9.40 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Protocol to the EC-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement following the accession of the Bulgaria and Romania ( vote )
- Report : Saryusz-Wolski
2 .
Conservation and enforcement measures applicable in the Regulatory Area of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( vote )
- Report : Capoulas Santos
3 .
Application of the Schengen acquis relating to the Schengen Information System ( vote )
- Report : Coelho
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Just three brief remarks if I may : a thank-you , a warning and a point of information .
I should like to thank all those MEPs from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and all the political groups , whose goodwill enabled this report to be adopted quickly .
I should like , too , to thank the Portuguese Government - and in particular Secretary of State José Magalhães - for taking the initiative and putting forward this system whereby new Member States that fulfil the Schengen assessment criteria do not have to remain unjustly suspended and can join the system immediately .
Secondly , speaking on behalf of Parliament as its rapporteur , I would like to sound a warning to the Council and the Commission .
In our opinion , this transitional measure must never be allowed to hinder the rapid conclusion of SIS II , which must not be delayed and must remain a priority in view of the value-added and important innovation it encompasses for our collective security .
Third and lastly , a point of information .
I should like to draw the attention of the Council and the Commission to the need to exert pressure on the Member States .
Each Member State is responsible for getting ready to enter the system and to remove internal borders .
Entering the Schengen system means that we have mutual trust when it comes to monitoring our external borders .
During this Schengen assessment process there is no place for political agreements between governments to water down criteria and requirements .
This is not an exercise in sympathy .
This is about our shared security , and the security of Europe 's citizens is not something to be dealt with lightly .
4 .
Mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund : floods in Hungary and Greece ( vote )
- Report : Böge
5 .
Draft Amending budget No 2 / 2007 ( vote )
- Report : Elles
6 .
Draft Amending budget No 3 / 2007 ( vote )
- Report : Elles
7 .
Addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods ( vote )
- Report : Scheele
8 .
Nutrition and health claims made on foods ( vote )
- Report : Poli Bortone
9 .
Visa Information System ( VIS ) ( vote )
- Report : Ludford
10 .
Prüm Treaty : cross-border cooperation in combating terrorism and cross-border crime ( vote )
- Report : Correia
11 .
Consultation of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) ( vote )
- Report : Ludford
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I just want to point out that the Irish Members of the PPE-DE Group will not be participating , as Ireland unfortunately is not part of Schengen .
It is the position we take in the Council , so we will take it here as well .
12 .
Protection of personal data ( vote )
- Report : Roure
13 .
Baltic Sea cod ( vote )
- Report : Chmielewski
14 .
Specific rules as regards the fruit and vegetable sector ( vote )
- Report : Salinas García
- Before the vote on Article 7 , paragraph 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , I move that the text be amended by the deletion of ' a report by 31 December 2013 ' and the insertion of ' a report by 31 December 2010 and every three years thereafter ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
15 .
Regional Strategy Papers and Regional Indicative Programmes for Mercosur and Latin America ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
16 .
Roadmap for the European Union 's constitutional process ( vote )
- Report : Barón Crespo / Brok
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I would like to make a point of order based on Rules 166 and 167 on the admissibility of part of a resolution .
Parliament 's Legal Service has said that we cannot use a non-ratified Treaty as a reference in our reports .
This applies to the first indent of the Barón Crespo / Brok report .
( Applause from the IND / DEM Group )
I would like you to delete the reference , if the House should be so unwise as not to adopt our alternative resolution , which could solve the problem of inadmissibility much more easily .
May I also ask you to change all other reports referring to the proposed Constitution or the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
According to Eurolex , 117 adopted legislative acts now include such references to the Charter .
There are seven references to the Constitution .
This information comes from Commission President Barroso , in an answer to a written question .
Mr President , I am sure that you and Mr Pöttering , in particular , as a skilled and very well educated lawyer , are the right people to establish law and order in our House .
The Constitution has only been ratified by 16 , not 18 , of the 27 Member States , representing 37 % of the citizens .
This is still far from the unanimity required to make it a legal-base reference point .
Your Legal Service is entirely right .
( Applause from certain quarters )
Mr Bonde , the interpretation of the Presidency , which , as you know , is responsible for interpreting the Rules of Procedure ( with the greatest of respect for the Legal Service , of course , but it is not the Legal Service that interprets the Rules of Procedure , but rather the Presidency ) ...
As I was saying , the reference to a document that exists , regardless of whether or not it has been ratified by all of the Member States , and which has been signed by all of the Heads of State or Government , regardless of whether or not it has been ratified by all of the Member States , can be quoted as a reference in the motion for a resolution .
The Presidency 's interpretation , therefore , is that your objection is unfounded .
( Protests and applause )
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on paragraph 21 :

Mr President , on behalf of the PSE Group , we suggest replacing the word ' possible ' with ' reasonable ' so that it would read : ' Emphasises that everything " reasonable ” must be done to avoid the creation of a two-speed Europe ' . I am sure you will accept the logic of this , that if we wanted to do everything possible , that might include shooting all opponents of this point of view .
That is possible , but not reasonable , and as we are very reasonable people , we think we should say ' reasonable ' .
( Laughter )
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
17 .
United Nations Human Rights Council ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
18 .
The social status of artists ( vote )
- Report : Gibault
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say that I have had great pleasure in drafting this report and that I am grateful to all my colleagues and all the shadow rapporteurs .
This report was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Culture and Education on 7 May .
I am tabling two new amendments today that I devised with eminent colleagues who have been ministers of culture .
I would emphasise the fact that the measures that they contain will be submitted to the Member States in their definitive version only when we have the results of a study that I request in my report and that will be entrusted to the Commission .
In the light of the elements that will subsequently be communicated to us , we will have an opportunity to analyse together the advantages and disadvantages of these measures and to take the most appropriate decision .
I should like to say that I was very shocked when , yesterday , a lobbyist , whom I find pretentious , woke up - even though he had had my report for two months - and took the liberty of calling my colleagues to ask them to vote against these two amendments .
I find this attitude unacceptable and I hope that all those who have supported me on the occasion of this report will not let themselves be influenced .
As I see it , our honour as MEPs is at stake , and I hope that you will put your trust in the artist that I am and that you will support the two amendments that give hope to European artists .
( Applause )
Mr President , as someone who was not phoned by the lobbyist but is delighted to vote against these amendments , I was just wondering what the point was of having a Legal Service at all .
The two amendments that my colleague is suggesting are well beyond the bounds of what this House can do : they are , indeed , ultra vires .
I am sure that under the Corbett reforms that we voted on in our previous term there was meant to be some sort of impact assessment and common sense applied to amendments that we are trying to pass through this House , which obviously has not happened in this case .
For example , I believe there is a call for a European social security card in this report , which really should not be allowed through this House at this stage .
19 .
Draft estimates of the European Parliament for 2008 ( vote )
- Report : Itälä
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
The purpose of this Commission proposal is to incorporate into the Community acquis conservation and enforcement measures adopted by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) , to which the Community is a signatory .
In keeping with the simplification of other legislation , the Commission has taken the opportunity to update and bring together in a single legislative document all of the rules spread across several regulations .
The rapporteur has updated these rules with other texts adopted following the Commission 's proposal , as part of the regulation on total allowable catches and quotas for 2007 .
The simplification proposal is , in itself , a good thing .
We feel , though , that the consequences of some of the measures incorporated for the long distance fleet , for the fisheries sector and by extension for national economies should be pre-empted and managed .
I wish to point out that Portugal was one of the founding Members of NAFO , represented by the Community when it joined in 1986 . This has not brought us any great benefits - quite the opposite in fact , as evidenced by the difficulties facing the Portuguese long-distance fleet .
in writing . We have problems with the SIS and particularly the planned SIS II , which will create enormous databases with too few guarantees to protect the privacy of citizens .
However , this report does not change the nature of the current system , just extends it to new Member States .
Without access to SIS , the citizens of these countries will not be allowed to travel freely in the rest of the EU .
For these reasons we voted in favour of the report .
The legislative resolution of the European Parliament on which we have voted today , which Parliament has already adopted and which I also backed , is a major milestone in the enlargement of the Schengen area .
This resolution will contribute to the speedy implementation of the acquis communautaire as it applies to the SIS in Slovakia and the other Visegrad Four countries , as well as in the Baltic States and Slovenia .
Some time ago all of the Members elected from Slovakia urged the Council to refrain from postponing the Schengen area enlargement date until 17 December 2008 , which we found unacceptable .
It appears that this intervention was a factor in the reassessment and acceleration of a process which will now , I believe , make the Schengen area a reality for Slovak citizens before the end of 2007 .
I welcome the fact that the implementation of technical assistance , as well as the SIS , SIS II and SISone4ALL , will proceed on time ; and that the European Parliament has gone to great lengths to ensure agreement during the first reading , thus avoiding risk of Parliament causing any delays in the implementation of SIS II .
The citizens of the new Member States are looking forward to the enlargement of the Schengen area , an act generally perceived as the genuine , definitive and complete accomplishment of EU integration .
in writing . ( SK ) The free movement of persons in the Schengen area is a visible and practical exercise of the basic rights guaranteed under the European Community Treaty .
To our citizens , the free movement of persons , unimpeded by passport checks , is a concrete example of the benefits associated with EU membership .
Thanks to the Portuguese proposal , the European frontier of the Schengen area will , from 1 January 2008 , move east from the Czech-German border to the Slovak-Ukrainian one .
The interior ministers of the Member States agreed on this enlargement date after many months of negotiations and innumerable discussions .
In 2004 the European Commission announced that , due to technical delays , it had to propose a new timetable envisaging an operational SIS II as of 17 December 2008 .
The risk was that the original enlargement date might be put off until 2009 .
I have voted in favour of the report by the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , on the proposal for a Council decision on the application of the Schengen acquis in respect of the Schengen Information System of the newly acceded Member States .
I believe that the new Member States will meet all the essential requirements for securing the external Schengen border as recommended by the EP rapporteur .
Even though it has not proved possible to launch the new SIS II according to plan , the provisional integration of the new Member States into the current system , SISone4ALL , will provide adequate time to accomplish the SIS II .
I am convinced that meeting the Schengen area enlargement deadline will contribute to the greater confidence of citizens in the European project as a whole .
I have chosen to abstain in the final vote on Mr Coelho 's report today .
The fundamental criticism of the Schengen system continues to be highly valid when it comes , for example , to personal privacy and the ability of refugees to claim asylum .
The continued construction of ' Fortress Europe ' must cease as soon as possible .
I do , on the other hand , of course recognise the right of individual Member States to join the system if the countries in question are anxious so to do .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed colleague , Mr Böge of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund , with a sum of around EUR 24 million being granted to our Hungarian and Greek friends , following the floods suffered by these Member States and their populations in March and April 2006 .
Even though we must deplore the delays , many of which were due to the Member States themselves , we should be pleased about the usefulness of this fund , which is endowed with a maximum annual sum of EUR 1 billion .
Given the deadlock in the Council on reviewing the Solidarity Fund , the mobilisation of the Fund to help the victims of natural disasters in Greece and Hungary in 2006 is an opportunity to reiterate the need to ensure that regional disasters remain eligible for the Fund , and to adapt it so that it corresponds most effectively to what the victims of this type of disaster need .
It is also an opportunity to reaffirm our opposition to the ideas of extending the scope of the Fund without raising its financial ceiling and of lowering the threshold to mobilise the Fund , in such a way that the EU Member States with the highest GDP stand to gain the most from it .
We should also like to highlight our proposals , adopted by Parliament , aimed at acknowledging the specific nature of disasters in the Mediterranean region - and adapting the Solidarity Fund to timeframes and eligible actions , and to the specific nature of natural disasters such as drought and fire - and at looking into the possibility of setting up a farming disaster fund .
The purpose of Draft amending budget No 2 / 2007 is to mobilise the Solidarity Fund , with a view to granting financial assistance to Hungary and Greece to help repair the damage caused by the floods of March and April 2006 in those countries .
Apart from the delay in activating this EU financial assistance , the cause of which must be investigated , one of the most striking points is the paltry amount in relation to the estimated losses directly sustained .
The overall amount of Community financial aid for these disasters is some EUR 24.4 million to a loss totalling almost EUR 900 - EUR 520 million in the case of Hungary and EUR 372 in the case of Greece .
This is another example , in other words , of the discrepancy between the volume of losses and the amount offered by the Community . This calls into question the idea of effective solidarity with the people living in the affected regions .
The current Solidarity Fund therefore needs to be reassessed in order to adapt eligibility criteria so that the Fund corresponds better to the needs of disaster victims .
( SK ) Yes , Mr President , I have voted in favour of the European Parliament Regulation on the addition of vitamins and minerals and certain other substances to foods , which lays down the procedures for exercising the executive powers transferred to the Commission , and I support the Council decision of 17 July 2006 in the matter of commitology , which can be summarised as ' regulatory procedure with scrutiny ' .
The European Parliament has adopted a text enabling the transfer to the Commission of the power to take quasi-legislative measures where necessary , the measures in question being those provided for in Article 2 of Decision No. 468 / 1999 , as amended by Decision No. 512 / 2006 , which lays down the procedures for exercising the executive powers that have been transferred to the Commission .
In this case the decision is a step in the right direction .
In general , however , it still applies that the European Parliament should leave to its Members the power to decide democratically on legislative procedures .
I voted in favour of the Scheele report because I feel that the excessive ingestion of vitamins and minerals can be harmful to health and because it is crucial that information is easily understood by all consumers .
The difficulties raised by various national laws are now reduced by this proposal via harmonisation of the Member States ' legal , regulatory and administrative provisions on the addition of vitamins , minerals and other substances .
I voted in favour of the Bortone report on the proposal for a regulation on nutrition and health claims made on food . It is based on greater information and protection for the consumer , and seeks to ban misleading nutrition and health claims , thus minimising their harmful effects and delivering greater consumer protection .
Food is the very foundation of health .
The concept of health is not solely confined to the absence of disease ; it also encompasses the person 's physical and emotional well-being .
It is therefore essential , in my view , that health claims be scientifically proven following assessment by the European Food Safety Authority .
in writing . - ( EL ) Following the vote in favour of the Prüm Treaty , the follow-up version of the Schengen Treaty , the SIS II information system and the decision on the uncontrolled and unimpeded collection and exchange of personal data , including on political , ideological , philosophical and religious beliefs , the European Parliament has now approved the Visa Information System ( VIS ) .
This system , which legalises the collection , processing and exchange of personal and biometric data on any foreigner applying for a visa for any country of the EU , to which the prosecuting authorities and secret services of each Member State have access , adds yet another link to the chain which the EU is using to throttle individual rights .
The EU aims for the VIS to be the biggest biometric database in the world .
These measures increase repression and the mechanisms used to impose it to gigantic proportions and institutionalise the potential to keep records on every inhabitant of the planet .
The ΕU is gradually turning into a barrack / fortress for its peoples and the citizens of third countries .
However , as capital extends measures to repress and throttle the rights of the workers in order to consolidate and safeguard its sovereignty , so too will the waves of resistance and disobedience and the inevitable fight to overturn the power of the monopolies and their reactionary Union .
in writing . ( SV ) When it comes to the opportunities under this proposal for foreign authorities to get access to data in Swedish registers , we would make it a precondition that such access be preceded by a request to the Swedish authorities and subsequent approval .
In the light of this , we are opposed to what is known as a ' hit-no hit ' system .
in writing . Whilst Conservatives support co-operation between police forces , we cannot support bringing the provisions in the Prüm Treaty into the EU framework .
We have grave concerns , as does the European Data Protection Supervisor , with regard to the requirements on the collection of data on individual citizens who are neither suspected nor who have committed a crime .
In addition , the issue of " hot pursuit " without authorisation by other Member States police forces is a source of great concern .
Conservatives believe that intergovernmental co-operation in the field of counter-terrorism and serious criminal cases is essential but feel that there should be an " opt-in " clause to allow Member States the freedom to maintain their traditional systems of justice .
I voted in favour , because the report is aimed at the approximation of the laws and regulations of the Member States , which will lead to closer cross-border cooperation between police forces through exchanges of information and research on criminal offences .
One of the EU 's objectives consists of giving the citizens greater levels of protection , freedom , security and justice .
Effective international cooperation by means of exchanging data , while guaranteeing the right to privacy and the protection of personal data , will help meet this objective .
The Prüm Treaty was signed , outside the EU 's legal framework , on 27 May 2005 , by seven Member States , with the aim , as they put it , of ' cross-border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime ' .
Since then , nine more Member States , including Portugal , have stated their intention to ratify it .
This Treaty forms part of the securitarianism that has been brought in under the cloak of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' , entailing serious risks to the citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
What is at stake is the establishment of a framework for police cooperation - joint operations , mutual assistance and even the possibility of the police force of one Member State taking action on the territory of another .
The latter appears to have caused controversy in the Council . The exchange of a wealth of information contained in personal data has proved similarly controversial .
It is particularly significant that the majority in Parliament rejected our group 's proposal , whereby ' it will be forbidden to process personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin , political opinions , religious or philosophical beliefs , membership of a political party or a union or relating to health or sex life . '
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the subject of the fight against terrorism , it is most unusual that it should still be so difficult , today , for the national police forces and the anti-terrorism authorities of the various EU Member States to cooperate together and to exchange information .
However , what we now know for certain is that the attacks of 11 September and those of 11 March in Madrid were planned , at least in part , on EU soil .
These attacks demonstrated the ineffectiveness of Europe 's instruments and policies for combating terrorism .
Terrorism knows no bounds ; the fight against terrorism must know no bounds either , and intergovernmental cooperation in this area must be stepped up as a matter of urgency .
The same goes for the controls at the Member States ' borders : they must be reintroduced as quickly as possible , because they are the bare minimum when it comes to combating terrorism effectively and efficiently .
As a final point , I should like to emphasise a reality : that of the Islamic nature of terrorism in its new guise .
A new political and religious ideology is gaining ground in Europe and in the Muslim world .
It represents a fearsome breeding ground for terrorism .
in writing . I voted against amendment 43 relating to so-called ' measures in the event of imminent danger ' in the abovementioned report as I believe that measures put forward do not represent an effective means of combating cross-border crime .
in writing . - ( EL ) The European Parliament today gave the go-ahead for the integration of the most basic provisions of the Prüm Treaty , known as Schengen III , into the so-called acquis communautaire and into the national legislation of the Member States under a simplified procedure , in other words without the signing and ratification procedures required under international treaties .
These provisions oblige the Member States to create DNA files and permit the collection , processing and automated exchange of DNA data , fingerprints and other records and information by the repressive mechanisms , including on persons who they suspect will commit a criminal offence or jeopardise public order and security .
It expressly provides that the purpose of exchanging such information is to safeguard public order at international demonstrations , especially in the run-up to EU summits .
That is why it grants the right for joint operations and full powers , including the use of firearms , to foreign police forces .
The Greek Communist Party has condemned the further criminalisation of civil and trade union action , preventive personal records and the stepping-up of the preventive repression of grassroots movements promoted by the provisions of the Treaty .
The peoples must condemn this Treaty , which is dangerous to individual rights and democratic freedoms and step up their fight against the stepping-up of autocratic measures and the anti-democratic and anti-grassroots policy of the EU in general .
The German Presidency is seeking to transfer some parts of the Prüm Treaty to the third pillar .
The objectives of this text , which is aimed at combating terrorist threats and protecting the public , are of the highest importance .
Consequently , I must highlight the fact that the course of action chosen by the Council - namely demanding an emergency opinion from Parliament - has hampered the normal functioning of interinstitutional relations .
Parliament has always held a clear , responsible position on terrorism and cross-border crime . It has supported the creation of conditions for cross-border cooperation and the exchange of information between bodies responsible for prevention and investigation into criminal offences .
This is the only way that we can hope to prevent terrorist threats effectively .
The establishment of procedures enabling the exchange of information to be prompt and effective is clearly of the highest importance . I therefore support the report .
It is both urgent and vitally important that this framework decision on data protection be adopted .
A new global legal framework on data protection under the third pillar comparable to the rules in force in Community law is a vital factor in guaranteeing the same level of protection .
I therefore welcome the fact that a political agreement has finally been reached , and I wish to pay tribute to the rapporteur Mrs Roure for her outstanding contribution to achieving this outcome .
Improving data protection under the third pillar presupposes that this framework decision should apply to the entire pillar , including Europol , Eurojust and the Customs Information System , which already come under the third pillar .
As such , I welcome this extension and the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , in particular the insertion of an assessment and revision clause so that the Commission can submit proposals for improving the framework decision after three years .
I also endorse the 15 general principles presented by Mr Frattini , which reflect the thrust of the acquis in the area of personal data protection processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Greek Communist Party voted against the report because , despite the individual improvements that it proposes to the new version of the Council 's framework-decision , it fundamentally adopts in its entirety its basic philosophy , which is the unrestricted and - in practice - uncontrollable facility for the repressive mechanisms of the EU and the prosecuting authorities both in its Member States and in third countries ( such as the USA ) and even private individuals to collect , process and exchange between each other all the personal data of every citizen of the EU , including data relating to their political and trade union action and ideological , philosophical and religious beliefs .
The sights of the repressive mechanisms are now set on every citizen of the EU , given that the collection and transmission of everyone 's personal data is permitted , even if they are hardly even suspected of any act , purely and simply for reasons of public order and security .
The addition of 15 guidelines for the protection of personal data is nothing more than a wish-list and exposé of ideas , without any possibility of imposing compliance with them in practice by the repressive mechanisms .
In reality , there is absolutely no protection , in that the exceptions from this protection are becoming the rule , with the simple and uncontrolled citing of reasons of public security , while data protection is the exception , which it is almost impossible for anyone to impose .
In the era of terrorist threats , the balance between privacy and protecting the citizens is becoming a constant challenge that we can only overcome with clear , responsible measures .
The rules on data protection used for judicial and police cooperation must be drawn up in such a way as to strengthen the principle of mutual trust between the authorities involved , enabling more effective European cooperation and the highest possible protection for the citizens when it comes to the use of this data .
The measures to be taken should therefore be accurate and complete . They should protect fundamental rights and comply with the articles in the Charter of Fundamental Rights covering privacy and the protection of personal data .
I therefore welcome the political agreement reached with the Council , which will lead to the rapid adoption of this proposal for a framework decision .
Creating the conditions for recovering fish stocks , in this case cod , is vital not only in terms of protecting marine biology resources but also keeping fisheries activity alive .
The objective should be to fish less when according to scientific research and to fishermen themselves , stocks are in need of recovery if fishing is to take place - perhaps on a bigger scale - in the future .
We must bear in mind , however , that these recovery plans , whereby fishing is restricted , have a serious economic and social impact that must be weighed up and taken into account .
Against this backdrop , we support the proposals in this regard contained in the report .
What is needed is for the sector to be compensated for the economic and social consequences of this break in fishing , and there should be a Community compensation fund specifically for this purpose . In other words the common fisheries policy must take on its responsibilities .
Our vote against Amendments 20 , 21 and 22 was based on our view that decisions on total allowable catches and quotas should not be automatically linked to the opinions of the Council for the Exploration of the Sea .
Other factors , economic and social factors for example , should be taken into account , as evidenced by representation in the Regional Advisory Councils .
in writing . ( PL ) Despite the restrictions on fishing quotas introduced in recent years , some Baltic cod stocks are now below acceptable biological limits .
The report wisely proposes an 8 % reduction of the number of days at sea using fishing gear , more rigorous inspections , and in particular raising to 300 kg the limit above which fishing vessels must obtain permission from the competent bodies at the point of unloading .
In addition , it proposes increasing the minimum size of cod fished in the Baltic to 40 cm .
The rapporteur also rightly refers to the issue of dividing the Baltic into an eastern and a western area , as these are two quite distinct ecosystems .
Different fishing quotas should therefore be laid down for each of these areas of the Baltic .
Priority should be given to the east as stocks there are now below acceptable biological limits .
The plan to prepare a report on the social and economic impact of implementation of the proposed regulation on the sector deserves our support too .
The report should focus in particular on the employment structure and the financial situation of fishermen , ship owners and enterprises involved in cod fishing and processing .
Mr President , I just wish to say that the Irish delegation and my colleagues in the PPE-DE Group voted in favour of this report .
We are happy with its emphasis on the role of producer groups and crisis management .
However , we have a problem with two amendments , 11 and 111 , which were voted through together .
These two amendments will pose particular problems for potato growers in Ireland who are currently losing significant entitlements to the single farm payment to the national reserve because the land they use for growing potatoes is not eligible for the single farm payment as things stand .
We welcome the Commission 's proposal to remove this exclusion and to change this anomaly , and we hope that the Commission 's proposal is ratified by the Council , not the one as amended here this morning .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the Salinas García report on market reforms in the fruit and vegetable sector .
The Commission believes that reform in the sector is needed , and this is a view I share .
What the Commission is proposing , though , is not reform .
What is needed is to end the unnecessary regulation of the entire sector , to remove export subsidies and to abolish quotas completely .
This , however , is not what the Commission is proposing .
Instead , it is proposing minor , cosmetic changes that retain the regulatory nature of the whole policy .
Neither I nor the other MEPs from the Czech Civil Democratic Party ( ODS ) support this approach and we have accordingly voted against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the bulk of the report by my fellow Member , Mrs Salinas García , on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down specific rules as regards the fruit and vegetable sector .
This important sector , which represents around 17 % of the Union 's agricultural production , is , in reality , very varied , fragile and confronted with structural problems , at the same time as being exposed to growing external pressure .
It deserves to be supported , not only for producers but also for public health reasons - the health of European consumers - and for our food processing industry .
The European Commission proposals are an initial basis for work that will have to be adjusted and improved in many areas .
Nevertheless , I welcome the specific attention paid by the Union to this important sector .
Following the reform of the CAP , which introduced the principle of single payment and which paved the way for the decoupling of production aid , the Commission now feels it is the turn of fruit and vegetables .
Using the old arguments of competitiveness , market forces , the WTO and so on , the Commission has put forward proposals that will , if the governments of the Member States agree to them , lead to more abandonment of production and more unemployment in the future , and will link aid to ' historical ' payments and to the single payment scheme , and we are opposed to this .
In Portugal , the industrial tomato sector is under threat .
It is a sector in which there has been a great deal of investment , one that has developed , that has produced quantity and quality , and one in which the overwhelming majority of production provides work for many small and medium-sized farmers , family farming and many workers linked directly or indirectly to the agri-food industry .
If the Commission 's proposal were to go through , thousands of jobs in agriculture and industry would be put in jeopardy , even if in the short term there is still a payment to farmers and a transitional period .
Although the report introduced several measures that we welcome , it does not substantially change the Commission 's proposal and as such we could not vote in favour .
in writing . ( SV ) The proposed addition to the Commission 's proposal put forward by Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is beneath contempt .
We firmly reject the proposals to subsidise growers of cherries and berries , mushrooms and fruit , to introduce area payments for garlic , to investigate the possible introduction of an EU quality label , to introduce an EU quality control agency for fruit and vegetables from third countries and to introduce a security fund for the said sector of cultivation and wordings relating to export refunds and the like for processed tomatoes , et cetera .
The June List observes , once again , that , in this situation , it is fortunate that the European Parliament does not have powers of codecision in respect of the EU 's agricultural policy . Otherwise , the EU would fall into the trap of protectionism and of heavy subsidies to all the various groups within the agricultural industry .
We have therefore voted against this report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The purpose of the proposed review of the regulation on fruit and vegetables is to adjust to the new CAP , the EU financial perspective and the WTO .
Decoupling subsidies from production , substantially reducing Community support and abolishing the remaining traces of export subsidies will result in increased imports and a reduction in exports , will shrink the manufacturing industry and turn certain factories into packaging units for imported raw materials and will result in drastic cutbacks or the abandonment of certain crops , the subsidies for which make a significant contribution to farmers ' incomes .
In Greece , the worst victims are mainly growers of juicing oranges , industrial tomatoes and sultanas , which are our country 's main products .
The result will be the concentration of the production of fruit and vegetables in few hands , the mass destruction of small and medium-sized farms , using decoupled subsidies as bait , and an increase in the profitability of commercial industrialists , with guaranteed cheap raw materials , both domestic and imported .
As far as producer organisations are concerned , their role is being upgraded , even using anti-democratic changes , so that even those who do not want to are forced to join .
However , the unwillingness of farmers to join producer organisations derives from their role as mediation bodies between farmers and commercial industrialists , for the benefit of the interests of the commercial industrialists .
We MEPs of the Greek Communist Party have voiced our opposition and voted against the report , because the proposed changes are yet another blow to small and medium-sized farms .
in writing . ( SV ) This report sets right , to a certain extent , the market in fruit and vegetables , which is brim-full of excessively detailed regulation , and phases out export refunds for this sector .
I am not , therefore , voting against the report , but the improvements to it are not great enough for me to vote in favour of it , so I am abstaining .
I voted to abstain and against the amendments proposed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
These amendments moved away from the principle and practice of reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
I abstained where there was no clear implication for UK interests , but where there were clear concerns for continental Member States - ' hot pursuit ' being that particular vote .
I also voted against eight amendments , which , when taken in combination , actually increased funds to fruit and vegetable sectors , which is against the UK Labour Party 's view that support spending should be reduced and contradicts CAP reform .
( PL ) Mr President , Montesquieu remarked that democracies are based on law , monarchies on honour and dictatorships on fear .
As we are a democratic institution , I should like to say that I do not agree with legal acts referring to other legal acts that are not binding .
I share the view expressed by Mrs Bonde on the subject .
In that connection , I should like to point out that I voted against Amendment 25 to the report by Mr Crespo and Mr Brok .
If by some mistake it appears that I voted in its favour , please note that my intention had been to vote against .
( PL ) Mr President , I have today voted against the report calling for work on the new Union treaty , the new Constitution for Europe , to begin as soon as possible with a view to adoption of the draft document .
The League of Polish Families to which I belong is opposed to the creation of a new European super state and to all measures aimed at depriving nation states of their sovereignty .
We trust that the attempt to draft a new treaty based on the draft Constitution for Europe , which has been pushed through so forcibly by certain Members of this House , will end in failure .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , contrary to the previous speaker , the Pensioners ' Party is highly in favour of the existence of a Europe that is also political and that heralds benefits for citizens , in particular for citizens who want a future , because they are working now , and for citizens who want a present , because they are now retired and have the right to a better life than that experienced by the elderly and retired in the past .
Thus they look to Europe for security , because all too often , if not always , States ignore the real everyday issues that matter to citizens , such as how to survive in a global society that focuses purely on the ' god of money ' and not on human beings at all stages of life , from the cradle to the grave .
We therefore hope that the European Constitution will be adopted as soon as possible .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted in favour of this report , which is basically a sound one .
We wish , however , to offer a number of clarifications .
We voted in favour of what is stated in paragraph 8 as we are in favour of strengthening the common foreign and security policy .
It is important to point out , however , that we are not in favour of common defence .
Point 12 highlights issues such as Social Europe and the struggle against climate change that are important to Europeans .
However , we are opposed to incorporating the Copenhagen criteria into the Constitution .
We believe that the Copenhagen criteria are important , but we do not want them to be written into the Constitution as this would make it harder to continue enlargement .
For the same reason , we are also opposed to other obstacles being placed in the path of the candidate countries .
We furthermore reject the preferential position proposed under paragraph 18 for religious communities in comparison with the rest of civil society .
in writing . The Constitutional Treaty is a landmark document which provides a blueprint for a more dynamic and effective European Union , strengthens the democratic character of an enlarged Union and enhances our decision-making capacity and ability to act on the world stage .
We are committed to preserving to the greatest extent possible the substance of the Constitution .
We support this report .
We reject the concept of a two-tier Europe .
However , we have voted against paragraph 11 regarding the diminution of the protection of the rights of citizens because of its vagueness .
How is this decided and who decides that the protection of rights of citizens has been diminished ?
We have also voted against paragraph 20 , which demands that all Member States coordinate their ratification procedures in order to allow for simultaneous ratification .
How can we coordinate between different systems of Member States particularly when some require ratification by referenda and others by Parliament ?
We need to respect the ratification system of each Member State .
Saying this , we encourage governments to come together and decide on as short a timeframe as possible for agreement and ratification of a Treaty according to their national requirements .
We voted in favour of CA28 as the language is more reflective of the reality than that of the PSE amendment regarding ratification in France and the Netherlands .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) I abstained during the final vote on the Barón-Brok report on the roadmap for the Union 's constitutional process .
Indeed , the rejection of the European Constitutional Treaty by two Member States in fact nullifies the proposal submitted for ratification by the Member States in 2005 .
This established fact must therefore be taken into account by the Heads of State or Government who cannot keep the initial text even ' in a different format ' .
Equally , the process of drafting a new treaty must not take place at the expense of European democracy by means of a mere intergovernmental conference .
in writing . The Socialist group has approved this resolution by an overwhelming majority .
I should add on behalf of the Labour MEPs that the EPLP fully supports the main conclusion of this report , namely " a commitment to calling an Intergovernmental Conference and the definition of a roadmap containing a procedure , a clear mandate and a clear objective of reaching an agreement before the end of this year " .
However , we thought that it was inappropriate to single out some - but not other - elements contained in the Constitutional Treaty as being essential , as the new treaty will only see the light of day if it is acceptable to all 27 member states .
I voted in favour because I feel it is crucial and increasingly urgent that we find solutions whereby we can overcome the problems and challenges facing the EU , both internally and externally .
This report is well-balanced and represents an important contribution to resolving the institutional deadlock in which the Union finds itself at the earliest opportunity .
The Union must be given adequate resources to meet the citizens ' concerns regarding the challenges of globalisation and climate change , thereby contributing towards strengthening the democratic control over its decision-making processes .
The new Treaty , regardless of the name and the structure it is eventually given , must retain the thrust of the text already ratified by a number of Member States and at the same time incorporate the amendments needed to obtain the consensus it cannot do without .
With the right legislative and budgetary procedures for giving the EU the maximum amount of decision-making ability and for making its policies as effective as possible , the new Treaty may help resolve some of the serious problems that Europe is facing .
The adoption of this report is definitive proof of the flagrant disregard for the sovereign decision made by the people of France and the Netherlands , demonstrating once again that Parliament 's concept of democracy does not extend as far as respect for the sovereign decisions of people expressed via referendums .
This decision taken by the majority in Parliament demonstrates that the ' period of reflection ' was nothing more than a means of overlooking the negative result of the two referendums and of preventing others , in which there could be further rejections of the so-called European Constitution , from being held .
Two years on , more pressure is being exerted to step up the capitalist penetration of the EU , the neoliberal policies , the ever-faster militarisation and the centralisation of power into the hands of supranational institutions , which are becoming increasingly distant from the citizens and dominated by the major powers .
It is unacceptable for Parliament to confer on itself a legitimacy it does not have , which is precisely what it is doing in its attempts to interfere with the timetable and content of the process , that is to say , in the sovereign decision of different countries , and to coordinate ratification processes .
We are in favour of a more democratic , fairer Europe that is characterised by solidarity , a Europe that promotes peace and cooperation with people from all parts of the world , a Europe that complies with the principle of sovereign States with equal rights .
in writing . ( SV ) The federalist majority in the European Parliament are not ideologically representative of their electorates as far as matters pertaining to the EU Constitution are concerned .
At present , everything possible is being done to avoid asking the voters for their opinions on Europe 's future via referendums .
We are in favour of arranging referendums on such matters , but we do not believe that the European Parliament is the proper body to push through referendums in the Member States .
The federalist majority would now like to secure as much as possible of the supranationalism from the old draft Constitutional Treaty by means of simply changing the title of the draft EU Constitution .
We have therefore voted against the report submitted by Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The Union needs a treaty that builds on the self-determination of the Member States and through which , together , we regulate how cross-border issues are to be managed .
One only has to read point 6 to justify rejecting the Resolution .
According to Point 6 , the Resolution ' reaffirms its commitment to achieving a settlement of the ongoing constitutional process of the European Union that is based on the content of the Constitutional Treaty , possibly under a different presentation ... '
These few words lay bare the true intention of the current ( cosy ) negotiations taking place in the Council - in other words , between the governments run by the Portuguese Socialists , the German Christian Democrat / Social Democrat coalition , and so on - which are purely and simply an attempt to ( re ) impose the thrust of the Treaty rejected by France and the Netherlands .
This is indicative of deep disdain for the democratic sovereign will expressed by the people of these two countries in national referendums .
During the debate , did anyone actually ask whether they ' take people for fools ' ?
Yet it is precisely because they do not ' take people for fools ' that the political forces of the right and the social democrats , in cahoots with one another , negotiate ' behind closed doors ' and keep their cards close to their chests so as to preclude the risk of failure .
The German Presidency moves full steam ahead , claiming it has a ' mandate ' to ' preserve ' the content and ' substance ' of the so-called ' European Constitution ' in the ' new ' draft Treaty to be presented by December 2007 ( ! ) and ratified by 2009 .
In a word , unacceptable .
in writing . ( DA ) The Danish Social Democratic delegation in the European Parliament has voted in favour of the own-initiative report on the roadmap for the Union 's Constitutional Process .
We should like to emphasise in this connection that the issue of how and when the individual Member State chooses to ratify a new Treaty should continue to be a matter for itself as a sovereign nation .
We think it sensible , however , so to coordinate the ratification process that , irrespective of the forms it might take in individual Member States , it is conducted in such a way that it will be possible formally to complete it in all the countries simultaneously , as indicated in paragraph 20 of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I believe that the majority of the European Parliament has not sought to respond to the message sent out by the EU populations that rejected the Constitutional Treaty .
By rejecting Amendment 1 , Parliament has refused to allow the people to be consulted by referendum on any new treaty .
The fact is , this element is crucial because the opportunity for them to impose social policies or policies matching their aspirations depends on it .
This is a major shortcoming of the European Union .
That is why I shall vote against this report .
in writing . I voted against paragraph 20 ( original text ) in the above-mentioned report as I believe that the proposal to hold a ratification process simultaneously across all EU Member States is impractical .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report endeavours to resuscitate the European Constitution .
The European Parliament is insultingly ignoring the rejection and condemnation of the ' European Constitution ' , through referenda , by the French and Dutch people and by the other peoples whose governments have deprived them of the right to express themselves .
The familiar coalition of the political spokesmen of capital ( conservatives , socialists and liberals ) and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is calling on the governments of the Member States to come to an agreement before the end of 2007 , to adopt and enforce the ' European Constitution ' before the European elections in 2009 , with the same reactionary content , perhaps packaged differently , in order to deceive the peoples .
There can be no progressive ' European Constitution ' of the imperialist EU of capital .
Any ' Constitutional ' Treaty will be a treaty which safeguards and promotes the interests and ambitions of big , Euro-unifying business , just like the current treaties of the EU and , previously , of the EEC .


The European plutocracy , the imperialists and their servants need a European Constitution , in order to shield their power , in order to safeguard the capitalist system , in order to strike at the rights of the working class and the peoples of Europe , in order to repress the grassroots movements and in order to step up their aggressive policy of intervention and war .
It is in the interests of the people to bury the ' Constitutional Treaty ' and the EU itself once and for all .
in writing . ( SK ) Critics frequently describe the EU as a strong organisation which meddles in too many areas .
As an MEP for Slovakia , a new Member State which has only recently acceded to the Union , I feel that we should have a stronger Europe capable of greater action .
For this reason I believe it is essential to adopt a revised constitutional document , that is , to have clear rules of the game .
The Union needs to reform the founding treaties in a way which would enjoy broad public support .
I appreciate the efforts by Chancellor Angela Merkel to lead the Union out of its constitutional crisis by introducing a road map offering appropriate solutions for the problems that the European Union is facing both internally and externally , as well as the problems associated with the expansion and deepening of the EU 's political dimension .
An enlarged EU needs tools and means to operate efficiently , to strengthen its role in the world , and to address the concerns of its citizens against the background of challenges brought about inter alia by globalisation , climate change , the need to ensure energy supply and an ageing population .
Many of the issues which provoked some of the greatest concern among the European public , such as the directive on services in the internal market and the financial framework , have since been resolved .
As reiterated in the Berlin Declaration on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome , we must build the EU on a renewed joint foundation and we must do so before the 2009 elections for the European Parliament .
This is why I have voted in favour of the report by the rapporteurs Enrique Barón Crespo and Elmar Brok .
Had a referendum on the Constitutional Treaty taken place in Portugal , in the wording and circumstances of two years ago , I would have voted ' yes ' .
Among other things , the institutional stability that would have arisen would have been beneficial to the EU .
As events turned out , precisely as stipulated , two countries exercised their right to a veto , which represents a considerable change in circumstances . We must now respond to reality , not in spite of it .
I still believe that the institutional architecture needs to be adjusted to accommodate the reality of ' Europe ' enlarged to 27 and as such I feel that the best solution is the maximalist solution to overcoming the difficulties arising from this new set of circumstances - if only to ensure that the solution reached is a stable one - but a minimalist solution to introducing amendments that , no matter how much the authors of the proposed Treaty would like , were rejected .
Realism is no less virtuous than idealism .
Lastly , I feel that as regards the referendum , and the possibility of holding one in Portugal , the further away the solution is from the Constitutional Treaty , the less the need for a referendum ; and vice-versa , of course .
in writing . ( SV ) I abstained in the vote on the roadmap for the draft Constitutional Treaty in respect of an amendment stating that all countries ' shall ' hold referendums .
I am in favour of referendums , but this is something that each Member State must decide for itself .
The German constitution , for example , does not recognise the instrument of referendums .
in writing . I , along with my EPLP colleagues , voted to abstain on critical issues of this report , which , even as an own-initiative endeavour , is inappropriate on certain levels .
Paragraph 5 is an ambiguous reference to the Member States that have not put the text to ratification yet .
There are also issues where inappropriate demands are made on a list of issues or concern idle threats to reject Council negotiations .
Alongside this is a request to hold simultaneous ratification , which could present serious problems in many Member States .
However , there were other serious issues which could be supported and where I could support them , I did .
in writing . ( PL ) This is a very significant report , which will enable the European Parliament to make its views on the action plan regarding the European Union 's constitutional process heard at the forthcoming June European Council .
Every effort should be made to preserve the content of the treaty , whilst at the same time including in the text provisions on the new challenges facing Europe .
I could mention climate change , social Europe , the war on terror , inter-cultural dialogue and economic management .
It is also important to point out that the so-called mini-treaty does not seem to provide a solution to this difficult situation .
The European Council should convene an intergovernmental conference as soon as possible and reach a compromise before the end of 2007 , so that decisions on the ratification process can be taken by the end of 2008 .
This would allow the incoming Parliament elected in 2009 to operate within the framework of the new Constitutional Treaty .
The debate on the definition of the functions of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees ( UNHCR ) comes through clearly in Parliament 's resolution , and in the conclusions of the Council . It is abundantly clear that attempts are being made to control and manipulate the UNHCR .

It is in this context that one must understand the criticism and pressure from the EU , regarding , firstly , the manner in which some countries have been elected to the body - the EU opposes the so-called ' clean slate ' principle and favours the introduction of eligibility criteria ; secondly , the ' special procedure ' for increasing the mandates per country and the possibility of creating new mandates by simple majority - and the absence of a ' code of conduct ' for this mechanism ; and thirdly , the modalities of the ' Universal Periodic Review ' .
In other words , what is needed is , on the one hand , to continue to monitor the development of the UNHCR , especially given the USA and its allies are known to manipulate it , and on the other hand , to support our proposals to promote fundamental freedoms , rights and guarantees , social progress , peace and solidarity , the rejection of the use of human rights to disguise a policy of interventionism and aggression towards sovereign peoples and States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a representative of the Pensioners ' Party I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Gibault on artists ' working conditions and pensions .
There are artists who become very famous and certainly do not need the European Parliament to facilitate their movement and pension conditions , but there are also excellent artists who unfortunately do not have great success ; such artists , and there are many of them , are nonetheless human beings - workers and pensioners who deserve the same respect as all other citizens .
There are artists who live a life of work and poverty , unprotected by regulation and without being shown respect .
This is all the more serious when the person to whom a lack of respect is shown has a sensitive soul , as artists have .
That is why I voted in favour , and I hope that Europe will do more for artists all over Europe and throughout the world .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of Claire Gibault 's report on the social status of artists .
I want to support her commendable work in this area , as she , an artist herself , cares about European artists ' livelihoods .
We of course know that many artists today depend for their livelihood on very short-term contracts in different countries in Europe .
It is therefore very relevant to ensure that artists in Europe also enjoy proper social status and receive social security , and thus in time a pension , because it is a fact that we in Europe want to promote education and culture .
We want to promote the European cultural arena because we know that it is the most important area in decision-making in Europe .
If that is healthy , we can then also build both a single market and a foreign and security policy upon it .
I actually voted in favour of this report as a European , as a Finn and as a member of the Finnish Centre Party , Keskusta , which also represents the Finnish cultural movement .
I voted in favour of this report because I feel it is important that European artists can benefit from an appropriate level of integration in their professional activities .
European standards must be applied with a view to having a dynamic and innovative European cultural policy in all branches of the arts , enabling us to offer artists the social guarantees enjoyed by all other European workers .
We know that this report addresses issues that need to be treated with special care .
Yet there are two points that must be made . First and foremost , it is necessary to confer on artists labour and social rights , in view of the specific nature of their activities and in compliance with the freedom of expression and creation .
We therefore feel it is crucial to take account of the activities of those working in creative arts and to improve their social status . We are critical , however , of some of the proposals in this report on which Parliament has voted .
We know that cultural democratisation can only take place under the right conditions and that these times in which we live , characterised as they are by ever deepening neoliberalism , are not conducive to improving the working conditions and the creativity of most artists .
In Portugal , the situation in this area is complicated too , with attacks on the rights gained and cuts in cultural and artistic activities , in which everybody - the artists and the population as a whole - loses out .
We hope , however , that something can be done to give more visibility to these issues .
in writing . ( SV ) The ability of artists to make a living is an important issue , but it is one that the Member States have responsibility for resolving politically in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
We have therefore voted against this report .
in writing . ( PL ) Mrs Gibault 's report aimed at improving employment conditions for artists deserves strong support .
Most of the difficulties encountered by artists working in Community countries other than their country of origin are not due to cultural issues .
They relate for example to mobility , visa policy , health policy , social security , unemployment and pensions .
The report urges the Commission and the Member States to introduce a European Professional Register for artists .
This would contain information on the status of each artist , the nature and duration of contracts , together with information on employers .
The register would make it possible to transfer pension entitlements and social benefits acquired by artists in third countries when they returned to their country of origin .
It would also allow experience gained whilst working in a Member State to be taken into account .
The challenge facing European cultural policy is the creation of a dynamic cultural environment that is creative and innovative with respect to all types of art .
By supporting this report we are committing ourselves to providing artists with the social guarantees enjoyed by all other European workers .
in writing . ( CS ) I shall be voting in favour of the adoption of the report on the social status of artists .
I feel that this will be a step towards resolving this problem , albeit one that merely scratches the surface and that will require further work .
I feel that the report implicitly places the emphasis on performing artists and rather overlooks literature , which is a highly creative and important branch of the arts .
As far as the report is concerned , writers are mere amateurs whose work is rarely classified as ' professional artistic activity ' .
As for the conditions that exist in , say , the Czech Republic , I know of only one solitary author who is ' allowed ' to be a professional artist .
Furthermore , there is clear and convincing evidence that the Unie českých spisovatelů ( Czech Writers ' Union ) - a left-leaning Czech writers ' organisation - has for years been silenced and segregated by the Czech Culture Ministry .
This only goes to show the sorry state of support for the art of writing .
The report also fails to define what is meant by the term ' European artist ' even though it uses the term on a number of occasions .
Do writers come into this category ?
If so , I feel that they cannot be measured in the same way as so-called performing artists .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report but with a cautionary note in terms of the proposed increase in spending on information , as it would relate to a proposal to bring local journalists here to Brussels .
We would need to be very clear about what we are going to do with the local journalists and ensure that we make information that is available here relevant to the people who read and listen to local media .
I do not think we have done that particularly well in the past , so we need more details on this issue .
( LT ) Mr President , today Parliament adopted a resolution concerning the United Nations Human Rights Council and its fifth session .
As one of the authors of this resolution , I am very pleased that all political groups have agreed on an assessment of the first year of operation of the United Nations Human Rights Council , and which shortcomings it needs to attend to .
They have also authorised a European Parliament ad hoc delegation , which will participate next week in the fifth Human Rights Council plenary session - a session , which is particularly important for the future of this organisation .
As one of the authors of this resolution and a member of the delegation , I would like to thank Parliament and my colleagues for supporting the resolution .
With regard to Parliament 's estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2008 , we wish to highlight just two of the many aspects worthy of consideration .
The first concerns the plan to earmark EUR 10 300 000 in 2008 for ' an awareness campaign in view of the 2009 European elections ' and EUR 900 000 for implementation of the Parliamentary Television Channel .
This is a matter of particular concern given that no detailed information or justifications have been given regarding the use of these financial resources .
For example , how will they be used , and by whom ?
What are the actions to be funded ?
Who is to decide how they are to be used , and according to what criteria ?
Might it be that this ' awareness campaign ' is being used , rather like the referendums on the lapsed Constitutional Treaty , as a covert way of using Community money , scandalously , to fund propaganda campaigns to promote the content of the Treaty ?
The second is the effective guarantee and exercise of multilingualism in the European institutions and , in this case , Parliament .
We wish to highlight the fact that the increasing outsourcing of language and translation services , and other types of unstable contract , inevitably affects the quality of the service and undermines the rights of those providing this service .
in writing .
( SV ) In the first amendment , Mr Lundgren points out that the travelling circus moving between the three different places of work results in absurdly high costs .
With that much I agree .
The problem lies with the accusation , which finds its way into the t