Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 10 March 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Welcome
I would like to welcome to the plenary chamber Maria Romana de Gasperi , the daughter of the great Italian statesman and one of the founders of the European Community , Alcide de Gasperi .
( Applause )
Statements by the President
A second piece of information is that there is disturbing news coming from countries in our distant neighbourhood : Bahrain , Syria and Yemen .
In all of these countries , force has been used to suppress demonstrations being made by people who are demanding democratic change .
Governments which use guns against their own citizens lose all democratic legitimacy .
The violence must be halted , and those responsible put on trial .
The next piece of information : I would like to inform you that we have received notice , today , of the resignation from Parliament of one of our fellow Members - Mr Thaler .
A second Member , Mr Strasser , has notified his intention to resign from Parliament in the next few days .
A third Member - Mr Severin - has left the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and has become a non-attached Member .
These resignations are a consequence of the serious accusations which have appeared in the press about the improper behaviour of some Members of this House .
This morning I called an emergency meeting of the Bureau to discuss the situation .
We are meeting again this evening to continue our discussion .
Speaking on behalf of the Bureau of the European Parliament and , I think , on behalf of the majority of fellow Members in this Chamber , we are determined to pursue a zero tolerance policy towards the actions which have led to the resignations of our fellow Members .
( Applause )
As President elected by you , ladies and gentlemen , I am determined to uphold the integrity of this House and all its Members .
I would like to remind you of the great public responsibility resting on us as representatives elected by the people .
The citizens have entrusted us with the right to exercise authority on their behalf .
We must not disappoint that trust .
The Bureau has decided that we must learn the lessons of this unfortunate incident .
Parliament is trying to establish all the facts .
We will cooperate fully with all competent authorities to explain everything that has happened and to verify all the information .
At the request of the Bureau , I will be in contact with the national ministries for foreign affairs of the countries of the Members concerned to establish what action the judicial authorities in these countries intend to take .
In Parliament , we must attend to strengthening our internal code of conduct for matters of this kind in the future , and this includes more severe sanctions .
We think the recent events show the need for the existence of a legally-binding code of conduct for lobbies operating in the institutions of the European Union .
( Applause )
I will keep you informed of developments as they happen .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to speak before you highlighted Parliament 's determination to call for the resignation of the other MEP , the last MEP , who has not yet resigned .
I thank you and thank Parliament for making a firm and determined decision to implement a zero-tolerance policy because this is all about the credibility of everyone in this House , and above all we must remember that we represent 500 million citizens and not the lobbies , thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , I fully approve of your severity .
I hope that it will also apply to journalists who cannot stir up trouble in order to provoke an offence and who are also in serious breach of ethics .
As for the rest , this House is too attached to the presumption of innocence for me to comment on these matters further .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all I would like to defend the journalist .
I think what has happened deserves to be praised .
Are you aware , Mr Buzek , that there are going to be a dozen more cases ?
Would you join us in recommending - as the Hans-Peter Martin 's List would like to propose - that these fellow Members resign before they are exposed in the media in order to avoid causing further damage to the great European peace project ?
I am therefore asking you to take this request into consideration in the Bureau and also to communicate it to the groups .
( PL ) Mr President , in your statement you said that you are expressing the opinion of the Bureau and the majority of Parliament .
It is the opinion of the entire European Parliament .
We are opposed to the actions of our former fellow Members . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , I would not have asked to take the floor had it not been for the speech before last .
I believe that zero tolerance applies to all Members of this House .
I would therefore like to ask the following question and I ask that a clear answer be given .
Can you , Mr President , or can the Secretary General of this Parliament confirm that Mr Martin is required to repay EUR 168 000 to the European Parliament following a ruling by the European Court of Justice in respect of irregular accounting ?
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I propose we move to the next items on our order of business .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Mr President , given that the Japanese earthquake and the suffering in Japan have taken second place recently , would it not be appropriate for this Parliament to mark them and to join with the people of Japan , and their democracy , expressing our condolences by observing a minute 's silence ?
Last week we held a meeting of all Members of the European Parliament with the President of the European Commission and the President of the Council of the European Union , Mr Van Rompuy .
At the beginning of that meeting I sent expressions of sympathy to the entire Japanese nation .
I spoke , too , of the terrible suffering .
We feel deeply for the Japanese people .
We also stood to observe a minute 's silence in the Chamber to honour the memory of those who died in this catastrophe .
There was also a brief discussion on the subject .
I think the House has done everything necessary to express our solidarity with the Japanese people .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has informed me that with effect from today Mr Severin is no longer a member of the group .
This time it is an official notification .
In accordance with Rule 211 ( 3 ) , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has proposed the following interpretation of Rule 128 entitled ' Proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union ' .
The whole interpretation has been made available for your inspection .
The above interpretation will be considered adopted if no objections are lodged by the opening of the sitting on Thursday , 24 March 2011 .
So you have until tomorrow at 9.00 to lodge objections to this interpretation .
It is a long one , so I am not going to read it out .
Nevertheless , all of you do have access to this interpretation .
I would also like to inform you officially that Mr Thaler has resigned from Parliament with effect from 21 March 2011 .
In accordance with Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) , Parliament has noted the resignation and established the vacancy from the date I have just given .
Mrs Soullie has resigned from Parliament with effect from 24 March 2011 .
In accordance with Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) , Parliament has noted the resignation and established the vacancy from the date I have just given .
In addition , the competent authorities of France have informed me that Mrs Soullie will be replaced by Mr Hortefeux with effect from 24 March 2011 .
I understand Mr Hortefeux is with us today .
Are you in the Chamber , Mr Hortefeux ?
We do not see him - he is not here .

Under Rule 3 ( 2 ) , until such time as his credentials have been validated or a ruling has been given on any dispute , Mr Hortefeux will take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and will enjoy all the rights attaching thereto , provided he has previously made a written declaration stating that he does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament .
Now Mr Cohn-Bendit would like to say something .

( FR ) Mr President , you know as well as I that the possibility of Mr Hortefeux becoming a Member of this House is being legally challenged .
Even so , I find it somewhat disappointing that the French Government is not waiting for this status to be verified .
Since Mr Hortefeux has not indicated his acceptance and not taken part in the inaugural session in Strasbourg , he cannot replace the Member he wants to replace .
That is why I call for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which claims to be so legalistic , to wait for a legal ruling on whether Mr Hortefeux may sit in this Chamber or not .
Otherwise , it is a legal outrage .
It is as if we are engineering one .

( FR ) Mr President , this is not the first time that our fellow Member Mr Cohn-Bendit , who called a president - a prime minister - a dictator in the mould of Hugo Chavez , has failed to respect democracy .
Brice Hortefeux was elected as a Member of the European Parliament in June 2009 .
That is indisputable .
At that time , he was appointed Minister of the Interior .
French law stipulates that an elected representative of the European Parliament who joins government may regain his or her seat upon leaving government .
That is exactly ...
( Interruption from Mr Cohn-Bendit : ' He did not have a seat - that is the problem , Mr Audy ' )

Brice Hortefeux was elected as a Member of the European Parliament .
Do you accept that ?
I shall conclude , Mr President .
By virtue of the Treaties and of the law , it is indisputably up to Member States to name their MEPs .
Having been elected , Brice Hortefeux was legitimately put forward by the French authorities to sit in this Chamber .
The statement you made is unacceptable .

( FR ) Mr President , I would simply like to tell Mr Cohn-Bendit that , in order to challenge a seat , an official proposal must firstly be made .
If no proposal is made , the Committee on Legal Affairs cannot analyse the situation .
Before intervening in this way , I suggest that you think before you act .
That is all .
( Interruption from Mr Cohn-Bendit : ' Yes , but he might not have a seat ' )
You are the one asking me to observe the law .
I have always observed the law .
Now let us leave it to the Committee on Legal Affairs to give its verdict .
It cannot give its verdict without a proposal .
If that proposal is not lawful , the Committee on Legal Affairs will tell us .
Let me say again : let us think before we act .
( FR ) Mr President , I fully agree with the idea that we should wait for the results of the legal analysis .
I would simply like to say one thing : in our country , we are seeing a rise in extremism , and this is doubtless because one part of the political class considers mandates and posts to be at its disposal .
We expect a little more from France , especially with regard to Parliament , which has its seat in Strasbourg .
I would like to come back to the words I read out just now .
Until such time as his credentials have been validated or a ruling has been given on any dispute , Mr Hortefeux is a Member of the European Parliament and is acting in accordance with the rules for Members of the European Parliament .
The matter is subject to verification .
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business : see Minutes
1 .
Amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro (
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this European stability mechanism is necessary in order to provide enduring legal assurance and in order to guarantee solidarity with countries that are having problems , but also in order to secure the euro , guarantee the necessary budgetary discipline and enable a joint response to growth challenges .
In view of the time that an ordinary procedure would have taken , and also in order to avoid a referendum in some Member States , this can only be regulated by a simplified Treaty revision procedure .
However , Parliament is saying that this should not become the usual procedure and that we should actually proceed here in accordance with the ordinary Treaty revision procedure .
The original proposals stated that this should be a purely intergovernmental method in which the Commission had hardly any role and the European Parliament no role whatsoever .
Today we are able to report that , further to the negotiations that we have held with the Commission , the European Central Bank , the President of the European Council and the President of the Euro Group , in almost all matters concerning models , tests and decision bases , all aspects concerned with defining a framework and proposing a regulation for this in a Community procedure , it has so far been accepted by the European Council , by the Council of Finance Ministers , that the European Parliament can also play a part in this process and will play a role in such matters .
We were thus not too pleased initially , but I believe that if Community institutions are used and we can start using intergovernmental procedures as in the past , then when the time is right it will be easy to arrive at a clear Community policy .
Since the institutional conditions are now in place , we can propose to you that we approve this Treaty revision procedure from the European Council and set it in motion .
We therefore tabled such amendments with the unanimous approval of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
We need to realise that our interpretations have also been accepted and confirmed by letters from the President of the Euro Group and the Commissioner for Monetary Affairs , as well as by a letter from the President of the European Council .
I believe that this provides a reliable basis for our adopting this now in order to secure the euro , which has been a great success for Europe , and to move forward together .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the report that we are about to vote for , we still have reservations over the decision to adopt a revision of the Treaty on the intergovernmental character of the mechanism , but at the same time we are in favour , because - as Mr Brok explained - the negotiations that we conducted allowed us to achieve important objectives that relate mainly to the fact that the conditionalities associated with the assistance will be determined by a regulation , hence by a codecision procedure .
It is therefore fair to vote in favour and I would like to thank the many fellow MEPs who have contributed to this result and mention the privilege of working with Mr Brok , Mr Pirillo 's extremely useful advice and also the work of the two rapporteurs from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) : Mr Scicluna and Mr Gauzès , Mr Schade , Mrs Häfner and the group coordinators and of course the chairmen of the groups that have given us such significant political support , thank you .






I would like to welcome the President of the European Commission and the Vice-President of the Commission who are here with us , and also the President-in-Office of the Council .
We have some very important voting , we know that very well , so thank you for your presence at such an important moment .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will be able to comment on the vote tomorrow .
Now is not the time for explanations of vote , so please do not make such comments .
Tomorrow after the vote there will be a time for comments on all the issues - those from today and from tomorrow together .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
I am voting for this report , as the European Council 's proposal to create a permanent stability mechanism would create an intergovernmental procedure beyond the EU 's scope , which would be a dangerous precedent .
The European institutions , specifically the European Commission and Parliament , must be an integral part of this board with the Commission as a member , not an observer .
Parliament is an important organisation for democratic monitoring , and the Council should consider the proposal made by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament regarding a possible compromise on Parliament 's involvement in the mechanism 's operational components .
As such , I would stress the report 's idea that ' the mechanism must not give rise to a new model of European governance which falls short of the level of democratic standards achieved in the Union ' .
Moreover , the stability mechanism must be viewed as only a part of the framework of solutions for European economic governance , for example , the Commission should investigate the potential of a future system of Eurobonds .
The European Council , which brings together European Heads of State or Government , is currently debating the implementation of a stability mechanism for Member States belonging to the euro area .
The aim is to collectively ensure the financial stability of the Union , which is today being undermined .
In this resolution , which I feel is balanced , Parliament welcomes this initiative , but issues a request to go beyond the temporary measures intended to stabilise the euro area .
I share this point of view and feel that the EU must continue to strengthen its economic governance , in order , of course , to stabilise , but also to encourage sustainable growth .
in writing . - ( LT ) Today we voted in favour of the amendment of Article 136 of the Lisbon Treaty , which will enable the EU to establish a stability mechanism which is only intended for members of the euro area .
The European stability mechanism will be aimed at reinforcing budgetary discipline and coordination of economic and financial policies of the euro area Member States , including the promotion of a joint European response to such challenges as growth , overcoming economic and social imbalances and improving competitiveness .
I believe that this mechanism will ensure greater financial stability for the euro area and will speed up the economic recovery of euro area Member States .
However , countries not in the euro club , which were worst affected by the crisis , remain in the sidelines , and the road to more rapid and sustainable economic recovery will be blocked .
I feel that the EU must show greater solidarity and provide the Member States with full assistance to enable them to join the club of euro area countries and become fully-fledged EU Member States .
in writing . - ( BG ) As a representative of Bulgaria in the European Parliament , I voted against the draft decision because I think that it imposes double standards , which is something I strongly oppose .
We have already seen such double standards in the case of Greece , which , rather than being punished , was rewarded with EUR 120 billion , while Bulgaria worries about its future in the euro area being on hold .
in writing . - ( CS ) The introduction of the stability mechanism for states paying in euro marks the first use of the simplified revision option in the Lisbon Treaty .
This is a revision which should also be supported by countries not paying in euro , since the stability of the euro is undoubtedly in their vital interest .
However , this mechanism should not be overused , in my opinion , and I am pleased we have upheld the idea that it should be activated only in cases where it really is absolutely essential .
This is an important signal as regards the responsibility of states and of creditors , since it does not establish a ' transfer Union ' in which financially irresponsible states would run their affairs at the expense of the financial standing of countries having consolidated public finances .
In contrast to that , I am not concerned that the proposed revision would create the conditions for introducing a stability mechanism entirely outside the scope of the Union .
The interpretation and application of the relevant provision of the Lisbon Treaty will , in any event , be under the control of the European Court of Justice .
The willingness or otherwise of states to involve other Union bodies in this mechanism must be respected , and any intergovernmental nature of the mechanism surely does not have to be a priori at the expense of quality or democratic legitimacy .
As long as the financial side of the stability mechanism is linked to national budgets , it is quite understandable and logical that the mechanism should have an intergovernmental nature .
in writing . - ( CS ) The report includes a proposal for a European stability mechanism , representing an integral part of an overall package of measures proposed with the aim of creating a new framework , while at the same time improving budgetary discipline and coordination of the economic and financial policy of Member States , which should also include support for a common European response to problems in the area of growth , leading at the same time to the elimination of economic and social inequalities , and to greater competitiveness .
In my opinion , the Commission 's call to consider other mechanisms as well for securing financial stability and economic growth in the eurozone is quite correct .
I also believe the Commission is entirely right to call for the submission of legislative proposals that would include a stability mechanism and measures for reducing risks in the interests of financial , economic and social stability in the European Union , including the effective regulation of financial markets .
It is entirely appropriate to review the stability and growth pact .
The report also supports the introduction of instruments for reducing macroeconomic imbalances in the eurozone , and measures aimed at environmental renewal .
For the reasons mentioned above , and for other reasons too , I have decided to support the report .
I voted for Parliament 's resolution because I agree that the European stability mechanism constitutes an important part of a global package of measures designed to define a new framework , reinforcing budgetary discipline and the coordination of Member States ' economic and financial policies .
This should include the promotion of a joint response by the European Union to growth challenges , concomitantly overcoming economic and social imbalances and improving competitiveness .
I voted against the report on amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
The Heads of State or Government of the European Union have responded to the economic crisis with austerity measures and public spending cuts .
These measures and policies have brought the workers to their knees in most countries in Europe , in that they take the form of wage cuts , pension cuts , cutbacks to social rights and soaring unemployment .
Basically , they are being forced to pay for the consequences of the economic crisis by those who caused it .
This amendment to the Treaty paves the way for stepping up austerity measures and ' tops off ' a package of ' supervisory ' measures which includes the economic governance package and the European semester .
The ' pact for the euro ' basically overrides national economic policy and almost forcibly turns the institution of the euro area into a tool for Germany to exercise its economic policy .
I also disagree with this particular use of the simplified procedure for revising the Treaty .
I believe that the most appropriate method for amending the Treaties is by referendum in all the Member States .

I voted for the report by Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , who recognise the need , within the Union 's constitutional framework , to make viable the creation of a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
Practice demonstrates that greater economic governance is needed within the EU , which will impact on economic and financial policy , and enable greater budgetary discipline .
The report rightly stresses that temporary measures are insufficient and that any attempt to create a system outside the EU 's institutional framework is a threat to the Union project ; for this reason , it also rightly calls for a more significant role for the European Commission .
I also agree with the call for the Commission to table any legislative measures that might prove necessary to strengthen financial stability and sustainable economic growth .
I voted for the report on the stability mechanism for the Member States in the euro area , given that this mechanism marks a step towards better coordination of economic policies at European level .
At the same time , a global package of measures is required which will aim to achieve economic stability and boost competitiveness in the EU .
in writing . - I rejected the proposal as a whole as I do not believe it solves the problems .
I agree with ETUC that the proposed changes will be ' paving the way to interfere with social dialogue and intervene in collective bargaining systems all over Europe ' .
Furthermore , I disagree with the choice of the simplified Treaty revision procedure .
I believe that the ordinary Treaty revision procedure should be used in order to allow for a proper and in-depth discussion about the proposed stability mechanism and other possible changes to the treaties , for example a social progress clause .
Finally , I urge the Member States to enable referenda in all Member States on proposals for Treaty change .
in writing . - I welcome today 's vote in the European Parliament on the proposed Treaty change .
However , it is a matter of the utmost importance for the Heads of State Summit this weekend to honour its agreement with the European Parliament .
As far as most MEPs are concerned , the process used by the Council in arriving at their proposed text is very unsatisfactory .
If it were not for the fact that it is extremely important for the eurozone and that a permanent European stability mechanism ( ESM ) is urgently required , particularly for small Member States such as Ireland , I for one would be voting against the original proposal .
The text we have agreed on in the European Parliament today is the minimum necessary to ensure legitimacy for the setting up of the Mechanism and its operation .
However it does not signal any agreement by the Socialists and Democrats Group to the draconian austerity programmes expected of some Member States without reference to their economic sustainability .
Parliament supports the limited amendment of the Treaty on European Union to allow for the implementation of a permanent stability mechanism for the euro area , which should be formally established during the European Council meetings of 24 and 25 March , by the amendment of Article 136 of the Treaty .
This decision will help to make the financial stability mechanism , which has proved it effectiveness since being created last May , more permanent .
We will thus have a healthy EUR 700 billion mechanism for providing loans , at the best rate and under strict conditions , to euro area countries in difficulty .
It was , however , inconceivable that the amendment of the Treaties would consolidate a mechanism based solely on intergovernmental commitments .
The Community method , which we favour , is the guarantee that all Member States of the euro area will receive equal treatment in accessing , subject to strict conditionality , this rescue fund .
As for the International Monetary Fund , we will remain extremely vigilant with regard to the conditions of its participation .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report to amend the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro , as it is essential to stabilising the euro area in the long term , to limiting speculation against European countries and to protecting the public .
Despite the mechanism 's intergovernmental nature , I believe that it is positive to strengthen the Union method , along with the role of the European institutions in the EU 's economic governance , specifically that of the Commission and the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats support this report as a whole .
At the same time , however , we believe that the wording of the text relating to a consolidated Eurobonds market goes too far .
We consider the creation of a Eurobonds system to be an interesting and promising idea , but we believe that the matter must be investigated properly before it can be considered appropriate to go on to actually implement it .
We currently know far too little for it to be possible to take any definitive decisions at this stage .
At exceptional times in the history of states and organisations , such as these which we are now experiencing , we have a joint obligation to find appropriate and ambitious responses to the challenges we face .
The debt crisis that Europe is fighting demands exceptional measures and the necessary maturity to find , within our institutional structure , the path towards mechanisms which will provide the euro with the necessary stability and resilience .
Measures which are firmly anchored in budgetary discipline , in the coordination of macroeconomic policies and in the existence of sustainable growth policies .
While I advocate legislative stability , it is because we are living through exceptional times that I support the currently proposed amendment of Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to such an extent as to enable the creation of a permanent mechanism to safeguard the stability of the euro area , as proposed in report , adopted by this Chamber on 20 October 2010 .
The European Union must strengthen its economic governance , which will only be achieved using the Union method , with the Commission 's leadership , rather than the intergovernmental method .
I hope that the strengthening of the Stability and Growth Pact , the European Semester , the Europe 2020 Strategy and the amendment of Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism will result in sustainable economic growth .
The workings of this mechanism must respect the fundamental principles of democratic decision-making , such as transparency , parliamentary monitoring and democratic responsibility .
This mechanism constitutes an important part of a global package of measures aimed at defining a new framework in order to reinforce budgetary discipline and the coordination of Member States ' economic and financial policies , which should include the promotion of a joint European response to growth challenges , concomitantly overcoming economic and social imbalances and improving competitiveness .
I voted in favour of creating this mechanism in the hope that it will be a valuable contribution to conferring greater stability on the financial markets and providing sustainable economic growth .
The intended simplified way of amending the Treaty is highly revealing of the vacuity of the claims of belief in the importance that the Treaty of Lisbon would ascribe to national parliaments - as well as the European Parliament - and of the falseness of all the rhetoric concerning deepening democracy .
Little more than a year down the line , the Treaty , which was supposed to last at least a generation , is then being amended , in a quick and simplified way because of the desire and pressure from the directorate of powers led by Germany , which wishes to preserve at all costs the economic and political dominance guaranteed to it by the instruments of this EU , including the single currency .
Discussion , participation and democracy fall by the wayside .
If , in order to adopt the Treaty of Lisbon , they shied away from national referenda - and disrespected the few that were carried out - they now do not hesitate to escape even the scrutiny of the national parliaments .
It is understandable if we consider the fact that , with the mechanism that they now wish to include in the Treaty and with so-called ' economic governance ' , there is a risk of these becoming meaningless words .
There is no longer any doubt that they are intending to create a veritable straightjacket for the Member States , so that they may implement the strategy of deepening ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
We are against the entire process involving the announced amendment of the Treaty of Lisbon , as regards not just to its substance , but also to its form .
The strict conditionality for the concession of financial assistance under the European stability mechanism is unacceptable for a number of reasons , the most significant of which is the possibility of removing powers from and interfering in the governing of the European Union Member States whose currency is the euro ; interference in the budgetary , social and labour areas is particularly serious .
It is an amendment which uses a mechanism of the Treaty itself to sideline everyone , enabling not just an amendment without any democratic participation - and , furthermore , continuing what they did by rejecting national referenda to adopt the Treaty - it creates a mechanism enabling permanent monitoring of Member States ' economies .
This report is along the same lines , tabling certain proposed amendments to the Commission 's draft of the amendment to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
However , it always aims to consolidate the desired boost provided as part of the aforementioned economic governance , with the creation of the ' European Semester ' , the deepening of penalties ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
According to legal opinion , a limited amendment to the Treaty is needed to ensure that the European stability mechanism is within the European Union institutional framework .
In the absence of other alternative solutions proposed by the Council , it was necessary to vote in favour of making the European stability mechanism permanent , in order to provide assistance to our Greek , Portuguese and Irish colleagues .
However , the debate is far from over .
This concession made by the French socialists is not an indicator of the outcome of other forthcoming debates on the economic governance issue .
Faced with the introduction of this intergovernmental mechanism , it is important to move forward and implement instruments which will encourage recovery in growth and business .
It is , among other things , to ensure that we are able to finance such instruments that I am campaigning alongside my socialist colleagues for an increase in the European Union 's own resources .
We could also use the Structural Funds in conjunction with the European stability mechanism to make deficit countries converge upwards .
It is with ambitious budgets and the promotion of a European social model that we will be able to emerge from the crisis .
I voted in favour of a stability mechanism ( ESM ) for the Member States of the euro area in order to help those of our neighbours that are in difficulty .
This mechanism is an embryo of what the Eurobonds could be in future in terms of their ability to finance the Union 's budget and to release the financial markets ' stranglehold on the sovereign debt of Member States .
I regret , however , the ESM approval method chosen - a simple consultation of the European Parliament - because the intergovernmental approach has prevailed over the Community approach .
This poses a risk to the quality of democratic debate , which is nevertheless necessary in order to implement an effective economic policy .
This mechanism remains a partial response which is not sufficient to encourage growth and reduce unemployment .
I saw it as my duty , as a Member of Parliament , to achieve the maximum possible level of democratic control and integration of the European stability mechanism in the negotiations .
The result is thus a great improvement on the original proposal .
I am therefore voting in favour .
However , I would like to set out my basic objections to the route upon which we have embarked .
The ordinary Treaty revision procedure should have been required for the ESM .
This would have enabled it to be set up within the Community framework with democratic participation and control .
Reverting to the intergovernmental method is fatal .
We are privatising ( speculative ) profits and socialising the losses .
That is the wrong way to go .
We let taxpayers suffer , but protect the banks , asset managers and speculators .
The public sector is lending money to the banks here .
It is the public sector that is bearing the costs - not the private sector .
Without a fundamentally new concept of money and clear legal rules for the banking and financial sector we will continue to be only ever treating the symptoms , without remedying the underlying causes .
in writing . - I abstained throughout the voting on this report .
Scotland is not within the eurozone and I therefore consider it appropriate to withhold my vote on this issue .
Having said that , I note that paragraph 6 refers to Europe 's smaller nations ' whose economy may be seen as not " indispensable ” for the purposes of safeguarding the euro area as a whole ' .
I feel that this paragraph displays a dangerous arrogance ; the EU is the sum of all its parts and the importance of all European economies is equal , regardless of size .
History shows that unions based upon the dominance of larger members are doomed to fail .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because the amendment of the Lisbon Treaty adopted will facilitate the establishment of the permanent euro stability mechanism .
The situation today shows that we are in a difficult economic and financial situation and that we must take very specific actions regarding economic coordination and surveillance .
However , this mechanism and the Guarantee Fund is only intended for euro area members , while countries not in the euro area will be sidelined , causing greater fragmentation of the EU .
In my opinion , the EU must show greater solidarity , by providing assistance to non-euro area countries as well as countries in the euro area , so that they become full and equal EU Member States as quickly as possible , and we would thus eliminate a temporary discrepancy in the EU accession agreement and contribute to the creation of a more cohesive EU .
in writing . - ( IT ) The resolution on the proposal to amend the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , approved in Parliament , concerning the provision of a European stability mechanism for the euro area , is an important goal for strengthening the cohesion and competitiveness of the economy and stabilising the financial system .
I voted for the amendment , given the significance of the euro to the European political and economic plan for sustainable growth .
The stabilisation of the euro area is of strategic importance , and I believe that Europe must include measures to strengthen it , increasing its economic governance in light of the objectives to be pursued by the EU 2020 Strategy .
Lastly , I believe in the need for a permanent stability mechanism to provide for the involvement of Community institutions , both to avoid the setting-up of double structures and because establishing a mechanism outside the institutional framework of the EU would constitute a threat to the integrity of the system based on the Treaties .
in writing . - I rejected the proposal as a whole as I do not believe it solves the problems .
I agree with ETUC when they say that the proposed changes will be ' ... paving the way to interfere with social dialogue and intervene in collective bargaining systems all over Europe ' .
Furthermore I disagree with the choice of the simplified Treaty revision procedure .
I believe that the ordinary Treaty revision procedure should be used in order to allow for a proper and in-depth discussion about the proposed stability mechanism and other possible changes to the Treaties , for example a social progress clause .
Finally , I urge the Member States to enable referenda in all Member States on proposals for Treaty change .
in writing . - ( RO ) I regard the stability mechanism as being particularly important and vital to the Member States which use the euro as their currency in terms of strengthening the single currency and supporting the European political and economic project .
Strengthening and ensuring the stability of the single currency provide the market with security and make adopting the euro more attractive to new Member States .
This matter is crucial to Europe 's growth and development , values which I support in every respect .
Consequently , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - I am pleased with the results which Parliament has secured through negotiations with the Council , and as a result I supported this Treaty change .
Giving a legal basis to a stability mechanism is vital to the immediate and long-term stability of the euro zone .
The Council has given assurances that in future there will be a strong role for the Parliament and the Commission , which I believe is very important .
While I approve this Treaty change I have very serious concerns regarding the current economic governance proposals , and voting in favour of this report is not an endorsement of the current economic governance package .
in writing . - ( IT ) The new European stability mechanism requires an amendment to the Treaty of Lisbon , to ensure its legally valid inclusion within the institutional framework of the European Union .
We believe that this should be accompanied by a strengthening of the preventive and corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact and measures relating to medium- and long-term competitiveness .
Measures , in other words , capable of promoting a common European response , in order to better address the macro-economic imbalances between Member States and to ensure their sustainable growth .
The European stability mechanism is therefore an important element of a comprehensive package of new measures ( together with the European Semesters and the EU 2020 Strategy ) , aimed at establishing a new framework for strengthening and coordinating economic and financial policies and budgetary discipline .
To ensure respect for the core principles of democratic decision-making such as transparency , parliamentary scrutiny and democratic accountability , Parliament must be adequately informed and involved .
In addition , we support the need for each national parliament to be fully involved , in accordance with their budgetary and control rights , in order to increase the transparency , ownership and accountability of decisions taken , including at European level .
This report endorses the institutionalisation of the control of the European Commission , the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) over the budgets and the political reforms of the Member States of the euro area .
It does not say a word about the social injustices that citizens will suffer in order to take advantage of the financial assistance that the European stability mechanism will provide .
Neither does it mention the causes of the crisis , which is driving the Member States to agree to bleed their populations dry in order to reassure the financial markets .
What is worse , it supports an abuse of authority which consists in using the simplified revision procedure of the Treaty of Lisbon in order to try and avoid a possible referendum .
My group is the only one to set itself apart in demanding that referendums be held in all the Member States .
Your European oligarchy fears democracy .
It is right to do so , as the people of Europe , following the example of the North Africans , want to tell it to clear off !
We must not hesitate in combating the sovereign debt crisis that has been affecting some countries in the euro area .
In another , less serious situation , I would not agree with the proposed amendment of the Treaty of Lisbon , which came into force so recently .
At this time , it is essential to go beyond temporary measures to stabilise the euro area and there is no doubt that the EU must reinforce its means of combating the sovereign debt crisis .
As such , the amendment of Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is essential to create a permanent European stability mechanism that will be effective in assisting Member States in difficulties .
I voted against this report because in no way is this the solution to the economic crisis we are experiencing .
The proposed changes pave the way for social dialogue to be torpedoed .
Moreover , I do not agree with the choice of the simplified Treaty revision procedure .
I am of the opinion that the simplified Treaty revision procedure should be used to create an atmosphere favourable to an in-depth discussion of the proposed stability mechanism and of other possible mechanisms , such as the social progress clause .
Finally , we call on the Member States to lay the ground for referenda on potential modifications of the Treaty .
in writing . - ( HU ) I represent a country from the euro area which at the time did not support the loan for Greece .
This was a decision that naturally no one was pleased about .
I sincerely hope that similar decisions will not have to be made often .
The crisis spared neither the euro area nor the European Union , but our common currency has already proven itself on several occasions .
It provides its users with a form of unity and protection which we can be rightly proud of as an EU achievement .
For precisely this reason we must protect our currency against future economic swings with an appropriate legislative framework .
Thanks to the current Treaty amendment , a European stability mechanism will replace the temporary stability tool .
The mechanism reform offers a chance to those in trouble , thus I would prefer it to be used rarely .
This is one of the last moments when we can coordinate our economic and financial systems .
I supported this highly realistic and constructive solution with my vote .
As Parliament has said before , the structural causes of the crisis need to be tackled .
A repeat of a situation similar to the experiences of the recent past must be prevented .
The debt crisis in the euro area has proven the need to establish an economic union and economic governance as quickly as possible .
The European stability mechanism is an important aspect of the measure aiming to strengthen the budgetary discipline and coordination of the Member States ' economic and financial policies .
It is the first step in a series of changes required to establish a credible economic government .
The permanent stability mechanism is the subject of an intergovernmental agreement , which unfortunately means that the unanimity rule will be applied .
This is a dangerous approach as it could play into the hands of Eurosceptics .
Ideally this mechanism should have been incorporated into the Community system .
Indeed , the Commission should be able , in agreement with the Member States , to manage the objectives of the permanent stability mechanism rather than being limited to technical monitoring .
Lastly , while it may have been necessary to use the simplified revision procedure in this case , I believe that it must remain an exception .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution because it is important for the whole of the European Union as it recovers from the tough economic crisis .
Consequently it is very important to establish such a mechanism that would stabilise the euro area and ensure its effective and efficient functioning and development .
The European stability mechanism is a permanent aid fund assisting euro area Member States affected by the crisis .
However , for this mechanism to function effectively it must be brought fully into the institutional framework of the Union .
Above all , it is necessary to ensure that it is open from the outset to all Member States , even those whose currency is not the euro .
I believe that it is advisable to provide for financial measures which would give the opportunity to purchase bonds from those countries that are facing enormous debt problems .
This would pave the way for them to access financial markets while encouraging a speedier economic recovery .
I agree with the proposal that other EU institutions should also be involved in the mechanism 's management process , and that the Commission should be given more powers , in order to effectively implement the Union 's expanded functions in this area .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the amendment of the Treaty with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
I hope that Member States will come to a quick decision over its details and specificity .
However , I do not think that the debate stops here .
Indeed , I believe that in the coming months and years the issue to be faced will be whether to and how to use these contributions .
I refer , for example , to the matter of Eurobonds .
In a situation like the present , in which Member States are asked , on the one hand , to implement severe budget policies to reduce deficits and debts and , on the other , to pay contributions to participate in the stabilisation fund , there is a real risk of collapse and a risk of States no longer being able to finance themselves .
The European economy cannot be revitalised unless , at the same time , we use the strength of the euro on international markets and the resulting improved credit rating for its recovery .
The collection of money at European level allows Member States to cut spending to avoid overlap and to achieve a better return on their investment .
Strengthening the EU 's economic governance has become a priority , especially in the current international economic situation .
In fact , when the Treaty of Lisbon came into force on 1 December 2009 , there were no expectations that it would have to endure amendments in the near future .
However , the well known , exceptional circumstances in financial , economic and also , now , social terms are the deciding factor for this amendment , which has a majority political support .
Nevertheless , I cannot fail to stress that this simplified revision process must not set precedents for future constitutional revisions when there are no truly exceptional circumstances , such as these we are currently experiencing .
I agree that there is a need for a concerted and coherent economic and financial policy between the Member States of the euro area , which could guarantee the cohesion and stability of the euro area , so I voted in favour of this report aimed at amending Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , as well as institutionalising a permanent European financial stability mechanism with the aim of guaranteeing stability and financial assistance , according to certain conditions , specifically a rigorous analysis and the application of an economic and financial recovery programme .
in writing . - ( IT ) Today we voted , during the mini part-session at the European Parliament in Brussels , on the report ' amending the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro ' .
On 16 December 2010 , the European Council decided to consult the European Parliament under the simplified revision procedure laid down in Article 48 ( 6 ) of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union concerning a proposal to revise Article 136 of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to a stability mechanism for Member States whose currency is the euro .
The objective of the proposal drafted by our colleague , Mr Brok , and fellow Member , Mr Gualtieri , is to add a paragraph to ensure that Member States whose currency is the euro are able to establish a mechanism to be activated in case of need to safeguard the stability of the euro area as a whole , stating that the granting of any necessary financial assistance under the mechanism will be subject to strict conditions .
in writing . - According to the report voted today , the EP :
1 . Emphasises that the monetary policy for the Member States whose currency is the euro is a Union-exclusive competence and has been a Community policy since the Maastricht Treaty ; and
2 . Stresses the importance of the euro for the European political and economic project , and underlines the importance of the commitment made by all Member States in favour of the stability of the euro area and the sense of responsibility and solidarity they have shown .
At the same time , it considers that it is essential to go beyond the temporary measures aiming at stabilising the euro area , and that the Union should build up its economic governance , including by means of policies and instruments designed to promote sustainable growth in Member States , and takes the view that the reinforcement of the SGP , the European Semester , the EU 2020 Strategy and the amendment of Article136 TFEU concerning the stability mechanism are only a first step in that direction .
in writing . - ( IT ) I support the wording of this resolution because I believe that the monetary policy of the euro should remain an exclusive competence of the European institutions , since this would avoid the setting-up of double structures which would prove detrimental to European integration .
All Member States currently coordinate their economic policies in accordance with measures dictated by the European institutions for the stability of the entire euro area .
The current draft Council decision could create a decision-making mechanism on the stability of the euro that is outside the sphere of Parliament and the Commission .
For this reason , the stability mechanism is a joint response to economic and social growth challenges and to encourage the introduction of the euro in the remaining Member States .
I hope that the setting up and functioning of a permanent stability mechanism will involve the contribution of the entire European institutional framework , and when necessary , through the use of the enhanced cooperation procedure in order to ensure the transparency of all decisions .
in writing . - I rejected the proposal as a whole as I do not believe it solves the problems .
I agree with ETUC when they say that the proposed changes will be ' ... paving the way to interfere with social dialogue and intervene in collective bargaining systems all over Europe ' .
Furthermore I disagree with the choice of the simplified Treaty revision procedure .
I believe that the ordinary Treaty revision procedure should be used in order to allow for a proper and in-depth discussion about the proposed stability mechanism and other possible changes to the treaties , for example a social progress clause .
Finally , I urge the Member States to enable referenda in all Member States on proposals for Treaty change .
in writing . - We rejected the proposal as a whole as we do not believe it solves the problems .
We agree with ETUC when they say that the proposed changes will be ' ... paving the way to interfere with social dialogue and intervene in collective bargaining systems all over Europe ' .
Furthermore we disagree with the choice of the simplified Treaty revision procedure .
We believe that the ordinary Treaty revision procedure should be used in order to allow for a proper and in-depth discussion about the proposed stability mechanism and other possible changes to the treaties , for example a social progress clause .
Finally , we urge the Member States to enable referenda in all Member States on proposals for Treaty change .
The sovereign crisis affecting the Member States is obliging the European Union to rethink its economic strategy .
The Union 's economic governance is gradually becoming a reality .
There is a need for a concerted and coherent economic and financial policy between the Member States of the euro area : a true ' pact for the euro ' .
Therefore , and to guarantee the stability of the euro area , this report aims to amend Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , as well as to institutionalise a permanent European financial stability mechanism with the aim of guaranteeing stability and financial assistance , according to certain conditions , specifically a rigorous analysis , and the application of an economic and financial recovery programme .
I am voting for this amendment because I believe it to be essential to institutionalise the European mechanism and simultaneously make it more flexible .
Nevertheless , I cannot fail to underline that it must take into account the competences of the European institutions , so an institutional framework separate from these must not be created .
Current events require the uptake of serious and real positions at Member State level , particularly those states in the euro area .
However , I cannot fail to stress that this simplified revision process must not set precedents for future constitutional revisions .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of this addendum to the Treaty on the Functioning of the Union because it has logical consequences for economic governance and promotes further coherence in the euro area with a view to common financial policy .
Moreover , it is right that no country is given discounts and that no distinction is made between good and bad debt .
The pact between generations means that the burden of debt is always passed on to subsequent generations , restricting their freedom to act and their future opportunities .
The draining of European public finances as a result of the Member States ' crucial commitment to controlling the fall in growth following the financial crisis has created significant public deficits which are subject to frenzied speculation .
It required the European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) to be made permanent .
I welcome the institutionalisation of this instrument , which clearly expresses solidarity within the euro area , and which , in return , calls on its members to be more responsible .
Firstly , activating this mechanism provides assistance to Member States in serious financial difficulty and , secondly , the mechanism requires those States , in return , to reduce their deficit .
By implementing a shared approach to the management of part of the Member States ' public debt and by making their economies converge , this mechanism is in fact part of a more comprehensive strategy which my political family broadly supports , namely economic governance of the euro area .
We are not talking here about a theoretical gadget or a European gimmick ; we are talking about a clear need and about real progress for Europe .
The strength of our currency , our capacity to import at low cost and our ability to attract investment to Europe are dependent on this strategy .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Brok / Gualtieri report explicitly states that the Council - and thus the Member States - have failed to implement the Stability and Growth Pact fully and that ways of stabilising the Pact that exist in the treaties have not been exploited .
Moreover , with this report Parliament gives its backing to the European Commission and unreservedly supports its ' intention to ensure consistency between the future mechanism and the Union 's economic governance ' in order to prevent any future crisis like the one we have at present .
As early as paragraph 3 of the report it is established that the European Parliament sees the stability mechanism as ' part of a global package of measures which are designed to define a new framework , reinforcing budgetary discipline and coordination of economic and financial policies of the Member States ' .
I share this view of many of my fellow Members .
in writing . - ( SK ) The single currency has brought greater freedom to Europe .
However , freedom must always go hand in hand with responsibility .
This is where the problem lies .
Some Member States apparently did not take their own share of responsibility for the common currency very seriously .
They now need to borrow more money for the gradual repayment of these debts , but the banks no longer trust them .
The countries that acted responsibly had a choice : allow the debtors to go bankrupt , or show solidarity .
As a staunch European , I am glad that the principle of solidarity prevailed .
At the same time , however , I expect the new mechanism to be applied cautiously , in order to avoid what we see happening today , with both Greece and Ireland requesting more aid on top of the original amount .
I also expect that our solidarity will not be abused by those who need it , or by those who are seeking a convenient pretext for tax harmonisation and other ways to curtail Member State sovereignty .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Preparation for the European Council meeting ( 24-25 March 2011 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparation for the European Council meeting to be held on 24 and 25 March 2011 .

President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , President Barroso , Commissioner , honourable Members , I very much welcome the opportunity to appear before you in advance of the next meeting of the European Council .
As you know , it will be a very intensive meeting due to the unforeseen events of the last couple of weeks .
Let me first run you through the main issues on the agenda of the European Council .
There will be three major items : first a comprehensive economic package which , hopefully , will be adopted by the Heads of State and Government ; then Libya and the southern neighbourhood ; and thirdly Japan .
Let me start with the economic policy issues .
The European Council will , I hope , adopt this package in order to respond to the economic and financial crisis .
The package has six major elements , the first being the conclusion of the first phase of the European Semester , with endorsement of the priorities for fiscal consolidation and structural reforms .
As you know , the European Semester cycle started early in the year with the presentation of the Commission 's annual growth survey .
It brings together various policy recommendations required to strengthen recovery , to help Europe maintain its international competitiveness and to achieve the EU 2020 objectives .
The first phase of the European Semester will now be concluded with the endorsement by the European Council of the priorities for fiscal consolidation and structural reform , in line with the conclusions prepared by the ECOFIN and EPSCO Councils .
The theme of this report - which was prepared by the Presidency - was welcomed by the General Affairs Council last Monday .
Member States will take these broad policy orientations into account when preparing their stability and convergence programmes and the national reform programmes to be submitted in April .
On the basis of the Commission 's assessment , the Council will subsequently provide its assessment and guidance to the Member States in June : that is , at a time when important budgetary decisions are still in a preparatory phase in most Member States .
The Hungarian Presidency 's aim is to close the first European Semester by the time of the European Council in June 2011 .
The second element is the strengthening of economic governance , and here the European Parliament has a decisive role .
The Council has already taken a major step forward : the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs have agreed the Council 's general approach in relation to the six legislative proposals on reinforcing economic governance .
This achievement enables the Presidency to start negotiations with this Parliament .
As you know , the Council has to observe a deadline set by the European Council - June 2011 - for reaching political agreement on the package .
Four out of the six proposals are subject to codecision .
We know that the deadline imposed by the European Council does not , by any means , bind the European Parliament , yet I take this solemn opportunity to ask for Parliament 's cooperation so that we can reach political agreement by June .
It would send reassuring messages to the markets and , most importantly , to our citizens who expect us to safeguard the euro and the European economy with it .
So we have a common responsibility with the European Parliament in this matter .
Our Prime Minster is about to meet the rapporteurs and the coordinators who are responsible for this package and I hope that we will have extremely fruitful cooperation with Parliament .
The third element is the restoration of the health of the banking sector through the ambitious new stress test .
The fourth is the pact for the euro , its extension to Member States outside the euro area who wish to join it , and possible announcement of the first national action plans to implement it .
The fifth element is finalisation of the work on the future of the European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) and on strengthening the European Financial Stability Facility ( EFSF ) , building on the agreement in the Eurogroup Plus ministerial meeting on 21 March , and you all know that the terms of reference of the European Stability Mechanism mention the fact that information will be provided to Parliament .
I was especially pleased about that .
The sixth element is the Treaty amendment , on which you have just voted , and the formal adoption of the decisions amending the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to the setting up of the future ESM .
I would like to thank Parliament here for this positive vote : I think it was an extremely important contribution on your part .
As you see , real progress has been made in combating the crisis .
The European Council will finalise this work at its next meeting and adopt a comprehensive package of measures to respond to the crisis , preserve financial stability and lay the ground for sustainable , job-creating growth .
Let me turn now to Libya and the southern neighbourhood .
On the basis of the European Parliament resolution of 10 March 2011 , the European Council 's conclusions of 11 March 2011 and UN Security Council Resolution 1973 , the Council has expressed its concerns at the present situation in Libya and has condemned the gross and systematic violation of human rights , the violence and brutal repression perpetrated by the regime against the Libyan people .
The EU 's main aims are protection of the civilian population and support for the Libyan people being able to realise their aspirations for a democratic society .
Colonel Gaddafi must relinquish power immediately .
His regime has lost legitimacy and is no longer an interlocutor for the EU .
So what kind of action has the Council taken ?
First let me mention the sanctions .
On 28 February 2011 , in record time , the Council adopted decisions concerning restrictive measures against the regime .
On 10 March further sanctions were added , including an asset freeze , a further travel ban , an arms embargo and an embargo on equipment which might be used for internal repression - thus going beyond the measures imposed by the previously adopted UN Security Council resolution .
Let me announce a third element : a third round of sanctions .
Acting upon the mandate given by the Foreign Affairs Council on 21 March , the Council has today adopted , by written procedure , the Hungarian Presidency 's proposal to extend restrictive measures to further Libyan individuals and entities , and these sanctions already extend to the national oil company of Libya .
What else did the Council do besides sanctions ?
The Hungarian Presidency put the question of emergency supply security on the agenda .
Ministers discussed the impact of the political crisis on the energy market , energy security and supply .
They agreed that the EU has sufficient oil and gas stocks . Nevertheless the discussion highlighted , once again , the vulnerability of Europe and the need for an even stronger common energy policy , including measures such as diversification of supply routes .
The Council expressed its satisfaction after the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 1973 and underlined its determination to contribute to its implementation .
The Council also welcomed the Paris Summit as a decisive contribution to its implementation .
By contributing in a differentiated way , the EU and the Member States are determined to act collectively and resolutely with all the international partners , particularly the Arab League and other regional stakeholders , to give full effect to these decisions .
The Council and the Member States will support actions under the UN Security Council resolution to protect civilians and civilian population areas under threat of attack .
The EU will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to all those affected , and of course - at a later stage - we will have to help Libya in building a democratic state and developing the rule of law .
The EU is preparing to provide CFSP support and humanitarian assistance in response to a request from the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and under the coordinating role of the UN .
Such actions will fully respect the UN guidelines on the use of military and civil defence assets .
The High Representative has been asked to develop further planning in accordance with the UN resolution and the European Council declaration of 11 March on support for humanitarian assistance and civil protection operations , including the use of maritime resources for this purpose .
Everything should be done in the closest possible cooperation with the UN , NATO and others .
The High Representative will maintain contacts with the UN Secretary-General and countries in the region , including Egypt and Tunisia , and has stated that this process should be undertaken as a matter of urgency in order to allow further consideration by the European Council by the end of this week .
Furthermore , the Member States have underlined once again their solidarity with those of their number most directly affected by migratory movements , and have reiterated their readiness to provide necessary support as the situation evolves .
The Hungarian Presidency put this issue to the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 24 and 25 February 2011 , and the joint operation Hermes has been launched under the Frontex framework , with several Member States contributing resources .
Let me mention what has happened on evacuation .
As early as 23 February , the Presidency activated the EU 's civil protection mechanism to support the evacuation of EU citizens from Libya - a decision also supported by the High Representative .
Inspired by the principle of responsibility to protect , set out in the EP resolution , the Hungarian Presidency is doing its utmost to coordinate the ongoing work , in particular with regard to refugees and migration issues .
The Hungarian Minister for Foreign Affairs , János Martonyi , and Commissioner Malmström are currently visiting Egypt and its common border with Libya .
Minister Martonyi has been to the border and talked to the local authorities and , in a statement made there earlier , he said that without the air strikes an unbearable situation would have evolved .
Now the situation is under control , thanks to the Egyptian authorities .
For three days , there has been no outflow of people ; some Libyans have decided to return but of course the situation is still shaky and we do not know whether there will be further outflows or not .
On 3 March I was at the Tunisian-Libyan border , in the company of Commissioner Georgieva , to see the state of affairs there .
The situation was still very serious : 1000 people per hour were entering Tunisia across that border .
Evacuation was the most important issue on 3 March , and it is still very important that Member States help with the repatriation of non-EU citizens , mostly migrant workers .
In the absence of a resident European Union delegation , the Hungarian Ambassador in Tripoli has been representing the EU .
He is there and will not leave ; he coordinates the consular and diplomatic efforts on behalf of the Member States .
On the southern neighbourhood : at its extraordinary meeting on 11 March , the European Council declared that democratic uprisings are bringing dramatic changes to the southern neighbourhood , creating new hope and an opportunity to build a future based on democracy , pluralism , the rule of law , human rights and social justice .
It has to be stated that aggression is taking place not only in Libya : we should be aware that in Bahrain and in Yemen people are also experiencing aggression , and we have to be very clear that aggression is not acceptable anywhere .
It is for the countries in the region to decide their future in a peaceful and democratic way .
The EU will support all steps towards democratic transformation to political systems that allow for peaceful changes , growth and prosperity and more proportionate distribution of the benefits of economic performance .
The EU will consult with the countries of the region that are concerned on financial and technical support for improving the control and management of borders , as well as measures to facilitate the return of migrants to their countries of origin .
The Council , in cooperation with the Commission , was invited to submit - before the June European Council - a plan for the development of capacities to manage migration and refugee flows .
The European Council broadly welcomed the joint communication from the Commission and the High Representative proposing a partnership for democracy and shared prosperity in the southern Mediterranean , following a differentiated and incentive-based approach and bringing together all EU instruments .
The Council was invited rapidly to examine the proposals contained in the communication and , in particular , to consider how the Union 's support for its partners could be enhanced .
I will conclude with a rapid presentation of the ideas on which very swift action is needed .
We have to increase the ceiling for European Investment Bank operations for Mediterranean countries undertaking political reform -Parliament will have a role on this issue and I count on your cooperation .
We have to adopt the Commission proposal to allow the EIB to reinvest within the FEMIP funds flowing from past operations .
We have to examine , with other stakeholders , conditions under which the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development could operate in the southern neighbourhood , and we have to adopt without delay the proposal on pan-Euro-Mediterranean rules of origin , which is essential for further development of the region .
Lastly , adoption by June 2011 of the regulation enhancing the capabilities of Frontex is , I think , a must .
I will stop there .
I will not speak on Japan because we now have a new item on the agenda .
I am sorry if my speech was a bit too long .
The reason is that a lot of things have happened and I wanted Parliament to have a comprehensive picture of all the issues .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , as I said last week to this Parliament , what Europe will put in place at this European Council on 24-25 March will be a real game-changer in terms of economic governance .
In other words , it will be a cornerstone in our comprehensive response to the crisis , and will mark the beginning of its full implementation with the setting up of a new economic governance framework - and , hopefully , a European Monetary Union ( EMU ) walking on its two legs ( the Monetary Union and the Economic Union ) instead of limping along .
The economic policy of each Member State is now recognised as a matter that should concern all Member States and all European institutions .
For the first time - with the European Semester - we have the tools we need for early and strong coordination of our economic policies and structural reforms , before each Member State sets its own policies and budget for the next year .
Not only do we have ex ante coordination , but we can do it in parallel with the economic policy and budgetary policy .
The first European Semester kicked off earlier in January with the Commission 's Annual Growth Survey , which presents 10 priorities for this year , all firmly anchored in the Europe 2020 Strategy for growth and jobs .
They are intended to promote fiscal consolidation , correct macroeconomic imbalances , and ensure financial stability - all prerequisites for sound growth .
In itself those policies will not deliver growth , but it is quite clear that without those prerequisites we will not have the kind of growth we need : sustainable inclusive growth .
The Pact for the euro , agreed by Heads of State and Government of the euro area and open to all Member States wishing to join , reflects the priority actions of our Annual Growth Survey , but now the Pact for the euro , as it was agreed , is also fully compatible with the Treaty and will be fully integrated in the European system of economic governance .
Once again I want to thank this Parliament because I believe the strong positions taken by this Parliament were very important to assure that the Community approach could also be recognised in the Pact for the euro .
The Pact for the euro also recognises the Commission 's work on taxation and financial regulation .
In fact as you know , the Commission is working on a proposal to tax the financial sector .
Every Member State , when implementing the Stability and Growth Pact , must follow the recommendations of the Commission .
As decided last week , and I quote : ' In deciding on the steps in the Stability and Growth Pact the Council is expected to , as a rule , follow the recommendations of the Commission or explain its position in writing ' .
This is the principle of 11 March 2011 .
I think it is a very important political principle that can be added to the important legislative decisions that have been taken , and also some that you are now preparing .
Fiscal consolidation is not an end in itself .
Without fiscal consolidation there is no confidence .
Without confidence there are no investments .
Without investments there is no growth .
But our target , as I said in this Parliament several times before , is growth : sustainable inclusive growth .
For that we also need to improve the business environment .
We need to complete the internal market .
One of the goals we have in the internal market is precisely the different bases in terms of taxation .
That is why the Commission has proposed , and has now tabled , a legislative proposal for a Common Corporate Consolidated Tax Base .
We need indeed to tap the full potential of the Single Market , and the Commission will soon put forward the Single Market Act with a set of a dozen priority proposals to put our biggest asset to work , to deliver growth and jobs and reinforce Europe 's competitiveness .
We also have to do more to foster employment .
We need more labour mobility , not less mobility .
We need more promotion of tax incentives to work and we want growth that is employment-enhancing and employment-friendly .
In close cooperation with the Commission , Member States are now finalising their National Reform Programmes as well as their Stability or Convergence Programmes .
Let me stress that having clear , concrete , ambitious , nationally-owned programmes is essential to the successful implementation of the European Semester .
So it is now up to each Member State to have this serious work completed by the end of April .
Last week the Council agreed on its general approach to the Commission 's legislative package on reinforced economic governance .
I would again like to thank the Hungarian Presidency for all its efforts which led to a successful compromise .
Now negotiations will start with Parliament .
I know that the Commission can count on strong support from this House , and I hope we will have a final agreement by June .
Then our new economic framework would be fully in place and all its tools could be used to assess national budgets , Stability and Convergence Programmes , as well as National Reform Programmes by 2012 .
Finally , with the current European Financial Stability Fund , and by 2013 the permanent European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) , we will have a backstop tool to guarantee the stability of the Euro area as a whole , if needed .
Last Monday the Finance Ministers agreed to set up the European Stability Mechanism from June 2013 with effective lending capacity of EUR 500 billion .
This is a major step forward for the European Union which the Commission , as you know , has been strongly promoting .
Following our proposals , the agreement for the future ESM clearly states the central role of the Commission in the process , as well as the implication of the European Parliament .
It will be for the Commission to assess , in liaison with the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , the existence of a risk to the financial stability of the euro area as a whole and to undertake analysis of the sustainability of the public debt of the Member State concerned .
Further , it will be for the European Commission to take the lead in assessing the actual financing needs of the beneficiary Member State , as well as the nature of the required private sector involvement .
It will be also for the European Commission to propose to the Council a decision endorsing the macroeconomic adjustment programme .
The European Commission , together with the IMF and in liaison with the ECB , will be responsible for monitoring compliance with the policy conditionality required by a macroeconomic adjustment programme .
The policy conditionality established under an enhanced surveillance or a macroeconomic adjustment programme will be consistent with the European Union surveillance framework and must guarantee the respect of European Union procedures , and thereby also the role of the European Parliament .
To this end , the Commission intends to propose a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council based on Article 136 of the Treaty clarifying the necessary procedural steps in order to enshrine the policy conditionality in Council decisions and ensure consistency with the European Union multilateral surveillance framework .
The Council and the Commission will inform the European Parliament on a regular basis about the establishment and the operations of the ESM .
Honourable Members , I just want to confirm what was said in a letter by Commissioner Rehn and the President of the Eurogroup , Jean-Claude Juncker , to you , President Buzek .
I think at the end we have an agreement that is fully compatible with a Community approach and I want once again to thank Parliament for its interest and commitment to that approach .
On the financial stabilisation front , Member States have eventually acknowledged the degree of interdependence of their economies .
The European Union has already done a lot towards repairing the banking system , but here also we need to do more .
A healthy banking system is a prerequisite for a sustainable economic recovery .
The next round of EU-wide bank stress tests will be conducted in the next months by the newly established European Bank Authority ( EBA ) .
Transparency is essential so that policy-makers and investors can make informed judgements ; so is the willingness to follow through with tough indispensable decisions .
I think after the very comprehensive and good report by Mrs Győri , representing the Hungarian Presidency , I will not now elaborate on the issues regarding Libya and the southern Mediterranean .
However , let me tell you , as regards the European Commission 's competence , that we have been playing a substantial role in coordinating the European response to the escalating humanitarian crisis on the Libyan borders .
We have mobilised EUR 30 million to provide assistance to refugees and migrants and , as you know , we have several teams on the ground and we maintain close contact with countries of origin and donors .
The Commission 's Civil Protection Mechanism ( MIC ) is also continuing to support Member States ' consular operations ; and working closely with the Hungarian Presidency , Commissioner Malmström and Commissioner Georgieva have also been very active on this matter .
The no-fly zone military actions , implemented pursuant to UN Security Council Resolution 1973 , brought about new circumstances that need to be factored in when delivering humanitarian assistance in a secure and efficient way to those in need , either at the borders or inside Libya .
It brought new hope as well as addressing the need to spare civilian innocent lives .
While dealing with the short-term challenges of this fast-changing and extremely complex situation , we are not losing sight of our long-term goal of a democratic stable prosperous Southern Mediterranean region based on the Commission proposal on Partnership for Democracy and Shared Prosperity .
The Commission 's Civil Protection Mechanism is also coordinating the European Union 's response to Japan 's request for assistance .
Since last Friday we have reinforced our presence on the ground with a civil protection team composed of logistics and nuclear experts .
Specifically on nuclear issues , it is important to draw lessons from the events in Japan .
That is why the European Commission proposed to review the safety of nuclear sites and the comprehensive risk and safety assessment ( ' stress test ' ) on all European nuclear sites .
These stress tests should also be carried out in all our neighbouring countries and beyond , under the responsibility of the IAEA .
I hope of course that the European Council will confirm and endorse this orientation .
Honourable Members , as you see , we have a very full agenda for the next European Council and the Commission has been working hard to develop this comprehensive European response to the crisis outside our borders , but also regarding the economic situation .
We will , together with the European Parliament , play a central role in the implementation of the comprehensive response to the economic crisis .
We will do this always in the spirit of the Lisbon Treaty , that is , in close coordination with your Parliament .
And you can be sure that we will always live up to this responsibility as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council is preparing to meet for the second week running amid a climate of international uncertainty and tensions .
There is the uncertainty in Japan , where the level of human loss is still difficult to determine , and uncertainty in the Mediterranean , as further populations rise up against their regimes , in Bahrain and as you mentioned President-in-Office of the Council , in Yemen .
Inevitably , all these situations are having repercussions for us here in Europe .
Our fellow citizens have witnessed Japan 's drama unfolding live .
On top of the empathy we feel for the thousands of families shattered by grief , as we speak there are fears associated with the problems at the Fukushima nuclear power plant and the dread of the dangers that we too could face in a similar or comparable situation .
These events should certainly be taken on board by all countries that have nuclear power plants and it is good that this Parliament is organising a debate on nuclear safety , though we should not lose sight of the fact that in Europe we need to be increasing and not reducing our energy independence .
This is a subject we will be returning to during our next part-session .
This weekend , the 27 Heads of State or Government will also be discussing the UN decision to intervene in Libya to save the insurgents from imminent attack by the regime .
I would like to highlight the fact that European States have taken the initiative in these operations and were the first to intervene within the framework of the UN mandate , which itself was the initiative of several European States .
No doubt they heard what us MEPs said during our last part-session here in Brussels .
My group would like to see the Council take this opportunity to further develop the EU 's Mediterranean strategy , whilst maintaining the goal to help and support but never to impose .
This is our duty as neighbours .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following last week 's euro area summit , at which the groundwork was done , the Council 's flagship measures this week will relate to strengthening the euro and making progress on economic governance .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is in favour of increasing the funds available to support the euro and of making the ad hoc instrument we adopted last year to help Greece and Ireland more permanent .
This political will reflects the responsible attitude that Member States have taken in managing this unprecedented crisis in our single currency 's history .
However , we wish to stress very strongly that these exceptional circumstances that the loss of control of national public finances has brought about must not be seen by the Council as an opportunity to adopt a different method for managing European affairs .
The Community method must remain the rule and the intergovernmental method the exception .
A very strong majority within Parliament supports this principle and the Barroso Commission also supports us in this approach , quite simply because it is vital for the future of the European Union .
I am sure that President Van Rompuy will succeed in persuading the Heads of State or Government of this .
The Pact for the euro should also be adopted on Friday .
We welcome it insofar as it introduces provisions for which we have been calling for months now , namely convergence between Member States ' budgetary , social and fiscal policies .
I cannot stress this enough : European solidarity will only be accepted by our citizens if they feel it is fair and deserved .
This will only be the case if the working conditions are met and if our businesses can invest and recruit under comparable fiscal conditions .
Lastly , our group calls upon the Council to make swift progress on the economic governance package and to take proper account of the European Parliament 's position as co-legislator on four out of the six proposals under discussion .
Europe must get back on the path of growth and employment , and the measures that are taking shape are a step in this direction .
Provided they are planned within a Community framework , they will give Europe a healthy basis for a fresh start and a promising future .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , firstly I would like to give the President of the Commission good wishes on his birthday today .
You deserve to be congratulated on that .
( Applause )
I cannot share your cheerfulness ahead of this summit .
I believe it is a summit that is taking place in the worst phase of the European Union , when it is in its worst state .
It starts with Libya .
Seldom has a campaign been prepared so hastily and in such an unstructured way as this campaign , which is actually a good thing and is intended to help people but which is now ending up a diplomatic and - possibly , although I hope not - a military disaster : hasty , uncoordinated , disorganised .
Europe is running away from it in every direction and Turkey , our accession candidate , blocks everything .
Many congratulations !
At this juncture we need to take stock .
This crisis has been ongoing for a year , and for the past year the same process has been taking place over and over again .
At first what is required is contested , only to be acknowledged four or five months later .
A year ago people said ' The Greeks should deal with it themselves .
We do not need to help them ' .
Four months later : a bail-out .
' We do not need a rescue package .
The amount we have made available is enough . '
Four months later : ' We need more money ' .
' We do not want Eurobonds . Eurobonds are nonsense . '
Now everyone is discussing Eurobonds .
Eurobonds will come - of that I am quite sure .
Perhaps in four months ' time .
' We do not need economic governance .
Europe does not need economic governance . '
The same people who were adamantly maintaining this are celebrating at a European Council meeting the fact that now at last we have economic governance .
They are not even embarrassed about saying and doing the opposite of what they previously announced .
I also do not know whether we have yet rescued the Community method .
I hope so and we support you in it , Mr Barroso .
Not just as a birthday present , but because Europe must defend the Community method , because we can see that if we change to this other method which Chancellor Merkel calls the ' new European method ' we will have exactly what I have just described .
Everyone does something and the next day does the opposite of what was announced the day before yesterday .
That is the reality .
We are not dealing with a crisis of the euro ; we are dealing with a crisis of the governments in the euro zone countries .
There is a crucial difference .
With respect to Portugal , everyone is talking and hoping that the government will be able to implement what are actually improbably harsh measures .
Moreover , it is a government - like the situation in Greece - that is acting in part against the will of its own electorate , and then we have some tactical play from the opposition party which is putting the screws on the government .
In Germany , the finance minister - a pro-European - comes up with a package that we all need just a few days before this summit , and then the foreign minister and the Chancellor say : ' Well , we will have to talk it over again first ' .
Last Friday I had opportunity to talk to many leading people from the European financial world on the issue of ' Does the euro enjoy confidence ? ' .
The answer from those in Frankfurt that I spoke to - including the President of the European Central Bank and the President of the Euro Group , but also many other leading bankers - was : ' Yes , the euro is a stable currency . The euro enjoys confidence , and likewise we have confidence in the euro .
However , we have no confidence in the governments of the countries that have this euro .
How can you have confidence in a government that cannot keep its word for even three days ? '
That is the problem that we are grappling with in Europe .
We have embarked upon the wrong course .
The euro is a strong currency .
It is also the expression of the economic might of the euro area in competition with other continents .
On its introduction the euro was worth USD 1.17 .
Look at what it is worth today .
The euro is a stable currency in the intercontinental competition between economic zones , but it is being destabilised from inside because there is no stable form of government .
That is why the Community method is not just a subject of debate in the European Parliament , but also provides the basis for stabilisation of the currency and the expression of the huge economic might of the euro area .
This economic might cannot develop , however , because it is being administered by people to whom the latest opinion poll for the next regional election is more important than the future of the European currency .
That is the reality with which we are confronted .
I hope that everything will go well at the weekend .
I hope that what you have announced will be implemented .
I hope that we will come back from a successful summit .
However , I have my doubts and I fear that we will continue to experience what has been going on for the past year .
I am sorry , but I have to say that the leadership of the European Union is blundering its way along .
( Applause )
Madam President , I would first like to offer my good wishes to President Barroso .
He is an Aries like me and like Marielle de Sarnez and Joseph Daul .
I have a band of Aries around me here ; however , we all have something to say about the pact for Europe , President Barroso .
Quite seriously , whilst it is good that everyone now agrees that we need an economic union and real economic governance , we have to ask the crucial question : will the pact for Europe really create economic union ?
Will this pact really create economic governance ?
I really do not think it will , for the simple reason that the Commission is not leading the process : it is still the Member States .
These are not my words .
I have here the text of 11 March , which will be approved tomorrow and the day after .
What does it say ?
It says that the objectives will be decided on by the Heads of State or Government , the undertakings will be made by the Heads of State or Government and the monitoring will be carried out by the Heads of State or Government .
In fact the Commission will only be involved in technical monitoring , nothing else .
The Council holds all the power .
This is what defeated the Lisbon Strategy and it will defeat this strategy also .

President Barroso , let me ask you once more : this weekend , what is going to be approved will be approved , but please get together with Mr Rehn as quickly as possible to prepare a real economic governance plan based on a Community act that gives all the power to the Commission and is based on a code for convergence , and put it on the Council 's table .
I know they will say no .
They always say no .
But carry on the fight with us and do not accept this procedure or the proposal that is on the table for the time being , as it will not do the job and will not stabilise the euro in the coming months or years .
This is the first thing I wanted to say .
The second thing I wanted to say , Madam President , concerns the Arab revolts and the follow-up of the discussion that we had here a week ago .
Right now , we can make an initial assessment of the EU 's action , and I have to say that this initial assessment is somewhat lukewarm .
In the first place , you will recall that in the beginning we were not very keen on talking about these Arab revolts , out of fear of Islam fundamentalism .
This was our first reaction in the EU bodies .
Now , in the Libyan affair we have demonstrated the European Union 's lack of unity .
I find it appalling that all the EU Member States did not adopt the same position in the UN Security Council : three voted in favour and one abstained .
This goes against the Treaty of Lisbon .
Article 34 of the Treaty states that on bodies discussing foreign policy , European Union Member States have the duty to coordinate among themselves and reach a joint standpoint .
Did they do this ?
I do not think so and I believe they even violated Article 34 of the Treaty .
Thirdly , look at what we are witnessing now .
Yesterday , Baroness Ashton appeared before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and I think she ought to be here today also , when we are discussing such an important issue .
Personally , I see a lack of strategy on the EU 's part in relation to the Arab revolutions .
Some outrageous decisions have been made within the EU institutions .
For example , on Monday before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , one of Baroness Ashton 's colleagues Mr Cooper even said at one point that we ought to understand the situation in Bahrain and that the authorities were right to restore peace and order , when four people have been killed and two hundred injured .
Is that the EU 's position ?
To give you another example , the Union 's foreign ministers met in the Council on Monday and what did they say ?
They also called on demonstrators - in Bahrain that is - to refrain from any acts of deliberate intimidation .
Therefore instead of supporting these revolutions within the European Union and supporting those who have taken to the streets and have fought and been killed , they have done exactly the opposite .
They are telling them to stay calm and be careful .
I ask Baroness Ashton to come to the next part-session and explain what attitudes and strategies we intend to pursue in Bahrain , in Syria and in Yemen and what sanctions we intend to introduce and with whom .
This is the stand we should be taking , rather than the pathetic stand that many European leaders have taken so far in this business .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I regret to say that it seems that this European Council could bring on some dangerous changes , and we should be concerned about this .
Under the banner of so-called economic coordination , economic governance , stability for the euro area , we see a favouring of EU-wide tax harmonisation and EU-wide fiscal unification .
Parliament , unfortunately , has been playing a very active role in that .
Let me speak clearly .
The Commission 's proposal of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base is a risky step that will undermine healthy tax competition amongst Member States , prove harmful to the economy and drive business away from those who impose the policy .
This has all gone too far and must be stopped .
What we have also seen in the last few days is an attempt by some Member States to interfere in the fiscal and tax sovereignty of others .
You know what I am referring to : the very disgraceful bullying of Ireland .
We must not let this happen again .
Turning to Libya , developments in Libya have reminded us once again that we should not expect too much from the so-called EU Common Foreign and Security Policy .
National leaders , not EU leaders , have shown international leadership .
Prime Minister Cameron and President Sarkozy have made and pushed through decisions - not the EU representatives .
I think that it shows clearly that there are limits to integration in this field - but not only in this field .
No Member State should feel obliged to do more than it feels is right .
This is as valid for foreign policy as it is for economic policy .
Europe must stay flexible wherever possible and not be driven by rigid integrationist dogma any more , and it is time for a change in the EU integration paradigm .
That is clear .
That is understandable , and I hope that the European Council will deal with that .
Madam President , Mr Barroso has left already but as he said , confidence is the basis of everything .
I can tell you that our citizens ' confidence is evaporating as fast as the water in the tanks at the Fukushima power plant .
Yes , our citizens know that certain things need to change and that we cannot continue as before .
Yes , we need to halt the race towards insecurity and greater inequality .
Yes , we need to break our addiction to fossil-based energy and hazardous energy .
Yes , we need to return to a situation where finance is there to serve the economy and the economy is there to serve citizens ; and no , we can no longer build our economies on debt , be it public or private , on deficit and on speculation .
Our fellow citizens know all this .
They also know that this will require profound and radical change on the part of governments , businesses and themselves .
They know this and they sense it .
They know that these radical changes are also complex .
As Marianne Thyssen said to me yesterday , they are complex and we cannot do everything at once .
We need to start somewhere .
However , the trouble is that from our fellow citizens ' point of view we always start in the same place : we always start by cutting public expenditure , which as we all know most benefits the more vulnerable .
We always start by making the labour markets more flexible .
Indeed , when people talk about rebalancing flexibility and security , we know full well that this means more flexibility and less security .
Our citizens are fed up with the double standards behind this policy .
At the end of the day , it leaves those who have profited most from the casino economy of the last 20 years in peace .
What we want from the Council , therefore - in addition to everything that is on the table today of course - is a bold initiative designed to provide Member States and the European Union with stable , fair tax revenue .
This means the financial transaction tax of course , plus energy taxes and business tax - and please do not try to sell us the common tax base as the be-all and end-all or the ultimate fiscal policy - and lastly , it means combating fraud and tax havens .
Without such an initiative , I promise you that everything to do with economic governance that is on the table will collapse and take the euro with it .
There is no historical example , ladies and gentlemen , of a monetary union that has succeeded without robust fiscal union to support it .
No more impact assessments , no more prevarication , no more national egoism : for goodness ' sake act !
Lastly , as regards the finance industry , new stress tests will not create greater security , any more than they will in the nuclear industry , if I may be so bold .
We have seen how useless the previous stress tests were .
Everything was fine supposedly , even in Ireland .
What we need are new binding rules , but not rules that we are told will be implemented on 1 January 2019 .
It is high time that the demon of the finance industry with its predatory activities was put back in its bottle , and our citizens will not put up with us waiting any longer .
This is the price to be paid for our fellow citizens ' confidence , and it is vital that as Europeans we have that confidence so that we can return to the 21st century with optimism and with our heads held high .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , economic and monetary union without effective coordination of economic policy will not work .
The Stability and Growth Pact has failed - on this many experts across party-political boundaries are agreed .
The problem is that politics does not seem to have made much progress .
In fact , no new political concepts are in sight .
Let me remind you that the stability pact 's 3 % limit has been breached 73 times since 1999 , 46 times in a way that is barely tolerable under the Treaty - yet in not one single case has a penalty been imposed .
This non-functioning pact does not need to be revised ; it simply needs to be implemented more - or rather , it needs to be implemented in the first place .
Naturally , every householder and every entrepreneur knows how important it is to have sustainable budgets .
However , I fear that in the forthcoming decisions on economic governance and on the European Stability Mechanism it will be all about cuts .
That is not the same as a sustainable budget .
No state that is in so much debt as to be on the brink of insolvency can get out of the debt trap if it has to continue to finance this debt by borrowing at high interest rates .
However much it saves , its debt will continue to rise - all the more so if wages , unemployment benefit and pensions have to be reduced , working hours extended , and public investment in infrastructure , education , health and so on cut back .
If there is no consumption , then production will also collapse .
Neither tightening up the Stability and Growth Pact nor the so-called strict conditionality of the future stability mechanism will therefore lead us to our goal .
What should be emphasised more clearly in the overall package of measures is the additional need for investment in crisis-hit countries in particular , and this must go beyond small extensions of credit and slight reductions in interest rates .
The mention of the necessity of reducing macro-economic imbalances will be problematic for so long as it is only demanded of economically weak states , while those that are economically strong are allowed to continue as before .
Not only does the key word ' solidarity ' not appear anywhere , but it has also been forgotten that expenditure and trade deficits on one side are income and trade surpluses on the other .
Madam President , what Commissioner Barroso has said basically amounts to a proposal to strengthen economic governance and the stability of the euro .
This means speeding up the policy of economic governance in Europe .
Of course , the work being done by Mr Barroso , assisted by Commissioner Rehn , is going very well and we see it in a positive light .
We hope that this pact will be able to respond to the economic and fiscal challenges facing Europe and send the right message to the markets .
Unfortunately , the markets are our current problem .
This new economic governance comes after a crisis , a rude crisis in the form of the Member States ' public debt .
In my opinion , with the United States printing money to an estimated tune of over three trillion dollars , I see no reason why Europe should not resolve its problems by printing money in the order of a trillion euro , not in order to pump it into the market , but in order to set up a fund , what we call the ' support mechanism ' .
Be that as it may , it would appear that the time has not yet come for such an idea , not while Mrs Merkel 's ideas hold sway over Europe .
However , we must again highlight the fact that the European Union is being forced to create new systems and values under unfavourable circumstances .
Introducing monetary union , without an overall strategy of economic governance and coordination between the Member States , was a risk which was tested in practice and operated along general lines .
I believe that the time has come for the Union to take bolder decisions and to make the structural changes needed .
As I said , of course we basically endorse the Council 's decisions on the pact for the euro and we consider that the euro is still a good currency .
However , we must ensure not only that we achieve the objective of stability in the euro area , but also that we achieve a high level of growth and competitiveness in Europe and that we increase and maintain jobs for European citizens , especially young people .
We must focus on young people .
( DE ) Madam President , as an ardent pro-European - as are the great majority of my 500 000 direct voters - I find it very difficult to accept this predicament that you have placed yourself in .
On the one hand , we need stability and have to do something to counter speculation ; on the other , the way in which you are doing this once again provides a fairly dramatic illustration of the democracy deficit in the European Union .
This procedure is more reminiscent of emergency legislation than of what we would like to see in a progressive Europe .
Naturally , I therefore emphatically supported Amendment 34 , which was put forward by the left and which calls for the ordinary Treaty revision procedure to be applied .
Whenever there is an emergency you always manage to do something that in reality increases the gap between citizens further still .
I would also like to take this opportunity to reject in no uncertain terms the way that Mr Schulz conducts himself in this House with respect to me .
( ES ) Madam President , the crisis in North Africa is putting the mechanisms established in the Treaty of Lisbon to the test .
Yesterday , in the High Representative 's appearance before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we stressed the positive aspects of European Union action : Baroness Ashton 's communication that distinguishes between the short , medium and long terms ; rapid application of Resolution 1970 of the United Nations Security Council ; the ability to negotiate with the Arab League ; and the European Council meeting .
However , it is only fair to say here today that there are still certain questions being asked by European public opinion and , therefore , by our citizens .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Verhofstadt is absolutely right .
How is it possible that , in this day and age , the four Member States that form part of the United Nations Security Council do not vote in the same way but rather do so differently ?
How is it possible , in this day and age , that we should be discussing whether the United Nations resolution is applied by the European Union , by NATO or by the international coalition , when we are talking about the same resources coming from the same taxpayers ; about the same ships and their use in the same theatre of operations ?
It is clear that we still have much to improve as regards our capacity for coordination , and much to improve too in the decision-making process .
There is a famous line from a film , which says that ' we will always have Paris ' .
Someone said during this debate that the European Union 's response has been hasty .
If it had not been for France 's courage , determination and consistency - and that is how it must be put - in recognising the rebels , in sending the Minister of Foreign and European Affairs to the Security Council , in calling the Elysée summit and in applying the resolution , Lady Ashton , Colonel Gaddafi 's troops would already have entered Benghazi .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to focus slightly more on one of the hot topics which will be debated tomorrow , namely , the situation in Libya .
My fellow Members are right in saying that a sense has developed in recent days of total chaos or at least of a lack of predictability in the decisions and behaviour of the European Union , especially of its Member States .
In particular , with some countries joining the coalition then stopping their involvement , it is impossible to reach consensus within NATO .
Not only does this situation create great uncertainty among our partners as to whether we are clear about what we basically want to achieve and how to achieve it , it also creates major problems for European public opinion , which cannot have any confidence that the European Union and its actual leaders are up to meeting the responsibilities they have towards our partners in the southern Mediterranean .
I would very much like the European Council , over the coming days , to come up with clear , sound decisions on Libya , and not only on Libya but also on the other countries where we basically have similar situations , such as Bahrain , Yemen and , to some extent , Syria .
We are somehow forgetting that what we do in Libya will also be assessed in the light of our conduct towards the other countries in the region .
I would like the European Council to make clear decisions about what the European Union wants to achieve in Libya , which will also elucidate , to a large extent , how we will achieve it .
I believe that we need to understand clearly that the situation in Libya will have many serious consequences for the neighbouring countries too , if the current situation continues for a long time .
We therefore need to be ready to provide help to both Egypt and Tunisia , not only in coping with the humanitarian situation , but also to be prepared to provide economic and financial support literally in the coming days , weeks and months because the situation there will have an impact on the economic situation in both these countries .
( DE ) Madam President , it has been said here that it is not the euro that is in crisis , but the Member States that have got into debt .
That is the nub of the crisis - irresponsible indebtedness that has been carried on for many years .
That is what we must now stop .
That is why it is right that the European Stability Mechanism must be strict .
That is also why it is right that this has been the case in the bail-outs that have taken place .
That is also why it is right that Ireland is not given an interest rate reduction .
This indebtedness must end .
Once again I am hearing the social democrats talk of a distinction between good and bad debt .
Of course investment is different to consumption , but at some point too much good debt becomes bad debt too .
We need to be fair to future generations , we need sustainable public finances - and then the euro will become stable again .
The pact for the euro involves too little Community method .
That has been said here , and quite rightly so . I share this view .
I would like to say a final word about Libya .
The Council has supported resolution 1973 .
We must now look to the future .
I agree with Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra when he says that France has played a very good role .
However , had Turkey been invited to the Elysée summit then we would not be having these problems in NATO and the situation would be considerably easier for us all .
Moreover , I hope that the newly appointed head of the transitional government in Libya will soon be visiting us here in Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , all the objectives which the Euro Group has set itself , and which are sometimes completely reasonable , can be achieved successfully with the help of the economic , social and taxation policies of the Member States .
The question arises , therefore , as to why we are amending the Treaty today at express speed to transfer these competencies - at least in part - to Union level .
I think there are two answers : as usual we want to share responsibility for unpopular decisions with the European Union , or we want to use the opportunity , perhaps under the pretext of reforms , simply to transfer more power to Brussels .
I doubt this will bring the expected effects , taking into consideration the fact that most Euro Group Member States have more public debt and a less competitive taxation system than the other Member States .
Hanging over this discussion , of course , is the threat of a two-speed Europe .
I would like to warn those who want to hurry .
In addition to the same speed , what is also needed is the right direction .
Moving at very high speed but in the wrong direction threatens to end in only one way - a huge increase in the scale of the catastrophe .
At least , that is what I see happens on Europe 's roads .
( PT ) Madam President , the Portuguese Parliament will today vote against the fourth stability programme tabled by the government in 12 months .
The majority of Members of the Portuguese Parliament will vote against this document because of the package 's content , but also because it was presented in Brussels before it was known about , negotiated or approved in Portugal .
That is the reason for my first question to the Hungarian Presidency : in the light of this experience , does it intend to defend , along with its partners , the obligatory nature of prior parliamentary approval for these documents , or not ?
My second question is as follows .
Tomorrow the Council is deciding on a post-2013 financing mechanism , but it does not tell us anything about the current financing mechanism , which is what interests us .
With Portugal entering a period of early elections , inevitably there will be an explosion in public debt and interest rates .
What does the Council intend to do to prevent speculation on Portuguese public debt ?
Do not , moreover , say that it is a matter for the Portuguese , because if austerity is ours , it is ours because the decisions are yours too .
( NL ) Madam President , the High Representative indicated yesterday afternoon , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that he wanted to offer concrete support to what we have begun to refer to as ' the new Egypt ' in addressing the large-scale housing shortage .
Anyone who is remotely aware of the enormous socio-economic misery in which the vast majority of the Egyptian people find themselves can no longer remain euphoric .
This is about showing genuine European empathy .
For that reason , I warmly welcome all European efforts to improve living conditions in Egypt .
Certainly now that the country is going through an uncertain transition after the departure of President Mubarak and now that Cairo seems to be heading straight towards a financial and food crisis .
In my opinion , European aid to Egypt should be accompanied by redoubled efforts on the part of the Council .
In the new Egypt , all citizens , irrespective of their religion , must be equal before the law , with equal rights for all .
Moreover , Cairo needs to observe the peace treaty with Israel and even develop it further .
If we set those two conditions , both the internal and external stability of the new Egypt would be strengthened .
( NL ) Madam President , I thought that you had overlooked me .
Thank you for giving me the floor .
We are creating a stability mechanism , a permanent aid fund , which will have to be paid for by the ordinary people , by the people who will not be getting any free gifts .
The beneficiaries , however , are the people who will be getting a free gift .
From now on , we will be rewarding cheats , those who break their promises and those who fiddle the figures .
Ten years ago , a Stability and Growth Pact was signed with a solemn pledge that it would keep public finances in order .
That pact has been breached by Germany , France , Greece and others .
Major deficits have not been tackled .
Now , though , solemn promises are again being made that the new pact will actually work .
It will now be Brussels which decides what the Dutch are allowed to earn , when the Dutch are allowed to retire and how much they will get from their pensions .
Again , the bill is being footed by the taxpayer , by the people who are not getting any free gifts .
Madam President , that permanent fund is an expensive toy which allows the political elite to conceal the fact that some countries cannot be trusted in a Monetary Union .
There are countries that want to enjoy the joys of the euro , but do not want to share the burden , countries which are failing to keep their finances in order .
Those countries , Madam President , should leave the eurozone .
That is the only adjustment we need to make to the Stability and Growth Pact .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the upheavals that are multiplying in the south of the Mediterranean should not divert our attention from the medium-term economic and other goals that have long been set .
The international turbulence should instead step up the pace for the growth of our economy : I welcome the fact that the decisions to implement the EU 2020 Strategy should be taken quickly ; as early as this week 's meeting .
We do not know what will happen after the conflict in Libya , but we can be sure that nothing will ever be the same .
Europe therefore really needs a package of measures to permit the economies of Member States to catch their breath as they enter a new period of uncertainty .
The biggest question certainly relates , however , to the situation in the Mediterranean .
The Mediterranean at war is the worst catastrophe that the world could imagine at present .
Those countries that considered it vital to do something in these circumstances acted wisely , but we are nevertheless left with the great contradiction of a European Union that seems to feel awkward , if not actually divided , over what to do .
I therefore appeal to the Hungarian Presidency : Parliament and I also believe the Commission is close to this Presidency , which has the opportunity to turn the crisis into something that does not end up simply undermining the European Union .
We have this enormous responsibility : to transform the present crisis into an opportunity to produce , to allow a foreign policy worthy of the world to live and breathe .
With our responsibilities , our doubts and our mistakes , we are on the brink of momentous events and I think we should shoulder this responsibility to the full , making sure that that the decisions taken by the Council tomorrow and the day after tomorrow are reasonable , but above all bold . Thank you .
( PT ) Madam President , it has already been said that , regrettably , at this moment in the Portuguese Parliament , the government could be collapsing .
If the government falls , it will happen as a result of the political instability caused by the opposition parties , which have not supported another austerity package .
It is true : this is the fourth package in a few months .
This is not because the previous ones were not observed : they were .
Rather , it is because the conditions imposed have become worse at the mercy of the so-called desires of the markets .
Portugal 's budgetary implementation in the months of January and February recorded a surplus , with a 3 % spending cut and income up 11 % .
The political forces that created this political crisis by rejecting this austerity programme , tabled by the government and supported by the European Commission , the Council and the European Central Bank , can be very satisfied with this .
However , it is only imprudence that allows them to be satisfied with this situation , as it is terrible for a euro area country with debt problems .
It is terrible for the country , it is unfair for the Portuguese people , and it is another blow to the sustainability of the great project that is the single currency .
We are not in a crisis in the euro area : we are in the midst of the euro area 's Great Crisis .
I would like to ask my fellow Portuguese Members , what is the alternative ?
All the Member States have to submit their austerity plans up to April .
Does Portugal , or does it not , need further austerity measures to reduce its deficit and public debt ; to reduce the deficit , in 2012 and 2013 , by 3 % and 2 % , respectively ?
You refused to negotiate , but you presented no alternatives .
Rejection is not the solution , it is the problem , forcing further sacrifices on the Portuguese people .
( FR ) Mr President , the next Council is probably the last chance for Europe 's leaders to remember that we founded Europe in order to uphold values and to act together when fundamental issues are at stake .
When a population finds itself at the mercy of a murderous leader , this is a fundamental issue .
A resolution has been adopted thanks to the efforts by France and the United Kingdom .
We have managed to stop Colonel Gaddafi from reaching Benghazi .
However , Europe 's lack of unity is worrying .
Tomorrow 's Council must send a strong signal ; it must support the intervention that is under way , recognise the Libyan rebels in order to give them support and isolate Colonel Gaddafi even more so that this regime will fall .
Fundamental issues are also at stake when we look at what is happening in Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
When we see the cycle of violence flaring up again in the Middle East , this too is fundamental .
We the European Parliament expect Europe 's leaders to act before it is too late .
History is on the move in much of the world .
Political courage means taking up this challenge : this is precisely what we expect of Europe and of those in charge of it .
( NL ) Mr President , the Dutch guarantee of many billions of euros prompted the former Minister of Finance , Mr Ruding , to say ' The road to budgetary hell is paved with guarantees ' .
Indeed , the guarantees that have been granted have been too large and too risky .
They will not help avert the crisis , because they are shooting wide of the mark .
The current European crisis was caused by those who irresponsibly allowed debt to mount up and those who failed to comply with the agreements made .
If we do not tackle these core issues , we can give as many guarantees as we like , but they will still not be of any help .
We have a Stability and Growth Pact .
As early as 2004 , it was laughed out of the room by Germany and France .
We had an opportunity to strengthen the pact , with automatic penalties , in particular , but what happens ?
The penalties remain subject to political decision-making .
That is unbelievable .
The German writer Hans Enzensberger correctly foresaw what would happen .
He predicted that the current situation will cause the citizens to regard the European political elite with cynicism and contempt .

( PT ) Mr President , the path that the European Union 's leaders are treading is unacceptable , with increased exploitation of workers , and with new antisocial measures that exacerbate inequalities , increase unemployment and job insecurity , and increase poverty and social exclusion ; all of which is in the service of the European Union 's economic and financial interest groups , whose profits never stop rising .
Under the pretext of the crisis , they want to force another noose around the necks of the more economically fragile countries , using the established conditions for the application of a European Stability Mechanism to , in fact , transform sovereign states into mere protectorates .
Therefore the workers and the peoples are opposing such measures , as happened on Saturday in Portugal at a demonstration involving more than 300 000 people , and is happening today in the Portuguese Parliament , where the majority of its Members will surely do the same to the fourth austerity package .
However , Mr President , we also want to say ' no ' here to the bombing being carried out by the international force in Libya , just as we said ' no ' to the repression of the struggling peoples in every country in the region , including Libya , Bahrain and Yemen .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the responsible management of financial resources is a basic precondition for the good and stable functioning of households , manufacturing or trading firms , regions , nation states and also federations of states .
It is therefore natural that , if a group of European Union states decided to create a single common currency , it must find a mechanism for preventing populist politicians from burdening the common currency with unsustainable liabilities - debts that are used to purchase the support of voters in the short term .
The Competitiveness Pact defines certain parameters which eurozone countries in particular should adhere to .
The problem , however , is with the implementation of these well-intentioned rules .
I therefore firmly believe that the time has now come to apply automatic penalty mechanisms over failures to follow the agreed common rules of management , so that these penalties do not become the subject of political horse-trading in the European Council , where government leaders make up for their many and varied political errors by remitting each others ' penalties .
Mr President , I want to consider two issues .
First , to welcome the birth of the Euro Plus Pact , which is a welcome event .
A new architecture is being born , almost a kind of economic Schengen .
What is important is that it should be inclusive and open for those who are able and willing to participate and that it should not create a two-speed Europe .
Unfortunately the pact will be half open because the amendment to Article 136 , as debated and voted in our Committee on Constitutional Affairs has fallen .
It reads : ' Calls for the stability mechanism to be open from the outset to Member States whose currency is not the euro , but who wish to participate ' .
It will be half open because it will be open to take obligations upon its shoulders .
It will not be open for those outside the euro who want to participate in the rights .
What unites us is the single market , much more so than the euro .
It is not a euro crisis ; it is a crisis in some euro Member States .
Any non-euro Member State could have the same public finance problem .
So there is a lack of logic and a lack of consistency .
A few words on Libya and the southern Mediterranean .
Firstly , I want to congratulate us - in fact not the Union but some Member States who are at the forefront of the defence of human rights and democracy in Libya .
We should be grateful to France and its leader , Nicolas Sarkozy , in leading the way .
I think it is the beginning of moving in our foreign policy from interest-based foreign policy to value-based foreign policy .
We need to follow two steps .
We need to redesign the neighbourhood policy and direct it towards our societies and governments and achieve something which we call in Central and Eastern Europe transition or transformation .
It is also an alarm call to redesign and reform and strengthen the common security and defence policy so as to equip the Union with common command capacities and military capacities .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , 24 March , will be a symbolic day .
In the first instance , it will be marked by the amendment to the Treaty of Lisbon that we have just voted for , which will allow a permanent European Stability Mechanism to be established .
This mechanism allows the European Union to devise the first Eurobonds , which are designed to finance sovereign debt at low interest rates in the event of speculative attacks .
In this respect , it is a shame that the process stopped halfway .
To deal with the markets ' irrational exuberance , the revision of the Treaty ought to have been an opportunity to authorise the European Central Bank to do what the United States does and buy back public debt in the event of exchange rate tensions .
The process is even more incomplete since the pay-off required is to implement the Competitiveness Pact , re-christened the Pact for the euro .
This is the second symbol of tomorrow .
This pact is backed unanimously by the Council , the Commission and the European Central Bank .
Ladies and gentlemen , you all know the Washington Consensus : you loved it .
Well , 24 March sees the birth of the ' Brussels consensus ' .
The ' Brussels consensus ' is the blind , roughshod application of neoliberal dogma : squeezing public services and the welfare state ; wage austerity and minimal regulation of the financial markets .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Council , the Commission and the ECB have short memories .
They are proposing to transpose the Pact for the euro into the governance package so as to enshrine in our system the very policies that led to the economic crisis .
In Spain , the UK , Ireland and elsewhere , the rise of household debt , which is fed by the finance industry , has been caused by none other than the crisis in buying power resulting from the pay restraint that has held sway for 20 years .
The Pact for the euro unfortunately proposes to make wage austerity a permanent fixture .
As for public debt , as well as being a consequence of the economic crisis , it is also a result of pointless tax reductions everywhere , advocated by liberals and conservatives .
There was no explosion of public expenditure in Europe : quite the contrary .
Budget and wage austerity , combined with the interest rate rises already planned by the European Central Bank , will end up killing off internal demand in Europe and killing off the recovery without reducing deficits .
Tomorrow , we will be side by side with employees demonstrating against this ' Brussels consensus ' : this is the third symbol of 24 March .
If we do not want to see a return of the likes of the brown shirts , whom Europe was created to stand against , the people 's elected representatives must stand with the people to denounce policies that are as unjust as they are ineffective .
( FI ) Mr President , creating a permanent crisis management mechanism for Europe is justified in case there are crises in the future .
None of us wants further crises , but they could happen .
It is nevertheless unfortunate that the plan is to establish the permanent crisis management mechanism outside the EU institutions .
The mechanism should be brought as close as possible to EU institutions , so that they might monitor how it is used .
Furthermore , any penalties should apply automatically , and not as the result of discussions and negotiations .
I would like to say a few words about our socalled foreign policy and Libya .
The situation in Libya and within the international community is confused .
It was right to take the decision regarding the nofly zone in order to protect civilians .
The EU has also been involved in this .
Now that ground forces have been attacked , I think that there is good reason to question whether this nofly zone was created for that .
In this respect , things are close to exceeding the threshold of war .
Mr President , Mr Schulz said that military operations were set up too hastily .
On the contrary , they came too late .
The West waited too long .
It could have isolated Gaddafi in Tripoli and forced him either to go or to be wiped out .
As it was , we were just in time to prevent a mass murder in Benghazi .
And what did we see ?
France and Britain - two nation states - took the lead .
My congratulations !
Germany , apparently , is a country of hard currency and soft power .
Being Minister of Defence in Germany is the most risky job in the country .
Meanwhile , Turkey opposes NATO , and the US is the power in retreat and acts like a spectator .
I am afraid that now - as in the Balkans - we cannot break the deadlock without committed American leadership : leadership that the European Union , unfortunately , is incapable of providing .
The only politician who knew how to deal with Gaddafi was Ronald Reagan .
Reagan was right all along .
( EL ) Mr President , exactly a year ago , the leaders of the European Union and the Greek Prime Minister decided that Greece should play the part of economic and social guinea pig .
Extreme , antisocial measures were then taken , on the pretext of reducing the public deficit and debt and improving competitiveness .
At the end of this experiment , public debt is just under 150 % , unemployment stands at 15 % , with unemployment among young people at 30 % , inflation is close to 4.4 % and the economy has shrunk by 6.6 % .
Commissioner Rehn , the Greek experiment has been a failure and you have exterminated the guinea pig economically , socially and politically .
The leaders of the European Union have the same fate in store for other Member States that take recourse to the pact for the euro , which is the European version of the Greek memorandum .
We are against this pact , because we do not want to exterminate workers , pensioners and the unemployed .
Commissioner Rehn , when the Greek memorandum was signed , you wished the Greeks ' bon courage ' .
If you are consistent in your wishes , you will also need to wish European workers ' bon courage ' on Friday or Saturday .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the American political scientist Samuel Huntington once predicted a clash of civilizations .
Had we relied on this , we would ourselves have played a part in bringing about this clash of civilizations as part of a self-fulfilling prophecy .
We , the European Parliament , have always worked for cooperation with the Arab states and the people there .
Now we are seeing how the peoples of the Arab world are striving for values that we also represent : democracy , freedom and the rule of law .
Who would have expected just a few weeks ago that the Arab League would be asking us , the western and the international community , to stop the tyrant in Libya ?
There is a sea change under way in the Arab world .
We must not make any mistakes here .
We must not just pay lip service to the peoples of the Arab countries , but rather must support them in what we do .
This evening I am travelling to Tunisia on behalf of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation , of which I am president , just as I was in Cairo two and a half weeks ago .
I would like to reiterate the words of Konrad Adenauer , the first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany , who said : ' We are on the side of freedom ' .
We now need to say to the Arab peoples : ' If it is what you yourselves want , then we want to help you by providing solidarity and advice on democracy so that you can prepare for elections ' .
We hear with some dismay that a terrorist attack was carried out today in Jerusalem and that many people were injured .
We condemn this in the strongest possible terms , whoever is responsible .
However , we also say that there must now be peace between Israel and Palestine .
If the wind of freedom is blowing through the Arab states then the opportunity must be seized to bring about peace between Israel and Palestine too , so that Israel can live within safe borders but also so that the Palestinian people , who deserve the same dignity as the Israelis , can also live within safe borders .
This is our task as this great change takes place in the Arab world : to make our contribution as the European Union and to so in a united and resolute manner .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , beyond the measures that have been announced , I wonder if European policy is doing enough .
It naturally takes time for the European Union to establish leadership , especially in foreign policy , but as we know , certain situations arise and unfortunately do not allow us all the time we would like and actually call for fast action and far-sightedness .
Now it is clear that we are still falling short of requirements as far as affairs in the Mediterranean region and particularly Libya are concerned : we need to reflect a little more to recognise that perhaps we will need stronger action to understand what has been happing and also to deploy concerted action towards the Mediterranean .
It is in fact clear to everyone that if we look at Libya , there is a substantial difference between the whole of Europe taking joint action and action only being taken by willing countries , as is the case at present .
No , my message to the representatives of the Council and Commission is that we are not there yet .
The Council has not answered certain questions , and now must do so quickly .
I wonder if beyond the humanitarian effort , we really know what to do if the application of Resolution 1973 is not enough and if some countries go beyond their mandate .
Secondly , I would like to know the Council 's view on the issue of operational command : NATO told us that it is performing a technical role , but not providing political guidance .
Do we think we can get along like that , without seeking a stronger and more united European Union voice instead of fobbing the job off onto the few who are willing ?
Finally , within the framework of ongoing operations and the relationship with the Arab League and the African Union , it is essential to prevent our intervention from ultimately being seen negatively , with the risk of creating uncertainty and dangerous shifts .
Are we aware ?
Perhaps not altogether : these are questions that do not deserve bureaucratic answers but need appropriate policy responses , starting with tomorrow 's Council meeting .
( SV ) Mr President , critics of the euro in my country say that the situation with Greece and Ireland demonstrates that the euro does not work .
They say that it is better to be outside the euro area .
They are wrong .
During its ten-year history , the euro area has created stability , low inflation and , in actual fact , millions of new jobs .
The permanent crisis mechanism will act as an absolutely last resort if a country gets into major economic difficulties .
The euro is not the reason for the crisis , as the Commissioner usually quite rightly points out .
On the contrary , the common currency is an important part of the solution , and that is the point as far as a country like Sweden is concerned , too .
I therefore deeply regret the fact that in the Swedish Parliament the majority is not in favour of Sweden joining the Euro Pact .
This reduces my country 's influence .
If Sweden wants to belong to the EU 's inner circle , as the Swedish Government says it does , it is no good sitting outside the meeting rooms .
Denmark and the Danish Government and Parliament are in favour of the euro .
It should be possible for Sweden to be so , too .
( EL ) Mr President , the Greek Communist Party condemns the new illegal imperialist war unleashed in Libya by the United States of America , France , Britain and NATO .
The interest in providing humanitarian aid is disgraceful hypocrisy .
The imperialists ' real objective is the oil , the natural gas and the wealth-producing resources of Libya , North Africa and the region in general .
The imperialist aggression on the part of the USA , NATO and the European Union is exacerbating the risks to which the people in the region in general are exposed .
The new pact and euro-unifying economic governance will bring mass unemployment and poverty in their wake .
The European support mechanism is a mechanism for controlled bankruptcy and safe insolvency for nations , in order to protect the profits of the plutocracy .
This is the free world of the USA .
This is the European Union of democracy and freedom .
The real dilemma is this : will it be the people or the plutocracy that defaults ?
The people should not pay for the consequences of imperialist barbarity and the capitalist crisis .
They should not be condemned to permanent unemployment and poverty and we therefore call on them to rise up against and oppose this imperialist intervention and to fight for their modern rights and for an alternative path to growth that serves grassroots needs , not the profits of the monopolies .
( PT ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to draw attention to the value that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and especially the Portuguese of the PPE Group , ascribe to the upcoming Council , to the solution that was found - which is frankly better than was expected at the time - and , in particular , to the work of my colleagues , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , who prepared the report on behalf of Parliament , in line with the Commission 's positions , bringing the fund closer to something that clearly follows the Union method and moving it away from what would be the intergovernmental solution .


Next , I should like to say to all my fellow Members , at a time when Portugal is experiencing a political crisis , that the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ( PSD ) , which is part of the PPE Group , is ready to govern following elections .
Moreover , we will govern in line with criteria , which are criteria for the euro area , meeting all the targets set and , beyond that , doing what the Portuguese Socialist Party ( PS ) was unable to do in 13 years ; I repeat , 13 years .
The PS government was a spectacular failure .
Everything happening in Portugal was foreseen by the PSD during the 2009 elections .
I took part in that campaign and we warned that this would happen .
Therefore , we are now here to say that we give every guarantee to the European Union and , in particular , to our partners in the euro area , that we will fulfill every criteria , which will be demanding and will force the Portuguese people to make sacrifices .
However , there will be , for once , someone credible in government , in contrast with the current Portuguese Government , which had to table four stability and growth programmes , and which is constantly seeking new solutions without being able to give the markets a credible response ; to give a response that serves the interests of Portugal and of Europe .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) )

( PT ) Mr President , I should just like to ask Mr Rangel whether , given that he is saying here that the next Portuguese Government will present the same austerity measures and will commit to the same targets that have been negotiated with Brussels , does he not think it infantile and imprudent to provoke a political crisis ; whether he thinks that Portugal will pay too high a price and that it will require too many sacrifices from the Portuguese people ?
It is to this that I should like an answer .
Is it not lust for power leading them to take this attitude ?
( PT ) Mr President , I will be very happy to answer , although I did not want to turn a European Parliament debate into a debate on Portuguese politics .
In fact , if Mrs Estrela wants to debate Portuguese politics , she has a simple solution : we must have elections , stand as a candidate for the Portuguese Parliament and she will have the opportunity , in opposition , to debate the policies intended for Portugal with the Portuguese Social Democratic Party .
I would just say the following : we cannot take another government that has failed four times in two years .
It is impossible , it is unsustainable and the markets do not find it credible : there are no more solutions with the Portuguese Socialist Party in government .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question ( Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) )

( FI ) Mr President , I will not have the opportunity to ask this in the Portuguese Parliament , so I will ask you straight : why is Portugal 's Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) not supporting this very important proposal ?
The whole euro area and the European Union may suffer a crisis if decisions are delayed .
Why do you not support the solutions proposed , right here and now ?
( PT ) Mr President , the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ( PSD ) responsibly supported all the austerity packages , unlike many parties in other countries of the Union .
When the government has spectacularly failed - and it no longer has any excuse , it is incapable of showing a single result after two whole years - and the market situation remains as it is , the PSD has no other option but to be on the side of the solution .
The solution is new elections , new government , new credibility for Portugal , and also for Europe and the euro area .
( MT ) Mr President , two weeks ago , this Parliament adopted a brave political resolution , appealing - amongst other things - for the creation of a no-fly zone over Libya .
Just one week ago , when the United Nations Security Council had not yet approved this resolution , we held another sitting where we were feeling rather desperate due to the imminent fall of Benghazi and ultimately the collapse of the revolution which is in favour of democracy in Libya .
Last Thursday , one day later , the resolution was approved and it has been four days since its implementation .
Mr President , I think it is important that we continue to implement this resolution and carry on supporting the Libyan people , while at the same time protecting them from further massacres and helping them in their transition towards democracy .
We also need to tackle two other issues .
First of all , we need to keep on providing extensive humanitarian aid to the Libyan people and to refugees fleeing Libya , particularly to Tunisia and Egypt .
Secondly , we need to prepare for a possible mass exodus of refugees toward European Union countries .
After all , this is not just the responsibility of Mediterranean EU countries but of us all .
Mr President , today the PPE Group meeting room was officially named after one of the founding fathers of the European Union : Alcide de Gasperi .
In his time , the key to solving the crisis was a supranational approach , taking care of European common interests first .
He was among those statesmen who , although born in the 19th century , were able to develop a vision of the Europe of the 21st century .
Reversing the economic crisis today needs statesmanship which is not geared to the next elections and does not concentrate first and foremost on national salvation but which has a care for the next generations and Europe as a whole .
As for the European Council , I welcome the new text of the stability mechanism , as well as the euro area reform package .
Second , I hope that the Competitiveness Pact will prove credible and will also attract non-euro area members .
It is important that every government makes significant national pledges to improve our competitive position .
Third , as with the single market , I am a bit worried that its ambitious targets have been substantially curtailed and its operational efficiency could become almost non-relevant .
Therefore , while deciding on new steps , let us prove our political will and credibility by completing the four freedoms on which European cooperation is based , including the internal market , and implementing in full the Services Directive .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I would just like to express my sympathy and condolences to the people of Japan .
I know we will have a debate on Japan in a few moments , but I hope that , in the days to come , as well , the Council will accommodate any requests from Japan for specialist assistance .
We often talk about developing countries , but here we have a disaster area in a highly developed country , where additional help may still be needed .
My second point is Libya .
I do not think that any of the warm words expressed here today , even those expressed by the Commission , can change the facts that the European Union has no presence in Libya and that , at the moment , it is not even able to put a stop to the crisis in the cities or the actions of Mr Gaddafi 's ground troops .
I would like to congratulate the French President on having ensured , at the very last minute , that the European Union was actually able to do something in consultation with NATO , but the suffering of the people is not over yet and it would be wise of us to be modest about our role .
Europe is better at providing help after a crisis than during a crisis , as I have already said on previous occasions .
Finally , I would like to turn to the Euro Pact .
I think that we have , indeed , taken important steps forward .
Mr Barroso has dubbed it a cornerstone , but I do not think that the cornerstone is yet firmly in place , and in the coming months we will have to move forward .
This will not really be resolved tomorrow .

Mr President , like Mr Barroso I would also like to concentrate on the economic situation , particularly as my country is the recipient of an EU and IMF bailout at this particular time .
However , we have a new government and new hope in Ireland .
In his very first speech , our Taoiseach said he wanted to build bridges in Europe , pay our way and pull our weight - and that is what we are determined to do .
However , there are two things we need in particular to do that .
Firstly , the interest rate charged is draconian and is not sustainable .
We would like to see that reduced by at least 1 % to 2 % .
Secondly , we also need a continued guarantee of funding for our banks until such time as they are functional again .
We do not need to be pressurised regarding our corporation tax and we particularly do not need lectures from people like Mr Sarkozy , who seems very cosy with an effective rate of 8.2 % in France , while our effective rate is actually 11.9 % .
Perhaps he should look at the plank in his own eye before he casts his gaze across the Irish Sea .
What is the quid pro quo ?
One , we will have the austerity package in place , much to the chagrin and pain of our citizens .
Two , we will consider , if required , a debt pact , like the one they have had in Germany since 2009 .
Three , we will also consider a European independent fiscal agency .
That also is very important because I do not believe there is such a thing as an independent national agency .

I would ask Mr Barroso , on this his birthday , and his colleagues , to help Ireland help itself on this one occasion and we will not come calling again for help by way of a bailout .
( PL ) Mr President , it is to be welcomed that the European Union 's leaders have devoted so much time in recent weeks and days to what is happening in Libya and other countries in North Africa .
I am sure this action will enable us to prevent a civilian massacre and I am sure , too , that the Libyans will overthrow the tyrant themselves .
However , it cannot be denied that we also have to talk about internal challenges - challenges concerning the way the European Union and its institutions operate ; challenges for internal function , common foreign policy and common security and defence policy .
The difference of opinion which has appeared between some of the European Union 's Member States shows how far we are from that objective for it to be a truly common policy , one which is in keeping with the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is also a challenge for the entire international community .
It is good that we are working with the United States and other members of NATO , it is good that we are in dialogue with the Arab League and the African Union , and it is good that we are in dialogue with Israel .
I think Mr Pöttering stressed something which is very important , that what is happening today in North Africa , what is happening in Libya and Egypt , may have very serious consequences , and that these consequences may also affect the future of the peace process .
We should remember this advice and be careful to heed it .
We should also think about the future of these countries and the promotion of democracy and human rights , and not just work as a firefighter putting out fires , and we should also think of other countries around Europe where such processes - sinister processes - can occur .

( DE ) Mr President , in his invitation to the European Council Mr Van Rompuy states that we will begin our working dinner by taking stock of events in Libya and in our southern neighbouring countries .
I hope that nobody chokes on this , but that instead we send out clear messages - and also united messages - concerning our aims to Colonel Gaddafi and to the people of Libya , but also to our own public , which is irritated by the lack of unity in the face of a dictator 's hold on power .
It is right to expand our blacklist to include certain people and to freeze the accounts of the national Libyan oil company .
However , I would also like to have seen the EU rather than NATO remembering its own decisions as regards capacity and capability , and being able to implement the arms embargo using its Member States ' naval forces .
After all , they are our neighbours .
Had we done so we would have avoided the recent stress involving Turkey at NATO and relieved the burden on our US allies .
I now hope that the planning of the EU 's humanitarian missions will concentrate not just on the reception of war refugees on the Egyptian and Tunisian sides of the Libyan border , but that we will actively provide humanitarian aid in parts of Libya that have already been liberated from Colonel Gaddafi 's power .
I believe this is necessary in order to make our intentions clear to those in Tripoli .
To the communist Member from Greece I would like to say that I have just heard from Moscow that Stalin is dead .
New directives are on their way from the politburo , but evidently you have not yet received them .
( RO ) Mr President , I think that we all agree on the ultimate objective of the intervention going on in Libya : to put a complete stop to the intolerable acts of violence and abuse being committed by the Gaddafi regime against civilians .
I believe that Paragraph 8 of UN Security Council Resolution 1973 provides an irrefutable legal basis for ensuring , by every means possible , respect for the no-fly zone established with the precise aim of protecting civilians .
I actually want to mention that , prior to the adoption of resolution 1973 , the European Parliament was one of the first international institutions to call for establishing such a zone , during the last plenary session in Strasbourg .
With the prospect of the European Council meeting which opens tomorrow , I feel that there are two important factors for ensuring that intervention in Libya is successful .
I believe that the key words should be ' coordination ' and ' clarity ' .
I am talking , first and foremost , about coordination at EU level in the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon with regard to the humanitarian aspects .
There is also coordination with NATO : I believe that our actions must complement those of NATO .
Lastly , coordination with the Arab League is very important , because ongoing regional support will be an essential aspect of our actions in Libya .
Finally , we need to be clear in our resolve to end the violence against civilians .
The successful resolution of this situation depends , to a large extent , on the clarity of our message .
( HU ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioners , the latest economic figures show that Europe is heading out of the crisis .
The next EU summit can further strengthen this process .
The weekend Council meeting may bring a breakthrough in European politics , elevating European solidarity to a new level .
An important element of the package of measures proposed for adoption is the macroeconomic coordination cycle , namely the European Semester , the first phase of which is concluded by the synthesis report prepared by the Hungarian Presidency .
This report is also important because it gives us an opportunity of sketching an economic picture of a post-crisis , competitive European Union .
In addition to this , the Hungarian Presidency-in-Office also played a major role last week in the adoption of the overall guideline of the package of six legislative proposals and , thanks to this , a start can be made by Parliament and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Mr President , I congratulate the Hungarian Presidency on its activity over recent weeks .
This is a real success story .
At the same time , however , this is a success for Europe as well .
Everything is set for a final agreement on the European Union 's new economic policy framework to be reached at the forthcoming European Council meeting in the second half of the week .
This may enable the whole of European integration to enter a new phase .
In the renewed framework for economic governance our responsibility , and the responsibility of the European Parliament , is very great , because it would be good to adopt these six legislative proposals at first reading .
The whole of Europe may lose if there is a delay .
I congratulate Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri on today 's report .
I am grateful that the Council was flexible , and the European Parliament not only now ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( GA ) Mr President , I support what is being done by the Irish Government to obtain an interest rate reduction under the EU-IMF Programme for Ireland .
The European Commission has made clear that it will be prepared to support an interest rate reduction , and I would expect that the 27 Member States will reach a consensus regarding the reconsideration of this question .
It is in the interest of both Ireland and the European Union to ensure that our debt is sustainable .
It is essential that the pricing of the EU financial assistance mechanism is affordable and that it is fair .
It is widely reported that some countries are seeking concessions from Ireland in return for an interest rate reduction .
It would appear that pressure is on Ireland to increase its corporation tax , for example - I do not have time to go into the issue of effective tax as against corporate tax -
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , so the European Council will adopt the decision to amend the Treaty with regard to the European Stability Mechanism , but will allegedly help countries stay inside the eurozone .
Of course it will fail : not for want of money being thrown at the problem , but because the problem is endemic .
This is a mechanism that will try to make water flow uphill !
The external value of a country 's currency should reflect the demand for , and supply of , its currency which of course should then reflect the demand for its exports , visible and invisible , and the demand for its imports , visible and invisible , as well as capital movements .
The same currency value cannot possibly reflect the economic conditions in 17 different countries .
Far from needing a mechanism to keep failing countries inside the eurozone , we need a mechanism to rescue them from it .
Even those countries that have seen successes in the eurozone will be better off outside with revalued currencies .
( RO ) Mr President , I think that it is vital , as part of the European Council discussions on 24 and 25 March , to finalise a credible legislative package for strengthening economic governance in the European Union .
In this respect , the cohesion policy , along with the common agricultural policy , is a priority area in view of the negotiations on the new post-2013 European Union budget .
It is vital to maintain a large proportion of the post-2013 EU budget for the cohesion policy to ensure that the European Union meets its ambitious targets and provides appropriate support for the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
However , the cohesion policy must make investments effective , especially through strategic fund programming , thematic concentration of targets and simplification of implementation rules .
( LT ) Mr President , today we approved the amendment of the Treaty of Lisbon which will facilitate the establishment of the permanent euro stability mechanism .
We showed solidarity by agreeing with the amendment of the treaty and by understanding that we are in a difficult economic and financial situation and that we must take very specific actions regarding economic coordination and surveillance .
This mechanism and the Guarantee Fund are only intended for euro area members , while countries not in the euro area will be sidelined , risking fragmentation of the European Union and rejection of the Community method .
The European Union must therefore show greater solidarity , by also providing assistance to non-euro area members , so that they become members of the club and recover all decision-making rights in the European Union and we would thus eliminate a temporary discrepancy in the EU accession agreement .
- ( SK ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to draw attention to two issues in connection with the forthcoming meeting of the Council .
The first is that many of the measures are undemocratic by nature .
The role of the national parliaments and the European Parliament , as the only elected bodies , will be weakened and the powers of central executive bodies will be strengthened .
The strict penalties and their automatic nature limit the power of national parliaments to influence economic policy .
I have a similarly negative view of the fact that the Commission is drafting legislation on macro-economic indicators without involving the European Parliament .
Secondly , many of the proposed measures are counter-productive .
How does the Commission intend to restore economic growth and employment ?
You are proposing policies which suppress domestic demand and rely on exports .
It is almost certain that such a combination of policies will not lead the EU out of crisis .
Instead of undemocratic and restrictive policies , Commissioner , I would like to express the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , the bad news today was that the Portuguese conservatives are rejecting this package in the hope of new elections being held .
In this way the whole euro zone may be brought into crisis , because a delay would be poison at present .
The markets are also watching to see if the European Union can take decisions .
It is very important that we find solutions .
This will be a historic decision , because now we are moving from a system of ageold coordination , in which only the few want to be coordinated , to governance , which is a brand new type of European economic architecture , and is a good thing .
Regrettably , the reputation of this whole project was tarnished by Sarkozy 's and Merkel 's neoliberal ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first of all thank the honourable Members for a very responsible debate on next week 's European Council .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to comment on several speeches concerning Libya and Japan before commenting on economic issues .
As you know , the Commission has no competence on the security and defence front but we have been coordinating the European response to the escalating humanitarian crisis on the Libyan borders .
The no-fly-zone military action implemented according to UN Security Council Resolution 1973 brought new circumstances which need to be taken into account when delivering humanitarian assistance in a secure and efficient way to those in need , either at the borders or inside Libya .
It brought new hope as well that innocent civilian lives would be spared .
Although the events in Japan have no immediate health consequences for citizens in the European Union , it is important to take stock of EU nuclear safety policies , as well as contingency plans and safety measures in place .
The Commission uses all instruments available to monitor the impact , including on future safety .
To my mind , Japan teaches us that risks can become reality ; what was thought to be impossible must now be included in our planning .
A European approach for a comprehensive safety and risk assessment of nuclear facilities would maximise the effects at the European level .
Before drawing final conclusions , a full analysis of the accident in Japan is essential ; the assessment should cover the most important issues , such as safety requirements for earthquakes , as well as emergency power supply assistance for reactor cooling .
On economic policy too , your debate reflected the magnitude of what is at stake at tomorrow 's European Council and I trust that the messages sent from here will be heard and listened to in all capitals of Europe .
It is fair to say that the European Union will have profoundly evolved after this March .
The financial crisis which turned into an economic recession and then into a sovereign debt and banking crisis has forced Europe to seek new ways forward , to consider all possible options and to take decisions with long-lasting consequences .
As President Barroso said in his opening remarks , we will respond to the challenge with a comprehensive strategy which builds on the strengths , values and institutions of the European Union .
It is exactly the kind of challenges which are facing us today that the European Union was created for : to be able to withstand storms together and to be able by joint efforts to come out of a crisis stronger than before .
As a result of very long talks for several months , the elements of a comprehensive response in economic policy are now finally there for the leaders of the Union to agree and commit to in the European Council tomorrow .
The Member States , and especially the euro area Member States , are all pursuing intensified fiscal consolidation and growth-enhancing structural reforms with very strong determination .
This is now the first and foremost cornerstone of making progress on this strategy .
Secondly , both the Council and the Parliament are delivering on your commitment to conclude the Commission 's legislative package on economic governance by this summer .
Reinforced economic governance is indeed the cornerstone of our comprehensive response .
Thirdly , the permanent European Stability Mechanism will be made functional as of June 2013 , with the effective lending capacity of EUR 500 billion .
By this decision we will have in place a financial backstop with a sufficient containment effect to clear away even the slightest doubt about our capacity to act even in the most stressed scenarios .
The role of the Commission in the running of the operations of the ESM will be central , and the link of the ESM to the EU institutions , of course including the European Parliament , will be very clearly and firmly established .
We shall in due course propose a regulation based on Article 136 of the Treaty clarifying the steps to define policy conditionality and to ensure consistency with the EU framework for country surveillance .
Last but not least , the banking sector repair must be completed , to safeguard the provision of credit to the real economy , to enterprises and to households .
The next round of bank stress tests will be conducted in the coming months ; the results will guide the necessary restructuring and possible recapitalisation of the EU banking sector .
Before the publication of results , all the Member States will need to decide and present their strategies , if needed , for the possible restructuring and recapitalisation of their vulnerable institutions .
It is indeed essential that we see that these two problems have to be resolved in parallel ; financial repair must be accelerated , banks restructured and , if need be , recapitalised as soon as possible .
This is a precondition for restoring and reinforcing confidence in the European economy , improving banks ' robustness , and ensuring that we safeguard economic growth through credit supply .
To conclude , once the European Council confirms its full commitment to all of these elements of our comprehensive economic strategy to overcome the crisis , the European Union will be well on track for turning the economic tide this year , 2011 .
This does not mean all is fine , even less that we can sit back .
But , yes , it does mean that we are prepared to face the current and emerging challenges and to prevent crises in the future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , first , I thank you for this debate .
I am grateful that most of you in the Chamber and the speakers in the debate recognised the need for the six elements which will be the European Union 's joint response to the economic crisis and on which the Heads of State or Government , I hope , can decide on Thursday and Friday .
With this we can bring the crisis to an end ; with this we can lay the foundation for severely restricting the occurrence of similar crises .
I agree very strongly with the speakers who said that it was not the European Union itself that was in crisis but that a part , a good part , of the Member States had become entangled in a debt crisis , a debt spiral .
This is what we must put an end to .
This is the top priority task for all of us , for every Member State .
However , we live in a single Union , and we have a common monetary policy and a common currency .
This is why the debt crisis of any individual Member State is a joint problem for us all .
This is why we need joint solutions .
An interesting debate has started , which , I believe , we will have to deal with when we start negotiations now in an official form as well on the six legislative proposals on economic governance .
This is distinguishing between good and bad debt .
Is there such a thing as good debt ?
This is a very exciting debate .
The Commissioner supports what I am saying , as we considered this in the European Council and the Council was very sceptical whether there was such a thing as good debt .
Here , too , one MEP said that in very many cases a debt that started as a good debt could turn into a very bad debt .
We should continue this debate , but I believe that if we wish to extract ourselves from the debt crisis once and for all , we must seek different ways of stimulating the economy and starting growth , other than increasing debt .
We should not wish to make good investments at the expense of future generations .
Therefore , I think it is also important to say that , as President Barroso also mentioned , we have tools in our hands : further developing the single market , removing still existing obstacles , and the Europe 2020 Strategy .
I would like to say a few words on the Portuguese and Irish situations .
We are all aware that this will be discussed at the European Council meeting .
As regards Portugal , I merely wish to point out that Portugal 's announced package of measures was welcomed by the Heads of State and Government at the EU Summit on 11 March , and it was also welcomed by the President of the European Central Bank .
Thus this in itself was a positive message for the markets .
At the same time , it is also very important to say that every action plan is only worth as much as is implemented of it .
Furthermore , it is very important that there should be political commitment and unambiguous support behind every undertaking .
Regarding Ireland , I would simply like to mention that the representative of the new Irish Government was very cooperative in the General Affairs Council on Monday , and that I am very confident that a solution to the Irish problem will be found at the European Council meeting as well .
Many people have raised the Community method versus the intergovernmental method , suggesting that intergovernmentalism was the reason for the failure of the Lisbon Strategy as well .
I believe that we have made considerable progress since 4 February .
On 4 February , a good number of Member States and many Members of the European Parliament with whom I spoke at the time were worried about where we were heading and what would become of the European Union if we outsourced important matters .
In my opinion , the situation has improved a lot and we have returned to the Community approach .
From the very start the task for us , as the Presidency , has been to try to promote the creation of a viable solution between the outsourcers and those who wished to remain solely within the Community framework .
The Hungarian Prime Minister suggested and requested as early as 4 February that a reference be made in the conclusions of the European Council with regard to also implementing what was then called the Competitiveness Pact in accordance with the Treaties .
I am very pleased to be able to say that we have certainly returned to the Community approach .
The European Commission , one of our most Community-oriented bodies , has an important duty in every element of our comprehensive economic answer of the six laws , and therefore the European Parliament has also been given guarantees that it will have access to the information .
So , we have come a long way and in a positive direction .
The Pact for the eis also open and Member States , such as my own country , will be able to join if they want to .
It is not an exclusive club .
Finally , as a last request , I repeat my wish that we pursue the debate on the package of six legislative proposals on economic governance in the most constructive spirit possible .
We are prepared for this , and I would like to mention that we strove to take into account the reports of the MEPs which were already complete in January when the Council formulated its position .
Turning to Libya and the Mediterranean , war and instability are the greatest tragedy possible for the people living in the region and the European Union .
I believe I am quoting Mr Mauro 's words , which I thoroughly agree with .
We have ahead of us the opportunity and task of creating out of this crisis the chance to ensure that a tragedy of this nature never again occurs in the Mediterranean region .
I think that it is fair to say , and I believe in plain speaking , that Parliament was quicker in deciding this than the Council .
In the end , the Coalition was able to put together an operation at the last minute which managed to save the lives of very many people in Benghazi .
As to the question of how united we are and how effective the European Union 's common foreign and security policy is , here again I will speak plainly .
We are not one hundred per cent united .
However , we have been able to agree a great many things which were essential in the recent period .
On 11 March , at the summit held then , the Heads of State or Government clearly stated that Gaddafi must go ; that relations must be established with the Transitional National Council in Benghazi , and that the Libyan authorities must be called on to allow humanitarian aid into the country .
Already at that time we decided that we must examine our relations with the southern neighbourhood .
A condition for this was the start of democratic changes .
Then we already agreed that financial support had to be increased by incorporating suitable conditions , that trade relations had to be deepened , and that we needed to facilitate social changes in the region .
The area where we need to progress is the three Ms , Market access , Mobility and Money .
Then , on 21 March , the Foreign Ministers , the trustees of the areas of the common foreign and security policy , and common security and defence policy , reiterated their commitment .
By then , UN Security Council Resolution 1973 was available .
We welcomed this and we could also welcome the decisions of the Paris Summit , the implementation of which must be started .
We were very quick to decide on sanctions and we emphasised our commitment to helping civilians .
The common foreign and security policy may not work perfectly but I believe that some very important decisions have been made , albeit at the last minute . Thank you very much , Madam President .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( NL ) This spring summit is of crucial importance to all Europeans .
Here , we will be laying the foundation for a stable euro and a thorough strengthening of economic cooperation in Europe .
The Pact for the euro which is now before us is , fortunately , much more balanced than the original options .
Respect for the social consultation model is central to this pact .
That is how it should be , because it is the basis of our European Rhineland model .
It is now time that we took the important next step , because the European project cannot be limited to a pure , bald financial-monetary project .
That would eventually be detrimental and lead to popular support for Europe melting away .
More than ever , therefore , Europe needs an appealing , new , future-oriented project which will inspire people with enthusiasm once again .
We need not look far , because the proposals are already on the table .
In particular , we need to focus on cross-border investment in renewable energy .
That will only be possible if we also open up the way for Eurobonds .
It will be a shot in the arm for our economy , for employment and the environment , of course , and entirely feasible , on the basis of the Commission 's Roadmap 2050 calculations .
Let us just get on with it .
in writing . - The upcoming Council meeting is indeed a very important one .
President Herman Van Rompuy , in his public invitation letter , notes that ' as an important step in the new framework of the European semester , we should give guidance for national economic policies with a view to implementing our Europe 2020 Strategy ' .
We should not bypass this point on the agenda as secondary behind the economic package .
Everybody knows that the key to European economic growth is employment .
The Europe 2020 Strategy aims at an employment rate of 75 % among men and women aged between 20-64 .
Everybody knows , in theory , that this 75 % threshold will not be attained without the massive participation and appearance of women on the labour market .
Therefore , I ask two things of the Council ahead of its upcoming meeting .
The first one is to be ambitious and explicit when it comes to employment guidelines , and especially when it comes to female employment .
Secondly , I ask you to reaffirm your commitment to European targets and guidelines that allow for the massive participation of women on the labour market , especially the Barcelona targets for daytime childcare , which we know , are far from being met in the EU .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that it is absolutely imperative for the investments in education , research and innovation to be made immediately with the support of all Member States so as to achieve the Europe 2020 strategy 's targets , thereby making the economic recovery a reality .
As a representative of Europe 's citizens , I declare my support for Mrs Balzani 's report .
I agree that the European Union needs to improve its financial resources so that it can compete on the global political and economic stage at a time when current challenges require greater competitiveness from global actors .
Last but not least , in order to have a strong economy , promoting employment should be set as a basic objective .
The European Union needs a skilled workforce in every area , people with the appropriate expertise and higher productivity in all its sectors .
Over the next few days , the Pact for the euro will be finalised by the European Council .
The basic objective of the pact is to promote competitiveness that will lead to an increase in employment in the countries in the euro area .
In the aim of achieving the above objectives at European level , I propose that the definition and control of the land and sea borders and the economic borders of the Member States of the European Union be integrated into the pact .
This will protect European manufacturing from counterfeit products imported from labour-intensive countries in the East .
Importing these cheaply-produced goods is not only illegal ; it also stops the market from functioning properly , thereby reducing the profits of European companies .
This is slowing down growth and reducing the competitiveness of European companies and of Europe as a whole .
In conclusion , we need new incentives for the Member States of the European Union to develop exclusive economic zones .
We need a European guarantee for the entire European exclusive economic zone which cannot be contested by third countries .
in writing . - ( DE ) There is no such thing as good or bad debt ; the continual rise in national debt must be stemmed .
Unfortunately , the Council has failed to implement the Stability and Growth Pact fully .
However , our citizens cannot be burdened with a further structural crisis .
The existing national debt problem can only be dealt with by demanding strict budgetary discipline .
The procedure adopted by the Member States of applying the ' fast-track procedure ' is to be rejected , but as Mr Gualtieri has already said , if we are to come up with a counter-proposal then we must concentrate on the substance .
I would welcome an initiative in which the 143 nuclear power plants in Europe were immediately taken out of the grid and sustainable energy sources were used instead .
To comment briefly on the imminent stress tests at the nuclear energy facilities : since - as is repeatedly emphasised - the detailed safety arrangements at nuclear power plants fall within the competence of the individual Member States , I cannot unreservedly support these stress tests at this early stage in the negotiations .
In view of the events triggered in 1986 by a crisis simulation at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor , I would view such tests with great concern unless they were performed by the EU or a comparable institution and only following detailed analysis of the condition and load capacity of the individual reactors .
The rapporteur sought to insert a paragraph concerning the European Union 's decentralised agencies into a chapter entitled ' Sustainability and responsibility at the heart of the 2012 EU budget ' .
I share the main idea raised , which is that agencies bring added value to EU policies in areas as varied as professional training , the environment , internal security and rail transport .
However , I also share the idea that , in terms of budgetary sustainability and responsibility , the agencies system could be improved .
Indeed , the agencies ' tasks and powers overlap at times , and some of them have high operating costs due to the constraints imposed by our financial and budgetary rules .
That is why the decentralised agencies ' expenditure could be rationalised through a system of shared services including , for example , assistance with the budgetary process , assistance with tender procedures and legal advice .
To conclude , during the last discharge procedure , Parliament also sought to draw attention to the Commission 's and Parliament 's control over the decentralised agencies ; this must be strengthened , as experience has shown .
Europe must learn from the nuclear incidents in Japan and undertake to guarantee nuclear safety across the continent .
The energy mix still comes under the remit of the Member States .
However , nuclear safety is defined by European legislation , which must be reviewed , taking into account the nuclear plant safety tests proposed recently by the Commission .
We must not forget that the EU is hugely dependent on energy imports and that Member States need to find solutions to make provision for their own energy sources .
The EU needs a common energy policy which must be based on striking the ideal balance between renewable energy , new technologies for conventional energy resources and the need to produce nuclear energy in safe conditions .
On the subject of Libya , the Council needs to come up with a new European partnership with the Southern Neighbourhood countries .
This partnership involves close political cooperation which will ensure the transition of these countries to democracy .
Furthermore , the European Commission must submit as soon as possible a plan for managing the migrant flows , which will take into account the solidarity between Member States and strengthen Frontex 's technical and operational capabilities .
However , this plan must not detract from the EU 's focus on the Eastern Partnership .
We have just endorsed amendments to the Treaty which will enable the introduction of a permanent stability mechanism for the euro area .
We have achieved great success in managing to give a clear expression of support for use of the community approach as the main form of cooperation within the mechanism .
The central role of the European Commission in the process of evaluating the financial situation of Member States augurs well for the future of cooperation , because this protects it from the instability which would threaten it if the intergovernmental approach were chosen .
Let us hope that after adoption of the amendment to the Treaty by the European Council , it will be successfully ratified in the Member States , enabling the permanent mechanism to be set up according to plan .
Incorporation of the stability mechanism into the Treaty is just one step which has been taken to improve the competitiveness of the euro area recently .
At tomorrow 's meeting , the Council is also going to accept the Pact for the euro , which was adopted at the meeting of euro area Member States on 17 March .
I am certain that the Heads of State or Government will manage to reach an agreement and this scheme will come into force , making it possible to step up economic cooperation in areas including employment and public finance .
It is to be welcomed that despite the initial fears of non-euro area Member States , the pact has been made open to all Member States wishing to join .
This guarantees , at least to a certain degree , that the mechanism will not give rise to a two-speed Europe .
This European Council is taking place in a specific context for Portugal .
The country 's economic and social crisis is plunging to unprecedented depths because of the path trodden by the European Union 's members , and of the national level application of measures dictated by them : intensifying regressive policies , increasing the exploitation of workers , new antisocial measures that worsen inequalities , increasing unemployment and job insecurity , and increasing poverty and social exclusion .
It is in this context that the government , with pressure and applause from the EU , is tabling another package of aforementioned austerity measures - the fourth .
The intention of the directorate of EU powers is clear : to force another neo-colonial noose around the necks of the more economically fragile countries , attacking their sovereignty , with the anticipated conditions for the application of a European Stability Mechanism .
All this , on the pretext of maintaining the privileges enjoyed by the great economic and financial interest groups - particularly those of the directorate countries - which a number of EU instruments contribute to , such as the Stability and Growth Pact , the Economic and Monetary Union , and the euro .
Faced with this , the struggling Portuguese workers gave the necessary response to this in Portugal on Saturday in a great national demonstration .
Situation in Japan , including the nuclear power plant alerts ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Japan , including the nuclear power plant alerts .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , on behalf of the Council I want to begin by conveying our condolences to the people of Japan , those who have lost loved ones and the many others who have been touched in one way or another by the tragic events over 10 days ago .
I also pay tribute to the courage and fortitude of those who are now struggling to tackle the consequences of the terrible earthquake and tsunami , as well as those endeavouring to deal with the consequences of the nuclear incident .
The European Union stands alongside the Japanese people at this extraordinarily difficult and challenging time .
We have already provided Japan with assistance in a very concrete way .
On the very day that the earthquake struck , the European Council asked the High Representative and the Commission to mobilise all appropriate assistance .
The European Civil Protection Mechanism was activated in order to help coordinate assistance offered by the Member States .
Within a very short time the European Union was responding to requests for assistance from the Japanese Government .
The European Union stands ready to continue to answer calls for humanitarian assistance , technical support of any kind or more specialised assistance that the Japanese authorities may consider appropriate .
On behalf of the Council , I would like in particular to thank Commissioner Georgieva and the High Representative for a swift , comprehensive and very coordinated response to the disaster .
The EU civil protection team deployed in Japan has our full support .
Individual Member States have also been prepared to make very generous offers of assistance .
It is also important to mention that the Council will need to follow up on the macroeconomic impact of the Japanese crisis .
Ministers already had a preliminary debate on the matter at the Ecofin breakfast on 15 March .
Obviously one of the main concerns for us all is the situation at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant .
I would like to stress the fact that the Hungarian Presidency acted without delay , taking into account the gravity of the events and the possible effects in Europe , especially regarding the nuclear risk .
We promptly convened the Working Party on Atomic Questions and an Extraordinary Energy Council in order to assess the situation in Japan , as well as its possible repercussions on the EU , and reflect on the EU response .
I would like to underline that the first message to come from the Council was one of solidarity , compassion and readiness to provide humanitarian as well as technical assistance .
This message is also one of respect for the tenacity and the resilience of the Japanese people , especially those who are still struggling to cope with the situation in Fukushima .
It is thanks to their tenacity in extremely difficult conditions that one can now see some hope regarding the situation of the nuclear plant , although it remains serious .
The major problem now is the high level of contamination that has been measured in the vicinity of the plant .
Our support to Japan needs to continue .
Several Member States are making a contribution , either bilaterally or through various coordination mechanisms operated by the Commission or the International Atomic Energy Agency .
As the Hungarian Minister for Rural Development , Sándor Fazekas , was told at the meeting of the Environment Ministers , for the moment the events at Fukushima nuclear plant have no consequences for the population in the EU .
Radiation levels in all Member States are normal and appropriate controls are in place regarding foodstuffs imported from Japan .
However , the accident at the Fukushima nuclear plant calls for an effective EU response .
There are certain lessons to be learned from this accident .
Implementing and continually improving the high standards for nuclear safety is a top priority for EU regulators and operators ; but the very concept of continuous improvement implies that we need to draw the lessons first , despite the fact that the accident was caused by external factors and not by malfunctions at the plant .
Several Member States and industry operators have already decided to review the safety of the nuclear plants , which should be welcomed .
Following the Extraordinary Council of Energy Ministers on 21 March , the Hungarian National Development Minister , Tamás Fellegi , has written to brief President Van Rompuy on the proposal for stress tests for nuclear power plants and for other countries , particularly our neighbours , to be associated with this exercise .
The scope and modalities for the test should be developed in light of recent events and making full use of the available expertise .
As to the scope , noting that each nuclear plant has its own specificities , the following core areas could possibly be addressed by the assessment : flood risk , seismic risk , backup systems and emergency procedures .
The European Nuclear Safety Regulatory Group , with the full involvement of the Member States , will define the modalities of this assessment in consultation with the relevant stakeholders .
Whilst it is difficult to set a firm date for this , it is clear that it needs to get under way as soon as possible .
The issue of the safety of nuclear plants obviously does not stop at the EU 's borders .
This is why it is important to involve neighbouring third countries .
An assessment needs to cover both existing and planned plants , and we must make full use of international organisations and bodies , like the International Atomic Energy Agency , and other international associations like the G20 to involve other countries .
It is obviously important that the message to the public regarding the situation in Japan is clear .
I have two comments on this .
First , the credibility of the exercise depends on our being transparent about the modalities and outcome of the assessment .
Second , however serious the situation in Japan is , we should not give the impression that the issue of nuclear safety is being addressed piecemeal and only now .
It is important to recall that there has been a legally binding framework in place in Europe for over 25 years .
As far as the specific nuclear issue is concerned the Council will obviously be following closely the developments and will in any case return to the matter in June .
The European Council later this week will take stock of the situation in Japan in the aftermath of this tragedy .
I have no doubt that our Heads of State and Government will want to express their continued solidarity with the people of Japan as I do now .
The European Union will continue to stand ready to provide whatever assistance we can to help them through this difficult time .
Once again , I salute their courage and determination .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , the Commission has expressed the solidarity of the European Union with the people and government of Japan .
We have expressed our deep sympathy .
We believe that the courage and the calm attitude of the Japanese people is worthy of our utmost respect and admiration .
We have coordinated aid efforts under the Monitoring and Information Centre so as to make a common offer of aid from the EU .
Blankets , mattresses , water containers , tents and hygiene equipment have been provided by 13 Member States as part of an initial joint EU aid package .
We are awaiting further offers and will be taking delivery of and distributing aid consignments in Japan in the coming days : on Thursday - in other words , tomorrow - and on Friday .
Commissioner Georgieva will be present in person .
We have also offered to assist at the nuclear power plant complex , but our assistance has not yet been requested .
Where nuclear energy is concerned , we are in close contact with the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna and are monitoring , assessing and analysing the safety situation in Japan closely .
Further information is required before we can estimate the impact of the incident at the nuclear power plant .
At the moment we are assuming that the Japanese engineers and technicians and the Japanese Government will regain control over this nuclear power plant complex and that further damage from the disaster can be avoided .
We are assessing what lessons we should learn from this for Europe .
To this end , on Tuesday last week we held a high level conference - with all the Member States , with all the energy enterprises that operate nuclear power plants , with all the enterprises that manufacture nuclear power plants and with the atomic energy authorities of the Member States .
On Monday an Extraordinary Energy Council was held , having been convened by Mr Fellegi .
It must be realised that there is great disparity between the situations and positions of the European Member States as regards nuclear power plants .
Fourteen countries operate nuclear power plants ; for 13 of these it is part of their long-term energy policy , while one - Germany - has a strategy to phase out nuclear power .
Thirteen countries have no nuclear power , of which two - Poland and Italy - are currently considering moving into or resuming nuclear energy production .
With the exception of renewable energy - with its 20 % target - the energy mix lies within the competence of national legislation and policy .
We respect that .
The situation in different parts of Europe varies greatly - overall , Europe generates 30 % of its power from nuclear energy , but in Austria the share is approaching 0 % and in France it is 80 % - but there are two common denominators .
The first , which we will come back to in the course of the year , is the infrastructure .
Whatever direction energy policy is to take , expansion of the infrastructure for electricity , gas and storage capacity - in terms of both quality and capacity - needs to be accelerated .
Secondly , safety .
The safety of industrial plants in general , of infrastructure in general and of nuclear power plants in particular is a common concern for the benefit of workers in the power plants , the citizens of Europe and European nature .
We are therefore proposing that we look at whether it is meaningful and appropriate , in view of the already recognisable causes and the emerging information on the causes of the incident in Japan , to carry out a safety check - a stress test ; in other words , an extraordinary test based on common standards and criteria with the aim of further reducing risk in the 143 nuclear power plants that are operated in the European Union , as well as for the building of any new plants in the European Union .
Safety benefits all citizens , regardless of whether the Member State in which they live has nuclear power , is planning nuclear power , is phasing out nuclear power or has no nuclear power .
This would look at particular criteria such as flooding and risks to operation and safety , earthquakes and knowledge gained in Japan , cooling systems and their functioning and the subject of power supply and backup power in a staggered configuration , so that more cooling can be maintained by means of power and backup power units even where there is a risk of earthquakes and flooding .
This would involve general criteria for all nuclear power plants as well as special criteria for each particular design , age , location , seismic risk , flood risk and other factors .
This special review should also include topics such as aircraft crashes , cyber attacks and terrorist attacks .
The Commission 's offer to the Member States is that it will prepare and coordinate this jointly with the atomic energy authorities .
This is only an offer ; acceptance is voluntary .
The Member States are themselves responsible for deciding whether they want to perform a general and special common stress test in Europe .
The previous speaker mentioned neighbouring states which are just as important for our safety ; a central one of these is Switzerland , along with Ukraine , Armenia , Turkey and the Russian Federation .
I have had a long telephone conversation with the Ukrainian Energy Minister .
He stated that he would be happy to participate if there were a general stress test for the European Union - in other words , an offer on his part .
It is clear that our authority in respect of a stress test outside of the European Union and its Member States will depend greatly on whether we can organise this jointly in Europe .
If some Member States do not want to participate then we will have less authority when making an offer to Turkey , Ukraine , Russia and Switzerland than if all the Member States take a common view that this is an important safety task .
We will therefore prepare these safety criteria in the coming weeks and we are happy to cooperate not just with Parliament , but also with all those involved in the European Union - with NGOs , energy enterprises , workers , technicians , engineers in the power stations - with the aim of achieving the greatest possible further reduction in risk and increase in safety .
We are grateful that President Sarkozy wishes to address this whole topic at the G20 and therefore lessons will be learnt not just for nuclear power plants in Europe , but also for those throughout the rest of the world .
This is the situation for our part .
We will be happy to provide Parliament with information on how to proceed further at any time via its specialist committees - as we have already done in recent days in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy - and we look forward to corresponding support from the European Council here in Brussels tomorrow and the day after .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have been reminded once again of the force of nature and we are seeing the limits of human capability and how we are at the mercy of these powerful forces of nature .
At such moments we can only show solidarity with the Japanese - a solidarity that is expressed in our thoughts and prayers , but also in practical assistance .
When the Commissioner mentions that we are providing aid , trying to provide relief and support people , that is an important measure that not only provides direct assistance , but also provides some comfort .
I also know that it is not just the state organisations that are doing this , but that many of the citizens of Europe are prepared to donate , to give their own private money .
In my home town alone - where I am a patron - EUR 50 000 was collected within three days , and the money is still coming in .
This is happening all over Europe .
It shows that there is a high level of support .
At the same time , we should pause for thought and not immediately start pressing our buttons for internal political purposes .
Undoubtedly , however , we will look at the experience that has been had and the lessons to be learned from the nuclear incident and will have to carry out the stress test , and I hope , Commissioner , we will do this at European level - because borders are meaningless when such incidents occur .
We must ensure that we create the necessary infrastructures for alternatives and that research is carried out into possible new energy projects , which should equally address issues such as climate change , jobs and competitiveness .
We also need to realise that the words ' ancillary risk ' will play a different role .
People no longer have faith that companies will observe all the regulations and that there is nothing that cannot be calculated .
Japan will change our thinking on these issues and consequently we need to rethink the issue of ancillary risk ; new conclusions will be drawn and must give rise to new considerations and new policies .
We should discuss this with the calmness that it demands .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , one of the world 's most developed countries from an economic and technical perspective has been thrown into a state of humanitarian crisis .
It is , first and foremost , a tragedy for all those people who have been affected .
The images from Japan are heart-rending .
We need to give them all the support and every possible form of assistance we can .
However , the disaster also demonstrates the vulnerability of all modern societies .
What has happened in Japan could happen in other parts of the world - even here .
Even in countries with extremely high safety requirements , this safety may prove deceptive .
Now , of course , we cannot simply imagine nuclear power away .
There are certainly some countries in Europe that do not have nuclear power , but the majority are extremely , or completely , dependent on it .
Some are building new nuclear power plants and some are decommissioning them .
That is the situation we find ourselves in - in other words , the situation is different in different Member States as regards vulnerability , but we are nevertheless in this together and we need to take a long term- approach to our energy supply .
We quite simply have to switch our energy systems so that we reduce the risks and the one-sided nature of these systems .
We must make a serious effort to prioritise research and development and investments in , and the expansion of , long-term sustainable and renewable energy sources .
Europe has huge untapped potential here that should be set against the fact that the construction of new nuclear power plants will make us dependent on them for many more decades to come - in other words new investments in nuclear energy are a means of postponing and preventing the expansion of renewable energy , a way of mortgaging the future .
Instead , what we should be doing now is having a serious debate with regard to raising the EU 's renewable energy targets and ambitions and as soon as possible deciding on binding energy efficiency targets and a long-term plan for our energy supply - a switch to renewable energy .
The collective stress test for nuclear power plants in all countries is therefore necessary , but then what is needed is a long-term approach .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the images of the massive earthquake and tsunami in north-eastern Japan are terrifying ; our thoughts and heartfelt sympathies go to those who have lost homes and loved ones .
Of course we welcome the EU help package .
In Fukushima , personnel are still working at the site of the nuclear power plant to prevent further radiation contamination , and this of course has to be assessed thoroughly all over the European Union - including in Brussels .
I welcome the stress test proposed by the Commission , but I think it has to be added that we cannot just have a stress test based on technology and geography .
We need two other steps .
One is on the security culture , where it obviously has been impossible to envisage multiple risks .
The second is on the institutional framework , including an oversight of the relationships between the national regulatory bodies and the nuclear companies .
Furthermore , authorities should not be allowed to audit themselves .
Finally , as we evaluate the consequences of the disaster , we should base our discussion on information and knowledge .
Radical measures might be necessary - I would think are necessary .
But one thing should be obvious : we have to reform our energy production and to rely instead on renewable energy and we have to do it now .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , let me express my admiration for the stoic Japanese resilience in the face of these mighty forces of nature .
We must remember the extraordinary strength of the earthquake and of the tsunami .
I welcome the precautionary stress tests on European nuclear power plants , while remembering that the nuclear industry is already the most regulated and safety conscious in the world , and I note the statement earlier this year from WENRA , the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association , about making new reactors even safer than our existing ones .
It is salutary to compare the safety records of the coal , oil and hydroelectric industries with that of the nuclear industry , in terms of accidents involving loss of life .
Madam President , I see a silver lining in this awful cloud for Japan - namely that the rebuilding and restoration work in that country , courtesy of the deep pockets of the insurance industry , should give a huge boost to their economy and that will be good for the rest of the world .
I thank the Minister and the Commissioner for their thoughtful remarks and I would say to Member States , and everyone else : do not go wobbly on nuclear power now , we need it too much .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , of course this situation requires that we should assist Japan as best we can and with all the resources at our disposal .
A country hit by the kind of disaster that has hit Japan needs all the help it can get .
However , I find remarkable the levity with which we heap praise on Japan 's heroes .
I believe that we are failing to recognise that the people referred to as ' heroes ' know better than anyone else that they are risking life and limb and that many of those who are fighting the nuclear meltdown in Fukushima are already dead men walking .
The Japanese know better than any other nation in the world what devastation a nuclear disaster can unleash .
Their history is dominated by Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
Every child in Japan is aware of the consequences of nuclear meltdown .
We should be aware of this when we come to discuss Japan .
The Japanese know better than anyone else all the horror entailed not just in this situation , but also in what is yet to come .
Perhaps the Ukrainians , who have witnessed the devastation of part of their country for the last 25 years , are the only others qualified to speak about this .
For me , current European discussions , unlike those of 25 years ago , should consider the political implications when we discover that in our own countries we have a technology that can get out of control , not just annihilating the past in certain regions or destroying the present , but also reaching insidiously into the future of all those living in the vicinity of these plants , as well as in the wider environs .
I do not believe that we are doing this when we talk about stress tests , Mr Oettinger .
We must be much more honest and should admit that we in the European Union have frequently been confronted with situations verging on nuclear meltdown in the plants that we operate .
Let me give you a short list : Tihange in Belgium , Civaux in France , Philippsburg in Germany , Kozloduy in Bulgaria , Paks in Hungary , Brunsbüttel in Germany , where there was a hydrogen explosion , Forsmark in Sweden , Barsebäck in Sweden , Blayais in France , Krümmel in Germany - this is a list of the most striking incidents that have occurred , with a range of different causes , since Chernobyl , where we have found ourselves on the threshold of nuclear meltdown .
How are we to deal with the fact that a nuclear meltdown could occur in any of the plants that we operate ?
Are we to do this through stress tests ?
In my opinion , these tests are only relevant if they lead us to produce a plan indicating which plants and which defined risks are to be the first to go as we turn our backs on this high-risk technology .
If these stress tests are intended to reassure the public and once again to suggest that we in Europe could never be faced with situations like those currently experienced in Japan , then I believe that these tests are wrong .
By the way , we would very much welcome the opportunity to have a say in deciding who defines the stress tests - this matter cannot be left to the nuclear power plant operators themselves - as well as who implements the tests and evaluates them .
The hitherto responsible authorities have turned a blind eye far too often to the difficulties encountered in European plants and have approved plants that never should have passed the conformity assessment procedure , as Euratom did in the cases of Belene and Mochovce , for example .
Madam President , like other speakers I would like to express my condolences to the people affected by the tragedy in Japan , a tragedy that is still ongoing .
We need to do everything we can to help the Japanese people .
Regarding the lessons we need to learn in Europe , the question of nuclear safety is clearly at the top of the agenda now .
Especially in relation to the ' stress tests ' to be performed on nuclear plants in Europe .
What happened in Japan has serious implications for EU energy policy in the future .
The humanitarian disaster shows the importance of moving towards a non-nuclear Europe .
We need a moratorium on nuclear energy , and what is needed is massive investment in sustainable and renewable energy .
There must be a review of the nuclear safety regulatory system as well .
on behalf of the EFD Group , - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to express my sympathy and admiration for the dignity , fortitude and cohesion demonstrated by the Japanese people in the face of the sort of catastrophe that the world has rarely seen in terms of size and severity .
The behaviour of the Japanese people is truly an inspiration to all and they deserve our help .
The lesson to be learned from this experience is the need to strengthen the European civil protection system through more closely coordinated action and the wider availability of people and resources so that we can act quickly in the event of disaster .
With regard to the nuclear option , it would be a mistake to discuss this topic on the emotional tide of current events : the subject is too important and must be addressed with a scientific approach .
It is absolutely right to strengthen security measures for present and next-generation power stations and to dismantle those that are older and more unsafe , but we must avoid political exploitation and be cautious and pragmatic , as Mr Brok said .
We should remember that in the same Fukushima area , a dam collapsed during the earthquake with many casualties , but this does not lead us to think of dismantling dams or building new ones , hence I call for caution , attention and openness to the future .
( FR ) Madam President , the terrible disaster which struck the Tōhoku region in the north-east of Japan has naturally aroused compassion and sympathy on the part of all Europeans .
Beyond that feeling , we must of course participate in the rescue effort because the situation is , I believe , far from being stabilised in Japan .
Japan is a remarkable country , an extremely dignified , strong and brave country , which is aware of its duties , but where bureaucracy has , as elsewhere , effects that can paralyse initiatives .
One of the lessons to be learned from this disaster is that the most effective emergency relief is , in the end , the one that arrives by sea .
Of course , this requires there to be sufficient facilities nearby .
The situation is not stabilised and many homeless people are still suffering from the cold and from hunger .
We believe that the lessons from this tragedy are the following : the first is that the worst always happens , the worst always ends up happening .
The Titanic was built to be an unsinkable ship .
' Even God could not sink it ' was what was said about it .
Yet it sank on its maiden voyage , despite the watertight caissons , because the engineers did not think there could be a leak on that scale .
Well , the worst always happens , the earthquake plus the tsunami , this was , of course , the worst scenario .
However , there will be other earthquakes , there will be the big Kanto earthquake that we are expecting at any moment .
There might be one in California , in Italy or in the Caribbean .
Therefore , as has been said , we need to be prepared for this by enhancing civil protection .
The second and final lesson is that we must nevertheless not give in to panic .
We cannot , at the same time , be told that we must forsake nuclear energy on the grounds that radioactive fallout is dangerous , while also being told that we should stop using fossil fuels because CO2 is being discharged into the atmosphere .
A choice will have to be made .
( LV ) Madam President , the misfortune that the Japanese people have experienced is immense .
I should like to put on record my deepest sympathy for the families of those who have suffered and those who have died , and their near ones .
The nobility and composure exhibited by the Japanese people in this time of trial is worthy of the greatest respect and is an example for the whole world .
Japan is faced with an intensive task of restoring its devastated territories , which will require significant resources , including inward investment .
That is why I call for the European Union-Japan summit scheduled for 25 May to take the decision to begin negotiations on a free trade agreement between the European Union and Japan .
This agreement would have to be of benefit to both parties ; it would have to guarantee equal market access conditions to both partners , both in the flow of goods and services and in relation to agricultural products .
A free trade agreement could become one of the instruments for the third opening of Japan , as Japan 's Prime Minister , Mr Kan , has picturesquely termed it .
The accident caused by the tsunami at the Fukushima nuclear power station is a cause of serious alarm throughout the world .
We must bow our heads in respect and gratitude to those heroes who are working , at the risk of their own lives , to stabilise the situation in the nuclear reactor .
The experience currently being gained by the Japanese engineers and nuclear power experts in accident prevention is unique .
It is important for the world to learn from this experience .
The experience of Fukushima must be of service to humanity , by becoming the basis for testing nuclear power stations and the development of improved safety criteria .
In conclusion , I should again wish to confirm that the European Union must do everything possible to help Japan , one of our closest partners . Thank you .
Madam President , two themes have emerged in the aftermath of the tragic events which struck Japan 12 days ago .
The first has been the Japanese response which , in terms of structural preparation in the cities , the rapid response of the emergency units and the inspirational resilience shown by the Japanese people , has been exemplary and should serve as a template for other earthquake-prone countries .
However , the second theme , that of the nuclear fallout in Fukushima , is more difficult .
While Japan will undoubtedly learn swiftly from these events , Europe too must take these lessons on board and our reaction might be broken up into two areas .
The first is to secure beyond doubt the safety of nuclear power plants operating in the EU .
I welcome plans for tests and would like to stress that they must conclude with common rules between Member States on the security of nuclear power plants and on the storing of highly toxic nuclear waste .
This is particularly pertinent in my Ireland East constituency .
The largest collection of such material is housed at Sellafield nuclear plant in England just 280 kilometres from County Louth .
Our second response should concern the future of nuclear power as a whole .
In this regard , a complete halt to the construction of new nuclear power plants must be agreed .
In order to ensure the continued provision of sufficient energy for the EU , investments in renewable energy production and increased energy efficiency must also be approved .

Madam President , I endorse the words of my colleagues in the Delegation for relations with Japan - Mr Gollnisch and Ms Kalniete - words of respect and of sympathy to the Japanese .
We must , however , also learn , and that means that this potential nuclear disaster should have an international dimension .
There must be absolute transparency .
We must find out why the International Atomic Energy Agency 's warning was not followed up ; there was no discussion about this warning .
We should find out what happened .
I agree with all the others who say that we should combine our efforts in rebuilding .
Therefore a free trade agreement is of special value and we should conclude this agreement as soon as possible .
( PL ) Madam President , as a member of the European Parliament Delegation for relations with Japan , I would like firstly to convey expressions of sympathy and solidarity with the Japanese nation in the face of this enormous catastrophe .
It has claimed almost 10 000 human lives , over 16 000 people are considered missing , and these numbers are constantly changing .
The earthquake and the tsunami have caused unimaginable destruction .
Losses are already estimated at USD 300 billion .
Although Japan has not asked the European Union for any help , we cannot remain passive in the face of the magnitude of this tragedy .
The greatest anxiety is being aroused by the damage to the Fukushima nuclear power station .
In the opinion of some experts , the situation is serious and may result in a repeat of what happened after Chernobyl .
The declaration of the Hungarian Presidency and Mrs Ashton concerning humanitarian and expert aid should be given substance as quickly as possible in close cooperation with the Japanese Government .
( DE ) Madam President , just 14 days ago , the Japanese company Toshiba and others that built nuclear power stations wrote in their promotional brochures that they had the safest nuclear power stations in the world - so much for the claim that we in Europe definitely have the safest atomic energy plants .
I believe that this extremely serious and tragic accident in Japan should make it clear how absurd it is to equate nuclear power stations with wind farms , energy efficiency or solar power plants when discussing the fight against climate change .
What is more , this idea of low carbon technology is simply wrong .
One needs to look at the overall risk from all technologies .
My first specific question to you , Mr Oettinger , is as follows : is it not high time for you to include at least one scenario in the Energy Roadmap 2050 that simply shows what we can achieve by combining 100 % renewable energy and energy efficiency ?
That is the very least that the citizens of Europe can expect .
Let me state , with regard to the stress tests , that we are in favour of such tests , but they must be mandatory and they must be European .
The first bank stress test was manipulated excessively by the national authorities so that a couple of banks would be excluded .
We needed a second round of stress tests to get things right .
The second key element is ' independent expertise ' .
Mrs Lauvergeon from Areva and Mr Teyssen from E.ON , the Euratom officials from the Commission , the nuclear experts in Vienna , and indeed the national nuclear watchdogs are all biased .
Even the national authorities will not admit that the safety tests outlined six months ago are no longer correct .
In other words , we need independent experts .
Otherwise you run the risk of hearing only biased opinions .
I have one final word to add .
I would recommend caution , Mr Oettinger , when you point to Mr Sarkozy as the great champion in the struggle for worldwide nuclear safety .
I would be a little more circumspect if I were you .
( DE ) Madam President , Japan is still under threat of nuclear meltdown .
Radiation from the nuclear power plant in Fukushima is rising dramatically .
This is yet another horrific demonstration of how impossible it is to control nuclear power .
That is why we are calling for an immediate abandonment of nuclear energy .
Nuclear energy lines the pockets of the power companies , but when an accident occurs it is the people who pay the price .
For this reason , the EU must immediately lay down a requirement for the operators of nuclear power plants to hold mandatory public liability insurance .
Sufficient cover must be provided for all damage to health , property and other assets in all Member States .
The European Union should finally halt the promotion of nuclear energy and terminate the Euratom Treaty .
Billions in taxpayers ' money is still being poured into a dangerous , high-risk technology , while safe alternatives like renewable energies remain under-funded .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it would be a serious mistake to turn this debate into a kind of trial against the risks of modernity .
We must acknowledge that science and technology allow us to live longer , to live under better conditions , to live with a more confident outlook and taking into account that food security conditions have improved , that the conditions of our welfare systems have improved , that conditions in our forward-looking world have improved , precisely because it has been able to use and exploit science and technology .
Of course this viewpoint is not without risks , but these risks can be overcome if we are able to join forces to deal with the problems faced by the international community day by day .
Mr Brock , in particular , got it right when he said that there is a mystery in our relationship with things that makes us realise that we have not mastered everything , that however advanced we may be , we have not got the answer to all problems that nature poses to humans and the magnitude of this earthquake reminds us of exactly that .
It is very likely that inferior technology and science led not long ago or a hundred years ago , for example in Messina , to an event that caused more than 100 000 deaths , despite a much lower intensity earthquake .
This should give us a clear guideline for the future : science and technology are tools and it takes good policy to put them to the fullest use .
It will therefore take good politics , what we make together as institutions , to determine whether we currently have solutions to go beyond today 's atomic age into the future or whether we must carry on taking these tools into account in the long term to enable the further development we all need .
Today , however , we are called on to do something quite different , essentially to take action to help with the pain and the need of a people .
I do not hear much about this in this House , because we are all concerned about a political discussion that is attempting to drag in future concerns that do not really have anything to do with what is on the agenda .
( RO ) Madam President , the crisis which is unfolding at the moment in Japan raises concerns about the safety of nuclear power plants worldwide .
It is our duty to ask ourselves how resilient and safe the nuclear power plants built on our territory are .
I come from Romania and the citizens of my country are quite rightly concerned about the safety of the Cernavodă nuclear power plant , especially as many question marks have been raised about it recently in the press .
I firmly believe that not only in Romania , but also in a number of Member States , the general public is wondering whether they would be adequately protected in the event of natural disasters which could affect the nuclear power plants .
Last week Germany decided to carry out a detailed inspection of its systems for producing nuclear energy .
In light of the events in Japan , it is absolutely imperative to carry out an urgent review of the nuclear safety situation across the entire European Union .
All Member States should exercise strict and total control over these power plants .
The European Commission must not only ensure that the Nuclear Safety Directive will be implemented properly , but also monitor closely , along with the competent authorities in the Member States , the state of these power plants .
The tragic situation in Japan highlights to us once again that we need to do our utmost to create rapid response mechanisms for tackling disasters .
( FR ) Madam President , a few words on Japan .
Firstly , everything must be done to relieve the suffering of the Japanese people , who deserve all our compassion and solidarity .
Secondly , on top of the two natural disasters - earthquake and tsunami - there is a third disaster , this one being nuclear and therefore man-made .
Everything that has been said on this matter can be summarised in one word : hiatus .
Yes , we are faced with a paradigm shift which boils down to two questions : what should be changed , and , secondly , what can we start by changing in regard to energy production ?
We can be sure that if we had run out of fossil fuels and nuclear energy , as it were , we would very quickly be able to get a more accurate picture regarding the potential for developing renewable energy sources .
We are expecting the European Union to redefine its strategy on this issue .
For this to happen , it needs a vision , strength of will and a detailed roadmap .
( NL ) Madam President , I would , first of all , like to congratulate Mr Oettinger on getting off to a good start .
You did , indeed , get off to a flying start last week , but since then you seem to have gone downhill .
However , you really need to tackle this now and clarify your position , because what you said last week was that we should have a debate on Europe and on a future for Europe without nuclear energy .
You have not repeated that since then , although that should be the subject of our debate now .
Time and again , many studies , scientific studies , have shown that you can achieve your environmental targets without using nuclear energy .
It is possible to run Europe entirely on sustainable power .
That should be the subject of our debate today .
Being for or against nuclear energy is a matter of political choice .
We should not have to justify why we are against nuclear energy .
Those who are in favour of nuclear energy are the ones who should come up with a justification .
Hence , the importance of the stress test .
I have two questions for you , Mr Oettinger , two important questions .
First of all : how are we going to establish the criteria ?
How are we going to ensure they are independent ?
Secondly , what will happen if a nuclear power fails to pass the stress test ?
What will be the consequences then ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the events in Japan have affected all of us very profoundly .
We pay tribute to the people who - at the risk of their lives - are dealing with the effects of three events which occurred together - the earthquake , the tsunami and the incident at the nuclear power plant .
This tragedy has evoked great sympathy , and in so doing has also started the discussion we are currently witnessing in Europe on the future of nuclear energy and Europe 's energy strategy .
We recently adopted an energy strategy for Europe up to 2020 .
At the moment it is , in a way , being undermined , although in the strategy we do accept nuclear energy .
We say there that it should simply be accompanied by stringent safety conditions .
However , it is an acceptable part of the energy mix of a number of countries .
It seems to me that this discussion should also enhance European cooperation on energy - and this is something we have asked for in our report .
Today we not only have to improve safety conditions , we also have to strengthen the European Atomic Energy Community and move towards a European Energy Community .
The European Commission must press for better cooperation between Member States and for Europeanisation of nuclear policy .
Stress tests should not be voluntary - some countries will use them if they want to , while others will not .
This must be part of building what is , after all , to be a common policy on nuclear energy .
We should also support new technologies .
Europe 's entire energy strategy is based on decentralisation and diversification .
Since this is the case , we should think about promoting small and medium-sized nuclear reactors .
They cost less , are built as modules and as a result can be tested more easily in terms of safety .
Perhaps this form will be more acceptable to public opinion , because we will not be able to eliminate this type of energy completely .
( LT ) Mr President , Japan has experienced the unimaginable impact of a natural disaster and a nuclear accident .
The people of Lithuania are actively raising funds and trying in every way possible to contribute to aid for the country 's victims .
We remember and will always remember the painful consequences of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster , which the people of this region continue to feel , even after three decades .
The disaster in Japan is forcing us to fundamentally reconsider the issue of nuclear safety .
We cannot control natural cataclysms , so we should at least ensure that natural disasters do not cause additional and particularly painful nuclear disasters .
I agree with the review of existing infrastructure and the creation of new capabilities , but we must thoroughly analyse events at the Japanese nuclear power plant , particularly in light of the Chernobyl precedent .
We must reach conclusions and adopt measures that would allow us to significantly strengthen nuclear safety throughout Europe .
Mr President , my concern about the nuclear industry has been overshadowed by my concern about climate change and I now believe that nuclear has a role to play in helping us fight global warming .
That was true before the incidents in Japan and it remains true now .
There are obviously lessons to be learned .
There are the problems of design , inadequate regulation , not enough independence and obviously : do not build nuclear reactors in earthquake zones .
But we live in a world of hazards ; our cities have chemical factories across the board , all of them present huge potential risks , but we manage those risks , we live with them .
Over the decades we have had horrific train accidents ; we do not close the railways as a result .
We learn lessons ; we apply them , and we improve safety .
That is what we must do with the nuclear industry .
( SL ) Mr President , if we are serious about our climate targets , then nuclear energy will remain part of our energy mix .
That is why our discussions must not be ideological .
What we need , first of all , are answers to numerous questions , such as what was the main reason for the accident and how could it have been prevented ?
Did the responsibility , implementation and supervision systems collapse ?
Was the safety culture in one of the nuclear plants weak ?
What are the options for storing spent nuclear fuel more safely ?
Was the regulatory authority too weak to take timely action ? , and so forth .
We need answers to these questions , and then we will be able to take responsible political action .
What does taking responsible political action actually mean ?
We need to reach a social agreement on acceptable technologies , in particular on the role of nuclear power plants .
We need to ensure the ' safety first ' principle is implemented .
We need to formulate a legislative framework , which would provide adequate financial and human resources for the safe operation of complex technologies .
We need to facilitate the development of an excellent and independent nuclear profession , its continued training and the transfer of knowledge from older to younger generations .
We need to assess the competence and independence of regulatory bodies which play a key role in ensuring the culture of safety , and we need to ensure safe disposal of highly radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel .
Finally , I would like to mention the common safety criteria .
Today , we all agree that we really need them , but remember 2009 , when we discussed the nuclear safety directive .
Even back then the European Parliament affirmed the common European criteria which the Council unfortunately did not affirm .
At the time , the European Parliament proved it was taking the right action .
Therefore , I think that it is high time that the European Parliament was given more powers in the field of nuclear energy and we ought to reach an inter-institutional agreement so that we can have codecision powers .
( HU ) Mr President , first , I would like to express my deep sympathy , second , my respect for the Japanese people and the Japanese nation , and third , my greatest admiration for and appreciation of the Japanese heroes who are working at this moment in the power station .
A tragedy has happened which will be remembered forever in the history of Japan and the world .
The disaster-stricken country has asked for the European Union 's help in the preliminary coordination of the aid offered by Member States .
The Commission 's swift reaction was gratifying , as was the fact that it was confirmed by the Commissioner that every assistance would be given to Japan and the almost half a million people staying in temporary shelters following the devastating earthquake and tsunami .
I firmly believe that everything must be done on top of this to avert the consequences of the disaster and rebuild living conditions .
At the same time , however , I would like to voice the opinion that it is not fortunate to contrast this type of tragedy and similar tragedies with the use of nuclear power .
Nevertheless , naturally , nuclear power plants must be equipped with the largest safety system , and must then be inspected continuously in accordance with the strictest regulations .
The Commission 's proposal to organise broad European consultation is to be welcomed .
I also support , as I believe it is necessary , the Commission drawing up guidelines which lay the foundations for a well-functioning safety system coordinated at a European level and guarantee the continued safe production of nuclear energy in the future .
The Japanese people 's behaviour is exemplary and sets a precedent for us .
I strongly believe that they deserve every support . Thank you , Mr President .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are all a little Japanese .
Even in the midst of the natural disaster we must admit that nuclear safety has a human face .
Planning , construction , operation , dismantling and , like now in the Fukushima power plant , handling accidents are a trial of strength of human knowledge and dedication .
The European stress test is an important step for us to plan what has been unimaginable until now for the future .
Commissioner , we can best pay tribute to the Fukushima workers if European experts are involved in making European professional and policy decisions .
Those nuclear workers should be involved whose dedication and knowledge are indispensable .
It is very important that nuclear knowledge be maintained and extended in the medium term because this is the real guarantee of safety .
Moreover , I would like to draw attention again to what Mrs Ulvskog said .
Nuclear research and development must provide answers , better than at present , as to how we can handle nuclear waste and its ever-present 60-year history . Thank you for listening .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Oettinger for taking such a serious-minded and responsible approach to this issue .
We should consider whether the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association ( WENRA ) should be upgraded to the position of European regulator for the 27 Member States .
We should think about whether the standards of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) should be made legally binding and whether this new regulator should be given the power to order an immediate shutdown if standards are not met .
We should also consider reforming the Euratom Treaties , focusing on the safety and security regulations , as well as the issue of the coverage of the costs for decommissioning and final storage , which needs to be sorted out now .
I believe this to be a sensitive subject .
We must take this opportunity here in Europe to implement a peer review and to institute the latest standards so that the health of the population is not put at further risk .
Mr President , of course I welcome the speedy assistance that we have given to the Japanese in their time of need , and I welcome and share the sympathy expressed with the Japanese .
However , I cannot help but think that the sincerity of our comments on solidarity will be a little bit tempered by the action of some of our Member States .
Reading our newspapers , I see that the Spanish Government has urged that goods from Japan be checked carefully for radiation ; that the Netherlands Government has cautioned dock workers to handle all containers from Japan with care ; that the French Government has called for the checking of all imports ; and that the German authorities are demanding random checks on all goods imported from Japan including cars .
These are goods which left Japan two or three weeks - and in some cases two or three months - before the earthquake .
There is little expression of solidarity and sympathy in such action , and I would ask the Council and the Commission to try and speak to the Member States to say that , if they really want to express solidarity , they should not put out such scaremongering stories .

Mr President , I am surprised that the Commissioner seems so optimistic about getting the situation in Fukushima under control in a few days when nuclear experts have talked about weeks and months ; meanwhile the plant is still emitting radiation which is continuing to seep into the food supply and into the water supply .
I welcome the call for stress tests but they do not answer the bigger questions .
The question is : do we want to accept the rising risks of nuclear power in a world where complex natural disasters and extreme weather events are very much on the increase ?
The safety of nuclear reactors simply cannot be fully guaranteed in the event of a large-scale disaster of any description where there are multiple levels of disruption , where you get cuts to electricity , to water supply , to communications and to physical access .
That is the question : do we actually want to take this risk when we have other alternatives ?
( PT ) Mr President , we should like to express here our complete solidarity with the Japanese people , and we too offer our condolences to the victims of the disaster that has struck the country .
We know that this disaster has triggered serious accidents in the Fukushima nuclear plant , the consequences of which still cannot be fully assessed .
The accidents in this plant 's reactors resulted from the combination of highly improbable factors , it is true ; however , they did combine and potentially it could happen again in other nuclear plants .
We must therefore learn important lessons from what is happening in Fukushima .
There is an immediate need to review and , if necessary , adapt the redundancies in terms of the plants ' safety systems , particularly with regard to the cooling systems .
It is necessary to reassess the locations of existing nuclear plants , particularly according to the risk of earthquakes and the risk that a tsunami will occur .
However , there is also a need to undertake a broad discussion as a society about the energy issue , our present and future needs , and how these can be met , tackling in a lucid and informed way the risks , impacts , potential and limitations of the various sources of energy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to express my solidarity with the Japanese people who have been so hard hit by the catastrophe .
It was a surprise to find that Japanese technology had not kept pace with events that constantly recur in those areas .
Having kept a technologically obsolete nuclear power plant in operation is certainly not a matter of minor importance and these things should make us reflect on the European nuclear energy programme .
We cannot allow ourselves to fall prey to fear and make hasty choices today : we need a general agreement on making existing nuclear plants safe and screening those that are under construction .
Europe can not refrain from helping the Japanese people , not only due to the emergency , but also due to the probable financial crisis linked to the terrible catastrophic event .
In the short run , steps must be taken to deal with an economic slowdown in Tokyo and with the likely consequences for the countries most closely linked to Japan .
We should not forget that the government was already weak before the disaster and without a majority in the Upper House , meaning a crisis of the executive could be in the offing .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my sympathies to all those affected by this devastating situation .
The tragic accident in Japan has led to a nuclear disaster that is now familiar to us all .
Europe has reacted in a relatively swift and united manner , although there is an awareness , which is hopefully shared by all those who support nuclear technology , that radioactivity knows no national borders and that nature does not recognise safety standards , however high they may be set .
We have witnessed Chernobyl - a failed so-called stress test - and now we have Fukushima .
The time has come for those who favour nuclear power to place the wellbeing and health of human beings and the natural environment above all financial interests .
We should consider a Europe-wide phase-out and promote renewable energies .
( HU ) Mr President , the tsunami after the earthquake in Japan was the direct cause of the accident at the nuclear power plant , which became above all a question of safety for both the profession and the public .
This is why the correct decision was made to subject our functioning nuclear power plants to rigorous testing .
It has become clear that we need a comprehensive , thorough debate in order to reach a rational decision concerning the future of nuclear energy .
We must also be aware that , after a terrible tragedy of this nature , people will become more afraid , and this is precisely why we must make sure that objective and genuine information is given and safety measures are tightened .
However , I would like to emphasise that nuclear power plants in Europe are subject to entirely different environmental factors than those in Japan .
Europe is not threatened by the danger of either tsunamis or such a powerful earthquake , hence direct conclusions should not be drawn from this unfortunate tragedy .
Our facilities are prepared for the potential impacts on them , and nuclear energy can remain an integral part of our energy resources in the future as well .
Finally , I would like to express my sympathy and esteem for our Japanese friends . Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I have listened attentively to your contributions and would like to thank you for the objectivity you have displayed , both in relation to the disaster and its consequences .
We have heard expressions of solidarity and sympathy , as well as offers of help .
There is nothing further to add to that .
This encourages us in the work to be done by the Council Presidency and the Commission .
The general issue at stake here is disaster response .
If we consider Haiti and Pakistan and the host of other recent natural disasters , then I believe that the Commission 's communication on an improved European disaster response , which was approved by the Council in December of last year , points the way ahead .
We need to improve cooperation within the framework of disaster response procedures at a European level and must dedicate appropriate financial and human resources to this , as well as coordinating efforts at European level .
I have no doubt that Mrs Georgieva will bring some concrete proposals to Parliament and the Council during the course of the year .
When it comes to energy policy in Europe and the lessons to be drawn from the new information arriving from Japan , I believe that we need to start by taking an honest look at the facts and realities .
Let me take the example of the German Government and its coalition parties , reminding you that I am a member of one of these parties .
Our government has announced a significant change of direction .
Seven nuclear power stations have currently been taken offline in Germany .
This action has been criticised for ' not showing much credibility ' or for being a ' typical display of German angst ' .
I believe we need to remember that respect for different positions should be the starting point for deliberations .
I wish to express my respect for Parliament , which a few years ago gave its clear backing to the permanent use of nuclear power in the European energy mix , but which has doubtless begun to reconsider this position .
Secondly , I wish to express my respect for the EU 's regulatory powers .
I have re-read the Euratom Treaty very carefully and have also looked closely at the Nuclear Safety Directive adopted by the Council and Parliament in June two years ago .
The second document makes many formal recommendations about the authorities to be established , information and reporting obligations and other points , but offers hardly any specific , material recommendations for construction or operating techniques , or even the most general specifications .
If Parliament proposes extending European legislation today , I am quite prepared not to wait for the reports from the Member States in 2014 before submitting a report to the Commission , but to insist that this Directive should become national law by July of this year at the latest - this would be incumbent upon the Member States - so that it will be possible , as further information is gathered from Japan and from the comprehensive stress tests , to discuss a proposal from the Commission for further specific , material requirements for nuclear safety here in Brussels over the next year rather than later .
It has been said that I need to ' act decisively ' .
I would disagree , however .
I will take a consistent approach to this issue in asking what competences European legislators have and have not given me .
When , even in the current climate , I hear criticism from some national governments for an over-dramatic assessment of the situation and the lessons to be learned from it , while others say it is high time I took decisive action , then I prefer to take a middle course .
I have always felt comfortable on the middle ground .
When you are criticised by both sides , then perhaps you are actually getting things right .
Many of Europe 's 143 nuclear power stations will still be online in ten years ' time and , unless present governments have a change of heart , many , though not all , will still be operating in the following decade too .
Consequently , it is in all our interests to insist on the highest safety levels , new standards and a further reduction of risks for those nuclear power stations remaining in operation in the medium to long term .
Secondly , I assume that new nuclear power plants will be built in Europe under the aegis of the Member States , their national parliaments and governments .
If we consider the referendum to be held in Italy in June , then we can see what is coming down the line and I note that with the exception of Germany , none of the thirteen Member States who operate nuclear power plants have changed their policy on this issue .
I have been closely monitoring the debates at national governmental and parliamentary level and in the media
We need to understand that , although this is a European issue , there is also a global dimension .
It is in all our interests to ensure that the highest standards apply not only in our own territories , but also throughout the world , as , after all , nuclear power will be in use around the world for decades to come .
It is for this reason that I welcome ...
( Heckling )
Mr Turmes , I really am trying hard to remain calm and objective here .
I suggest you do the same .
When you tell me not to trust Mr Sarkozy , I can only say that I have every confidence that he will table this point for discussion at the G-20 summit .
This is a major success in itself : the issue will be discussed in a forum attended by the Americans , the Chinese , the Russians and others who already operate nuclear power plants , are planning to build new plants or have authorised major industrial concerns to build nuclear power plants in their countries .
That is why I believe that the reassessment of risks and higher safety standards are essential , irrespective of whether one is for or against nuclear energy , because nuclear power is going to remain part of our global future .
( Heckling )
This is not the time to go back over the ground covered in the debates of two years ago .
I am not the right person to deal with on that score .
You are welcome to make your views known when others come to speak .
I do not believe that you are addressing this issue to the right office holder .
Let me turn to the question of the Energy Roadmap 2050 and the criticism we have heard that this does not sufficiently promote and fund renewable energy sources .
In this case you are underestimating the power of your own resolutions , although we seek to monitor and guarantee compliance with such decisions .
20 % renewable energy sources in just nine years actually corresponds to 35 % in the crucial area of electricity generation , which is where these sustainable sources are primarily deployed .
We are well on the way to generating 35 % of electricity from renewable energy sources - and the Member States are playing their part - while renewable energy sources are set to overtake nuclear power and coal in electricity generation in four to five years .
This means that we are on the way to making renewable energy sources the most important sources for electricity in Europe .
We will present our concepts and scenarios for the Energy Roadmap 2050 in late spring .
However , there are other significant dates besides 2050 , which might seem far off - there are also interim targets for 2025 and 2030 , in other words for the period that requires investment in infrastructure and production capacities right now .
I do not want to make concrete commitments here at this point , but by 2030 we will certainly have gone beyond 35 % renewable energy sources , reaching a figure of over 40 % , or even 60 % , or somewhere in between .
If this does prove to be the case , then nobody will be able to argue that renewable energy sources did not receive sufficient backing ; renewable energy sources will play a decisive part in the energy mix within our lifetime .
( Interruption by Mrs Harms )
Mrs Harms , I am talking about the Energy Roadmap , while you are referring to the CO2 Roadmap .
These are two different issues .
We have not lowered the targets for 2020 .
They are unchanged - a 20 % standalone target and 30 % if other countries follow suit .
This has always been the position of Parliament , the Council and the Commission and this is the global offer on the table .
There have been no changes .
What we are talking about here is ' renewable energy sources ' and that is where we shall achieve over 40 % .
We have therefore created a basis for ensuring that the energy mix is no longer just a matter for the Member States , but that the Member States share 50 % of the responsibility , or a little more .
Secondly , we have also set down requirements for establishing subsidy principles and for how the financial and technical resources are to be set up in the Member States with our cooperation .
You can rest assured , Mr Turmes , that the scenarios will seriously examine something that has been proposed by various bodies , namely a move to up to 100 % renewable energy sources .
However , then you need to take a look at the legislation , specifically Article 194 , which states that the energy mix is a matter for the Member States .
I do not regard the Treaty of Lisbon as set in stone .
It does , however , provide the parameters for my activities , setting down the rights of the Member States .
These rights are jealously guarded , whether in Berlin , Luxembourg , Paris or London .
I have one final point to make .
I listened very carefully to what Mr Davies and Mr Hall had to say .
They both belong to the same party .
They both come from the same Member State .
Yet , as we have heard , they have diametrically opposed positions .
I respect that .
When a small party in a large country can accommodate such divergent opinion as expressed by these two honourable Members and when the same party was opposed to nuclear energy in its country before the election but can accept it now that the election has taken place , then I respect this nonetheless .
However , this goes to show the ecological , economic and political dimension of this issue , which is why we shall always have disagreement .
Part of the process is always global in nature .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I promise that I will be brief .
Sympathy and a cool head are , I believe , the two things which should guide our actions now .
Through sympathy we can help the Japanese with all they need ; we can listen to them and take action where they , too , see a need , and a cool head is required in order to make the right decisions in good time about our own future .
We should not decide on an issue of such importance under the influence of events .
One thing that is certain , and no one in this Chamber has disputed this today , is that we must strive to achieve maximum safety with all our strength .
It is our duty , moreover , to fully inform citizens in order that they understand what is under discussion , and when , about what and how we decide .
It is very important that we draw conclusions and learn lessons .
We should examine the events without being either tardy or jumping the gun and making statements which in a couple of weeks ' or months ' time may not stand their ground .
As regards stress tests , I would simply point out that now , based on the current regulation , there is a voluntary option for these .
Several of you have mentioned amending the legal bases , the frameworks which are in force today , which I firmly believe that the European Council would not exclude .
This needs to be elaborated and an appropriate proposal tabled .
There is no need to hurry but naturally the work must start .
Commissioner Oettinger also pointed out that the energy mix is a national competence .
Every Member State makes a sovereign decision about which forms of energy it uses to cover its energy needs .
Half the Member States , half in terms of scale , use nuclear energy .
When we have the appropriate legal basis , we will be able to impose a safety obligation on anyone , but the option and responsibility to choose lies with the Member States .
In any event I welcome with pleasure that the Commission , as Commissioner Oettinger mentioned , will be able to prepare the report by July 2011 .
As a final thought , we talk a lot about research and development , which is also a cornerstone of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
It is our task to create the best possible conditions for research and development in the European Union .
Indeed , we still have much to do in this area .
With the aid of research and development we should find the safest possible and most environmentally friendly forms of energy production .
Let us make science serve people and the maximum safety of people . Thank you very much , Mr President .
I have received one motion for resolution1 tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday , 24 March 2011 ) .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( HU ) First of all , permit me to express my profound condolences to the Japanese people and the relatives of the victims in connection with the exceptional natural and industrial disaster which happened barely 12 days ago .
The Japanese tragedy reminds us that natural and industrial disasters can occur anywhere at any time , even in Europe , too .
The question is merely when and where they will happen .
This is precisely why I believe it is important for the European Union , in the event of a potential industrial disaster in Europe , to have at its disposal an adequate financial facility to intervene immediately and effectively , and to alleviate damages .
Naturally , the EU efforts aimed at prevention are very important , but at present the European Union does not have a financial facility that can satisfy the aforementioned need .
We only have to imagine what would happen if a disaster struck a Member State in a difficult financial situation .
Apart from the shocking social and environmental consequences , this would gravely affect the budget of such a country and the European economy as well .
In my view for this reason Europe needs a new disaster insurance scheme which , based on the principle of mandatory liability insurance , would provide additional funds in the region of EUR 4 to 5 billion per annum from payments by potential polluters in order to extend swift financial aid in the event of industrial disasters .
Furthermore , the payers may also be the beneficiaries of the scheme as a result of the support they could claim through tendering for safety and environmental protection investments from the unused funds .
in writing . - ( IT ) The growing demand for energy requires diversification in the supply of alternative energy sources to oil , such as renewable solar , wind and nuclear energy sources .
In my view , the production of energy from nuclear sources is not an argument that should be discussed with feelings running as high as they are at present .
I am afraid , in fact , that the usual opponents of nuclear power , often financed by oil companies , will try to exploit events in Japan to promote Italy 's energy dependence on oil and its by-products .
More than 8 000 people in Italy and more than 350 000 in Europe die each year because of pollution caused by burning oil by-products .
Moreover , as regards the identification of possible sites in the area , I stress that this choice is aided by technical and scientific guidelines produced by experts that will put administrators in a position to make the most appropriate choices to ensure public safety and environmental sustainability .
I hope that discussions about alternative energy sources to oil can be addressed with objectivity , ensuring European citizens adequate and accurate information in order to prevent easy manipulation , making us even more dependent on unstable oil-producing countries .
in writing . - ( RO ) I share the sentiments of my fellow Members who have expressed their condolences to Japan and the Japanese people in the wake of the tragedy they are going through .
The EU must support Japan with all the capacity it can muster in launching and running the reconstruction programmes .
I have closely followed the debate , but I must say that I cannot agree with turning such a tragedy into a crusade against nuclear energy .
This is a cheap , green source of energy and technological progress will make it increasingly safe .
A plane crash , for example , is similarly tragic , but I do not believe that this provides sufficient reason for us to have doubts about the benefit and safety of planes .
The correct solution is : yes to stress tests , yes to supervision and no to demonising nuclear energy .
in writing . - Madam President , I would like to convey my sincerest condolences to the people of Japan , who have suffered from a terrible natural disaster during past weeks .
Japan is being provided with assistance from the European Union , as well as from the Member States .
The European Union will continue with any kind of assistance that the Japanese government regards appropriate to help them get through this terrible crisis .
However , the nuclear power plant alerts in Fukushima have provoked an emotional debate over the use of nuclear energy in the European Union in general .
I would advise everyone to consider their positions dispassionately and keep in mind that the use of automobiles was not forbidden when an Irish scientist , Mary Ward , was thrown out of , and run over by , her cousin 's steam car on 31 August 1869 .
Instead we should learn our lesson and increase investments both into nuclear safety and innovative research .
Fossil fuel resources are exhaustible and renewable energy is still very much experimental .
Nuclear energy , on the other hand , could hold the key to our future .
If the first cavemen had been afraid of fire , we would still be living in the Stone Age .
in writing . - ( CS ) First and foremost , I would like to join all those who have expressed sympathy for the people of Japan , stricken by the destructive earthquake and the tsunami .
This natural disaster has taken the lives of thousands of people , which is an appalling loss .
It has deprived further tens of thousands of their homes , personal items and belongings , dramatically changing their lives for years to come .
We must not forget this , even though the media are concentrating instead on the nuclear energy issues .
The problems of the damaged Fukushima plant almost overshadow everything else .
However , I would like to say - in connection with the alarmist scenarios - that the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki still constitute the greatest ever nuclear catastrophe .
The greatest threat to humanity is the military nuclear arsenal .
It is expanding , despite the many good intentions , and it lacks the permanent and thorough public control that we see with nuclear power plants .
Moreover , after the events in Japan , safety requirements and standards will surely be further enhanced .
We must therefore stick to a sensible position , avoiding any hasty or even hysterical reactions to the events in Japan .
There is currently no alternative to nuclear energy , which provides us with much-needed , accessible and emission-free power .
I am pleased that the Czech Republic , Finland , France and others are taking a realistic approach to the issue .
This is in contrast to countries where nuclear energy has become a pawn in pre-election battles to an extent that is almost unethical , bearing in mind the situation in Japan .
I would like to comment on the situation in Japan .
Humanitarian aid for Japan is an obvious and necessary reaction of the European Union in response to the tragic catastrophe which has hit the country .
I think Japan and the affected regions should be given all necessary aid ( technical , administrative and organisational ) as well as financial support .
Besides emergency aid , we should also consider developing a model of systematic cooperation with all countries which are at risk from various types of disaster , including countries which are not part of the European Union .
I would like to ask the services of the Commission and the Council which are responsible for this area to review the relevant legislation and make proposals for enhancing exchange of effective practices in the field of crisis management .
Increasing numbers of countries , including those of the European Union , are suffering more and more often as a result of natural disasters .
Therefore it is essential to have permanent and highly developed international cooperation .
It is also important to conduct a review of existing legal and regulatory frameworks for the safety and protection of nuclear installations .
In this connection I would like to draw attention in particular to two things : monitoring of full transposition of the directive on the safety of nuclear installations and adoption of a directive on radioactive waste .
in writing . - ( IT ) Following the earthquake on 11 March , the consequences of the crisis in Japan for nuclear safety and the global economy have shaken the European Union , which is already grappling with instability in North Africa .
I welcome the decisions taken at the special meeting of energy ministers , held in order to examine the implications of the accident at the plant in Fukushima , and trust in the determination of Member States to carry out stress testing of nuclear power plants in the European Union to be extended to non-European countries , and especially neighbouring countries .
In this context , and giving due importance to the nuclear moratorium decision taken by some Member States , and the fact that public consultations on energy development are imminent , it is important that the Commission should report on the safety situation in European nuclear power plants that could affect neighbouring regions of Member States if an incident occurred .
in writing . - ( EL ) I too wish to express my condolences and support for the people of Japan suffering from the disaster wreaked by the massive earthquake and tsunami , which claimed thousands of lives and left considerable damage in its wake .
Of course , science and technology have done the most to help make the usual important structures safe and , of course , we have very strict rules to reduce their vulnerability ; however , the recent massive earthquake and catastrophic tsunami which followed , claiming thousands of lives and causing destruction on a biblical scale , and the very serious damage to the nuclear reactors in Fukushima are such that we need to review and change the prevailing opinion of the safety of nuclear plants .
They must be located and designed on the basis of criteria every bit as extreme as the natural phenomena to which they may be exposed .
Scientists estimate , with a high degree of probability , that strong earthquakes may well occur in the medium and long term .
Politicians should not therefore , under any circumstances , plan nuclear plants in active earthquake zones .
There are modern , viable , smart and efficient ways for countries in earthquake zones to satisfy their energy balance .
Otherwise , it would appear that human life is being used to counterbalance the energy problem .
First , I should like to offer my condolences to the Japanese people on behalf of Jobbik , the Movement for a Better Hungary , and the whole Hungarian people .
Hungarians have always regarded the Japanese with cousinly affection , which makes the disaster particularly shocking .
It is the European Union 's duty to help the people of Japan , and all the assistance Japan requires must be given .
At the same time , the consequences of this disaster must be drawn , which clearly show for mankind that the globalised world estranged from nature is extremely fragile .
There is a Hungarian proverb which says that a wise man learns from other people 's misfortunes .
The nations of Europe must learn from this disaster , and , returning as far as possible to nature , to natural foodstuffs and to natural energy resources , protect our environment for future generations .
in writing . - ( LT ) Firstly , I would like to offer the Japanese people my sympathy following the earthquake and tsunami that have struck the country and claimed many lives .
Given the tragic disaster at Fukushima nuclear power plant that followed the earthquake and tsunami , I would call on Europe to consider the future of nuclear energy and look for other alternative means of producing energy .
Furthermore , our assessments of the impact of the disaster must be based on information and expertise provided by specialists and experts , and we must view new means of producing electricity from a scientific perspective .
The events in Japan should be a worry for all Member States , regardless of whether or not their countries have nuclear power plants , because if similar disasters occurred , radiation would threaten the whole of Europe .
At present Russian and Belarusian intentions to build nuclear power plants are a major cause for concern for the countries of Eastern Europe , in particular the Baltic States .
The impact of radiation from these planned nuclear power plants is an even greater worry and there is concern about neighbouring countries complying with international safety requirements .
I would like to stress that immediately after the disaster in Japan , Germany shut down its own reactors built before 1980 .
The Member of the European Commission responsible for Energy also maintains that Europe should strive for a future without nuclear power plants .
Therefore , once we have assessed the potential radiation threat to Europe , here in the European Parliament we should discuss the risk of nuclear power plants near the European Union 's external borders .
The devastating earthquake and tsunami which struck Japan and the Pacific region on 11 March 2011 , taking a toll of thousands of innocent lives , was a tragedy which has moved us all .
It is our duty to convey expressions of profound solidarity with the Japanese people and government and to offer our condolences , and it is also our duty to extend humanitarian , technical and financial aid .
I am pleased that the European Union provided this essential support almost immediately , using its best rescue teams and its experience in the field of disaster mitigation .
This aid must be given continuously until the situation in Japan stabilises .
In view of the disturbing fact that the disaster caused an extremely serious nuclear accident , which is affecting the Fukushima nuclear power station and constitutes a fresh threat to life and health , we should review and test the safety of nuclear power plants within the EU .
Despite the fact that the accident at the Fukushima power station is a warning to us , I do not think it should cause us to panic or be prejudiced against nuclear energy .
Japan has very often helped European nations in mitigating the effects of disasters , using its extensive and valuable experience in this area .
The time has come when we have to take up this important role .
I am certain that such cooperation will not only bring benefits in the form of emergency aid for the victims , but will also strengthen our relations with such an important friend as Japan .
in writing . - We should not only focus on nuclear safety within the EU , but also look at its immediate neighbourhood .
Two new projects for nuclear power plants with experimental reactors are being developed on the edges of the EU : one in Kaliningrad and another located in Belarus , 23 km from the EU 's external border and 50 km from Lithuania 's capital city .
Both sites were selected on unknown criteria .
The lack of transparency in the process , flawed consultations and failure to share information with the affected countries make both projects a cause for serious concern .
Work has already started , although the international environmental impact assessments of both plants are far from complete .
Moreover , immediately after the tragedy in Japan , Russia and Belarus signed an agreement giving a green light to build the plant in Belarus .
Data from the Chernobyl and Fukushima tragedies show that the area of immediate radioactive impact is 50-55 km .
In the event of an accident , the capital of an EU Member State would be immediately affected .
The EU should demand that these third countries take their responsibilities seriously and carefully observe international obligations and standards for nuclear energy .
I hope the upcoming European Council will agree to take the appropriate decisions .
Establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question to the Council on establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme by Rui Tavares , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group - B7-0205 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Council on establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme for refugees by Nadja Hirsch , Sophia in ' t Veld , Sonia Alfano , Nathalie Griesbeck , on behalf of the ALDE Group - B7-0206 / 2011 ) ,
the oral question to the Council on establishment of a joint EU resettlement programme by Manfred Weber , Simon Busuttil , Georgios Papanikolaou , on behalf of the PPE Group - B7-0208 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , refugees are probably the most vulnerable populations in the world and , of them , the most vulnerable of the vulnerable are those who can neither return home nor stay in the countries of transit .
The United Nations High Commission for Refugees puts a figure on that population : 200 000 refugees per year .
We know that half this number are resettled by the United States and other players , and we know that Europe does too little : 4 500 per year .
We all agree , therefore , that the tragedy of the refugees is urgent and important .
How important is it ?
The Council itself has already answered this question .
The Swedish Presidency talked about resettling 100 000 per year and the Belgian Presidency , at the end of its own term said - we had Prime Minister Yves Leterme here -that refugees were the image of the European Union 's very raison d 'être .
Excuse me for saying so , but refugees are important for the Hungarian Presidency for historical reasons because it was for Hungary , in 1956 , that the first concerted effort was made by the international community to resettle thousands of refugees .
In the end , however , how urgent is the tragedy of the refugees ?
Unfortunately , it is this question that we are forced to ask the Council .
How much of a priority are refugees for the Council ?
Are they urgent enough to finally put a signature , to finally add a signature to a piece of paper ?
A year ago , Parliament voted in favour of two reports , one of which was a co-decision on the European Refugee Fund .
The vast majority of us united behind what was important : from the Greek Communists to the British Conservatives .
We did our homework .
A year later we are still waiting for the Council .
The co-decision process has transformed into a co-indecision process .
This co-indecision process would be ridiculous if it were not so tragic for the people on the ground .
The report that we adopted included emergency measures to be applied in addition to the Commission 's annual priorities .
We did this because we know that a humanitarian crisis can erupt at any time .
One has just erupted in North Africa , on our doorstep , and we do not have these emergency measures ready to be implemented .
We do not have them because the Council has unfortunately not finished this co-decision .
Moreover , from the first day that it was completed , we would have , in addition to these emergency procedures , extra money for countries wishing to start carrying out resettlement , and clear categories for priorities to be used by the Member States .
We would also have everything that we put into the own-initiative report : quality , speed and the creation of a resettlement unit in the European Asylum Support Office .
Members of the Council , you - I am finishing here , Mr President - are co-legislators .
It is not for us to tell the Council how to legislate , but this desk-drawer veto helps no one , especially the institutions ' credibility .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the resettlement programme is something that we worked extremely intensively on , investing a lot of energy , across all group divides and allegiances .
We were unanimous in wanting to send out a clear signal on this matter .
We also made it our top priority simply because it is such an important issue : people 's lives are at stake .
Nonetheless , the situation and ongoing developments in North Africa mean that we are called on once again to produce results in double-quick time .
We have already lost one year .
We have made the best use of the time available to provoke a civil and social debate because , in the final analysis , we also need the support of the Member States , regional authorities and the local population if such a programme is to become established in the new Member States , too .
This discussion and the social consensus that has gradually resulted cannot be abandoned just because the Council and other key players are unable to agree and have reached an impasse .
The issue is too important .
We have instigated this debate and , true to our liberal credentials , our aim is to make this matter a genuine priority .
I believe that we have agreement across all the groups in Parliament .
We have signalled our position and now await a clear course to be set by the Council so that the issue will be placed on the agenda and that the other Member States that have so far not played an active role will now be encouraged to get involved .
The feedback that we have received during our discussions indicates that these Member States are willing to come on board .
For this reason , the main concern on the part of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - although I believe I can speak for all the groups involved because the level of cooperation was really excellent - is that this matter should be given priority and the debate that we have engendered on a broad social level should be encouraged , rather than jeopardised by continuously the matter being continuously put on the long finger .
Mr President , following on from what my fellow members said , I too should like to add that , first of all , Minister , almost a year after the resolutions passed by this Parliament , in which a great deal of effort was invested , a mission was sent to Syria for that very reason and we tried to galvanise as many Member States as possible into becoming involved in the refugee resettlement programme ; yet , despite all that , we have still done nothing .
Even if there are formal problems on the part of the Council and Parliament also needs to be involved , we are here to find solutions .
That is our purpose .
We refer to the humanitarian dimension of this programme , but we also refer to the instrument provided to Europe , so that it can exercise its foreign policy even more effectively .
Would this instrument not be a very important tool today in Baroness Ashton 's hands , if she were in North Africa and could refer to the programme we had decided on ?
Obviously we refer to global needs .
However , we do need , of course , to understand that the problem now lies at our door .
Europe is being called upon to play a leading role in the Mediterranean .
We need to start up this programme , Minister , and push ahead with it and we need to understand , when debating budgetary resources post-2013 , that there are resources for this programme up to 2013 and , if we waste any more time , we shall no longer be able to utilise those resources and facilities .
To close , may I remind you , Minister , of the proposal we made back then and to which we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) keep reverting , namely the refugee reallocation programme .
We cannot afford to wait for yet another Lampedusa , Minister , before we understand how necessary this initiative is and that we need to push full steam ahead with it .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , honourable Members , the European Parliament addressed three questions related to the resettlement of refugees to the European Council .
I would like to thank the three questioners very much for presenting in detail the considerations which led them to formulating the questions .
All three questions were related to the Commission 's proposal which intends to amend the decision establishing the European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 with regard to the establishment of a joint European Union resettlement programme .
I believe that this debate also demonstrates the deep concern of the European Parliament for the fate of people who are most in need .
Therefore , first , I would like to thank the honourable Members for paying such very close attention to resolving the situation of the refugees .
As Mr Tavares remarked as well , coming from Hungary , with its inheritance of the 1956 revolution and as a commitment to that , the Hungarian Presidency has a moral obligation to achieve progress in the area of the joint European Union resettlement programme .
The North African crisis , which several of you have referred to , has shown the need to establish a well-functioning , unified European asylum system .
I agree with the European Parliament 's position that the European Union must accept responsibility in resolving the situation of refugees if it wishes to preserve its leading role in the provision of humanitarian aid .
Allow to me to give you the very latest information on how the refugee situation on the borders of Libya is developing at this moment .
I visited the Tunisian-Libyan border at the beginning of March .
At that time one thousand refugees were arriving every hour , most of them migrant workers for whom finding a way home , a means of repatriation , was the most burning issue .
Of them all , the people in the most difficult situation were those who arrived without any papers or documents at all .
The international aid organisations on the spot were looking after them .
Their number was growing ; their repatriation , as such , is irresolvable , and therefore in this instance the resettlement system certainly comes into consideration .
Today , or rather yesterday and today , the Hungarian Foreign Minister János Martonyi has been on the other side , on the Libyan-Egyptian border .
The primary purpose of his visit was to learn about the refugee situation .
He went to the border and met Egyptian officials there .
The situation there , on this section , has changed now .
For three days there has been no outflow from Libya on that section of the border .
At present , there are about 200 people who should be able to take part in the resettlement programme .
The others who have arrived until now are being evacuated , that is to say assisted in returning home , by the Egyptian authorities , incidentally with the help of EU Member States .
By the way , Mr Martonyi has also held talks with the Foreign Minister of the Benghazi Transitional National Council , as well as the Egyptian Interior Minister precisely to gain an overview of the refugee situation .
As regards a common European asylum policy , I would like to emphasise that we will do our utmost in order to create a common policy and system which is based on the full application of the 1951 Geneva Refugee Convention relating to the status of refugees and other relevant international conventions , and is in accordance with the commitments undertaken in the Stockholm Programme by the European Council .
The Hungarian Presidency is committed to advancing the proposals in the refugee package .
This is also shown by the fact that , based on last week 's authorisation granted by the Member States , we are ready to start informal trialogues on the Asylum Qualification Directive as soon as possible in order to achieve the target date of 2012 .
I thank you once again for the January debate which I presided over on this subject .
Then , too , I replied to MEPs ' questions .
I would also like to stress that the Council , as it acknowledges the importance of resettlement as a lasting solution for refugees , welcomed the proposal for a decision on establishing a joint EU resettlement programme and the related Commission announcement , which the Commission submitted back in September 2009 .
These initiatives stemmed from the agreement which the European Council reached in connection with the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum in September 2008 , namely , that the resettlement of persons under the protection of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the territory of the European Union could proceed for the time being on a voluntary basis .
As a concrete example , I would highlight the conclusions of the Council in July and November 2008 in which the EU Member States made a commitment to resettle Iraqi refugees in their territory or rather this is what we encouraged them to do in these conclusions .
In September 2009 , the Council started the detailed examination of the proposal to amend the decision on establishing the European Refugee Fund .
In the first half of 2010 , informal meetings were held with the European Parliament on several occasions .
The Member States , showing great flexibility , adopted the European Parliament 's proposals almost in their entirety in order to achieve the common objective , the establishment of a better , more flexible system in accordance with the Commission 's proposal .
As the honourable Members rightly pointed out in their questions , the European Council and the European Parliament reached agreement on the political content of the decision as a result of the aforementioned informal meetings .
The Council supported , for example , one of Parliament 's most important proposals , namely that a mechanism be created which would encourage newer Member States to join the resettlement programme through financial instruments among other things .
The Council , however , could not support the proposal of the European Parliament which suggested that the adoption of the common EU annual resettlement priorities happen in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty through the application of the procedure relating to delegated acts .
The position of the Council and the Commission is identical on this .
The programming cycle for the operation of the General Programme on Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows sets tight deadlines , and effective planning can be provided through implementing acts .
Furthermore , the Council agreed with the Commission 's opinion that defining annual resettlement priorities has only an implementing nature because essentially this means that the detailed rules in the decision are applied to specific situations .
It is regrettable that the Council and the European Parliament were not able to agree in relation to the proposal at a level that would allow the common EU resettlement priorities to be defined for each year .
However , we should not forget that resettlement is among the activities to be supported under the current European Refugee Fund for the period 2008 to 2013 .
It is true that , based on the proposed changes , the Member States taking part in the resettlement programme for the first time would receive somewhat greater financial support , and there would be an opportunity to define the geographic regions designated for resettlement and the nationalities in need of resettlement each year .
Nonetheless , even now Member States are entitled to a fixed amount of EUR 4 000 for each person resettled who falls under one of the categories specified in the relevant decision .
Apart from this , there is no obstacle to Member States which have not participated hereto starting resettlement activity under the current programme .
It is a pleasure for me to inform you that Hungary , too , will become part of this programme next year and is prepared to participate in the resettlement programme .
Lastly , I would like to emphasise that naturally the Council remains willing to consider all proposals that can be implemented and offer a mutually acceptable solution to outstanding issues related to this matter .
Our aim , in accordance with the Commission 's proposal , is to make the existing mechanism even more flexible and efficient .
I would very much like this extremely important matter not to become the captive of yet another question of legal interpretation .
There are a great many issues where very important matters are the captives of the ' implementing act ' versus ' delegated act ' dilemma , and I would like positive progress to be achieved in these during the Hungarian Presidency . Thank you very much .
Mr President , I think nobody will be surprised to hear me say again that solidarity with refugees and displaced persons should constitute a fundamental element of EU policy in the areas of asylum and immigration .
However , it is not just a question of having solidarity with those coming from weak and disadvantaged societies , but also with the Member States that , because of their geographic location , their culture or their language , suffer greater pressure in this regard .
While numbers of applications for protection and of immigrants arriving are low in some countries , there are many other countries that are unable to tackle on their own the pressure their borders are subjected to on a daily basis .
Following Parliament 's adoption of the reports relating to the Commission communication on the Union resettlement programme and the modification of the European Refugee Fund in May 2010 , we are still waiting for the Council to complete the codecision procedure .
The pilot projects currently being undertaken in 10 Member States are a drop in an ocean , which we still have to cross .
The southern Member States are subjected to great pressure , particularly since the popular movements in Egypt and Tunisia , and the war in Libya , began .
Lampedusa , with a population of 5 000 , has received almost 6 000 immigrants since the conflicts started .
The aforementioned pilot projects are completely insufficient and will hardly do anything to relieve the pressure that is already affecting Italy and Malta , but will affect other Mediterranean countries in the near future .
The Union as a whole must help these countries .
It is imperative that the Council overcome the obstacles currently preventing the full implementation of a European resettlement programme and defeat the minorities blocking it .
Massive population displacements and migrations affect the Union as a whole and not just a part of it .
I am finishing , Mr President .
Last week I called for a European Parliament presence on Libya 's borders and I repeat that call now .
It is not enough for 10 fellow Members to have spent last week in Egypt : we must have the capacity to evaluate the humanitarian situation ourselves .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , today in the Chamber we are clearly hearing a very strong cross-party request for the Council to do everything possible to make refugee resettlement a reality .
Refugee resettlement is not the same as burden sharing .
While we want to see improvements in the common asylum system , what we are asking for here is the removal of the barriers that make for a European resettlement system of very limited credibility , taking care of say 4000 refugees in the whole of the European Union , compared to the kind of figure that we see in the United States and Canada .
Let us not forget that the vast majority of the world 's displaced people are pouring into developing countries .
The lesson of North Africa is that all of those people are pouring into countries unable to deal with the burden .
The Council must unblock this situation so that we can have a credible resettlement system .
This is an all-party request that we are making to the Council this evening .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , I have one figure , one observation and one question .
One figure : there are more than 10 million refugees in the world .
These are vulnerable people , women at risk , children and unaccompanied minors .
This is a serious crisis , to which we need to provide answers that show our commitment to human rights .
One observation : for one year , Parliament has given its agreement , and I join my fellow Member in asking you , Mrs Győri , to take note of the very strong consensus within Parliament on this matter .
One question : I do not want to believe that the Council is being cynical in any way , thus leading it to use , in the procedure , the fact that the first reading is not subject to a cut-off date , in order to block the codecision process .
Hence , what about emergency resettlement ?
Mrs Győri , this cannot wait until 2012 .
I urge Member States to shake off the schizophrenia which leads them to take firm and consistent positions in speeches while advocating the opposite when the legal framework is starting to take shape , as it is looking like here .
The latter must meet an imperative need , that of our world today .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I speak as a former UK Immigration Minister .
There is no doubt that the protection of the vulnerable and those seeking genuine refuge , especially given recent events around the world , is of great importance and priority for this House and , I hope , is even more important for the Council .
The UK , like other Member States , has played its part in resettling refugees through national resettlement programmes in the past , but it is hugely important that through a coordinated , cooperative and communicative approach we discuss how we can best reconcile assisting those most in need with the situations of those Member States that are already overburdened with national priorities .
I am cautious , however , that programmes in this area should not undermine a nation 's right to set its own policies .
We also need cooperation and communication between Parliament and the Council , more action by the Council , more determination by the Council .
I would like to seek a reassurance that it intends to inform this House regularly as to how it will proceed and if or how recent events in North Africa will change the pace and process .
I should also like to know whether increases in burdens will , in the future , result in proposals for compulsory quotas of refugees for resettlement in Member States .
Please , Council , let us get on with this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , resettlement is an important instrument in dealing with refugees .
Other countries such as the US resettle thousands of refugees on their territory every year .
Resettlement is for people who have not reached , or have not tried to reach , the European Union to apply for asylum here , so for all the Heads of State who are constantly saying that we should tackle migration where it originates before it ends up in the European Union , this should be the perfect instrument .
However , instead of the EU , it is countries that are much poorer than any of the EU Member States that take in and host great numbers of refugees , such as Pakistan and Syria .
Since these countries lack reception facilities , many refugees have to endure unacceptable conditions .
The EU can and should help here .
The resettlement of Iraqi refugees in the EU has shown that it works .
However , the number of Iraqi refugees accepted was ridiculously small .
Many more internationally-recognised refugees need a fair chance for a new life , and I find it incredible that the Council and Commission try to prevent Parliament from exercising its parliamentary rights .
I do not find it acceptable if you are saying that we are delaying the process : it was just us who are trying to implement our normal parliamentary rights .
I think it is you , the Council , that is delaying it by means of not granting us these rights .
This is not only our right , but also our duty as elected representatives of the European people .
I would like to know your practical , precise timetable for overcoming the difficulties that you have encountered .
Are you personally committing yourself to putting this issue on the agenda as soon as possible ?
We are losing time every day .
There are other instruments that would be a great asset in the current situation .
Resettlement could also play a role in the long run when we are tackling the situation in North Africa , but there are also other instruments we have in place which are not being used . For instance , the directive on temporary protection or the internal distribution of refugees .
These are instruments that are in place but are being not used .
That leaves me with the impression that Member States are not willing to protect human rights , that they are timid when it comes to international protection .
I would like to know what how you are trying to put the common asylum system into place by 2012 , because that seems to be rather late to me .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we are talking about migration these days , we obviously cannot help but begin by analysing the situation in North Africa .
On the one hand , it is to be welcomed that the peoples of North Africa have felt the wind of democracy , but on the other hand , it is lamentable that masses are dying these days , and even in these very hours .
Children , women , innocent civilians .
This , I must add , is only the short-term effect .
After all , it will be in the long term that migration will truly show its negative impact .
Let us just consider the simple fact that nearly half a million people , refugees , have left Libya in the past few days .
The resettlement of these refugees is made particularly difficult by the fact that Western Europe is full .
In Eastern Europe , however , it is the prevalence and ethnic ratio of the Roma that makes the reception of additional immigrants hard .
In Western Europe the same applies to people from Black Africa , or Arabs , for that matter .
Let us , however , ask this question : what if we settle these immigrants in Europe ?
What will happen after that ?
Who will provide them with jobs ?
What about social tensions ?
What about religious , ethnic and cultural tensions ?
In the current situation it is absurd to settle more immigrants in Europe in such a forcible manner .
And the reason this process , this liberal structure , has come to a halt is that this migration concept is fundamentally flawed .
Would the liberal Members please contemplate how few of them are present in this hall , at the discussion of a topic that is so important to them ?
Why , there are one or two Members from the liberal group here .
Shame on you !
And do not even hope to achieve your goals if you participate at plenary sittings with such levels of activity .
The European Refugee Fund should instead be used to create livelihoods for those people in North Africa and locally in the countries of the refugees , and give European people back their esteem and their work . Thank you very much .
( PT ) Mr President , I was very pleased to hear the President-in-Office of the Council stressing the importance of refugees and the resettlement programme .
The figures from the United Nations High Commission on Refugees are clear : we are talking about millions of refugees and about more than 200 000 people in need of resettlement programmes every year .
There is , therefore , a humanitarian emergency in the world around us : now it is not just in Afghanistan , Somalia and the Congo , but we are also facing it in Egypt , in Libya and in many other countries .
However , as well as the humanitarian emergency there is , as Mr Papanikolaou reminded us , also the fact that we have unspent budgetary resources because these programmes have not been approved .
That is what is happening , Mrs Enikő .
I was also pleased to hear you saying that this process would not be paralysed because of legal issues .
However , the truth is that this process is paralysed , to a great extent for legal reasons .
We are in a co-decision process and we have not seen the Council disagree with Parliament 's solutions .
Mr Tavares prepared an excellent report and we see no proposals from the Council to contradict the model resettlement programme that has been designed .
What we are seeing is the Council limited by legal issues , and that cannot happen .
The question that Mr Tavares was asking at the start of this debate , of knowing what is the priority and if the issue of refugee resettlement is or is not important to the Presidency and the Council , is very important .
We have the feeling that this , in fact , is not important .
Members will be holding a Council tomorrow , after which - we already know this Council 's proposed conclusions - the draft on the issue of migratory flows is being put off until the July Council .
The recommendation that we would like to be taken from here , Mrs Enikő , is that the European Parliament is not asking the Council to delay : the European Parliament is asking the Council to decide .
( FR ) Mrs Győri , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the humanitarian crisis in Libya , today more than ever , it is fundamental that Europe provides itself with the means of concerted action in respect of resettlement .
Whereas , since 1 March , UNHCR has called on the international community to participate in an urgent resettlement effort , no Member State has so far made known their intention to take part .
Only Italy has welcomed 58 Eritreans urgently evacuated from Tripoli , but I hear it said that there is a programme or proposal to resettle 4 000 people trapped in Libya .
Hence I would like to know more on this .
It is indeed the case that the European Union 's responsibility in this area cannot allow for inaction .
We need to show increased solidarity with these countries and with their population .
Tunisia and Egypt have agreed to open their borders to those fleeing Libya .
Europe must support them and play its part in the international effort for protecting refugees .
However , beyond the urgency of the humanitarian crisis in Libya , the challenges that Europe has to face up to with regard to resettlement are many .
I will mention three .
Firstly , the European Union must work towards a more generous resettlement policy for those for whom resettlement is a last resort .
In this respect , we should all have in mind that in 2009 , approximately 85 000 refugees were resettled in the world , but only 8.4 % were resettled in Member States of the European Union .
In addition to this quantitative objective , any credible European resettlement policy should also ensure a high standard of preparation prior to candidates ' resettlement , by taking into consideration the most vulnerable and the quality of reception and integration facilities in the host country .
Finally , insofar as it complements the existing national asylum schemes , the European resettlement programme should , as Parliament 's position in 2010 already made clear , be based on the various experiences and results within the Member States and be subject to enhanced coordination .
( DA ) Mr President , everywhere in the world , streams of refugees are on the move .
This is partly the result of wars and unrest and partly that of natural disasters .
These people are looking for temporary shelter .
The vast majority of refugees go back to their homeland , but around 200 000 have to be resettled somewhere else in the world .
Circumstances are changing constantly , however , and due to the unrest and wars in North Africa , Europe 's southern borders are now under increased pressure from thousands of refugees .
The capacities of the Member States to take these people vary considerably .
I would therefore like to ask whether the Council can tell us what this stream of refugees will mean in terms of what proportion can be included in the resettlement programme .
This programme will extend the EU 's competence in the area of refugees and asylum .
I view this as problematic .
Like other Members asking questions , I too would like to ask whether the Council can give a time horizon for a response to the question of whether it is in favour of or against a joint EU resettlement programme .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem we are debating is clearly a public opinion problem .
How do we convince the Member States that a common resettlement policy is better ?
That a Member State wishes to maintain its sovereignty in this area is not an obstacle to there being a Union policy that sets some priorities , nor does it prevent these policies being reflected in European Refugee Fund ( ERF ) grants .
It is therefore urgent to break the stalemate on this issue , as there are many possible solutions .
Perhaps the Council should consider this issue .
If the Member States can receive financing from the ERF without any conditions being attached , then there will never be a common resettlement policy .
Therefore , the common asylum policy is an unresolved issue that cannot be hidden away .
Moreover , not tackling a joint strategy is unintelligent and miserly , and its only result will be that the consequences of this lack of response become worse day by day .
It is not merely a question of values : it is that the lack of coordination and common solidarity is more costly for the Member States .
- ( SK ) Mr President , almost one year ago I stated in this plenary that less than half of EU Member States had official resettlement programmes for refugees from third countries .
Moreover , these programmes are not well coordinated .
As a result of the low level of coordination and cooperation between EU Member States , the costs connected with resettlement are disproportionately high .
It is still true that , given sufficient political will , we will be capable of creating an effective , fair and unified resettlement programme .
To this end , it will be essential to create not only a programme , but also a special fund for the resettlement of refugees in the Union .
This package would finance the creation of national resettlement programmes where they do not exist already , as well as the coordination of activities at the central level .
Although we have long known these facts , and although political consensus has prevailed between Parliament , the Commission and the Council for at least a year , there has been no final decision .
I would therefore like to join the call made by Members for the Council to include the completion of the co-decision process in this area among its priorities .
( PT ) Mr President , we have serious concerns about the humanitarian situation of refugees , about those fleeing from wars , armed conflicts , hunger , exploitation , penury , and of the women and child victims of human trafficking .
Solidarity with these people is a central issue requiring concrete measures , whether in terms of aid for refugees or in terms of supporting the countries that , because of their geographic proximity , are most highly sought by refugees ..
The recent conflicts in the countries of North Africa , added to the wars in the Middle East , have worsened an already very difficult situation .
Therefore it is necessary to have effective and urgent measures to resettle refugees and house them in the dignity they deserve .
We cannot continue to wait for decisions that are dragging on whilst thousands of people are knocking at our gates daily , without raising the response to which they have a right .
( HU ) Mr President , Minister of State , we can see , as you too have said , that it was the events of the past few weeks that best demonstrated how the matter of refugees could become a serious , acute issue in Europe at any moment .
It is also quite apparent that the EU is not prepared for states of emergency , larger waves of refugees , or to provide a strategic solution to the refugee situation .
The matter of resettlement is one of our important tools in this regard .
And naturally , a higher degree of solidarity and better coordination should be expected .
However , as has been said here in this debate , this area requires social consensus .
All of us , and the Member States , too , have a lot of work to do in this area .
Nevertheless , we appreciate the fact that the Hungarian Presidency does not intend to set up legal barriers and is showing openness and commitment with regard to settling this issue .
( DE ) Mr President , a small , elite , politically correct grouping obviously believes that we still do not have enough refugees in Europe and that the European Refugee Fund should be used to bring those who have already fled to a bordering third country into the EU because the standard of living is higher here .
This approach seems particularly out of touch when one considers that hundreds of thousands of refugees from North Africa are already flooding into Europe and that the island of Lampedusa is already on the verge of exploding .
A better option would be to accommodate refugees near their home countries in a cultural environment that is as familiar to them as possible , for example in Egypt and Tunisia , as this would avoid integration problems in Europe .
Following the democratic changes , these two countries should be classified as safe third countries for refugees and that is where we should be channelling controllable , sustainable , structural aid .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , honourable Members , I will also attempt to provide specific answers to the main subjects .
First of all , let us have a look at the record of the European Union , in that many have said here that we have fallen behind the United States and other countries in terms of generosity .
I do not think that it is so .
The total number of refugees resettled by the EU is , on an annual basis , indeed lower than the corresponding numbers in the US , Canada or Australia .
And although the Council fully acknowledges that resettlement continues to be a means of permanently resolving the situation of refugees , we should keep in mind that the annual number of spontaneous asylum requests submitted to the EU far exceeds that in other regions of the world .
According to the statistics published by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , the 27 Member States of the EU received 1 150 980 asylum seekers between 2005 and 2009 , whereas in Canada and the US the corresponding figure was 391 090 .
I therefore believe that these figures speak for themselves .
Many have asked for clarification of the exact schedule that the Hungarian Presidency intends to follow .
There is no debate among us that we must move forward ; the issue is an extremely urgent one .
I also said this in January , when the refugee situation was not yet as acute with regard to North Africa as it is now .
This means that we have already had concrete plans , and we intend to accelerate this work .
As you know , the Belgian Presidency , with a view to adhering to the 2012 deadline , proposed the strategy that we focus on four priority laws .
You are familiar with all this ; they are the Qualification Directive , the Dublin Regulation , the Eurodac Regulation , and the Long-term Residence Directive .
Talks have also continued in connection with the two directives that require the most work , namely the Procedures Directive and the Reception Conditions Directive .
At that time this strategy gained widespread support in the Council , Parliament and the Commission as well , and also yielded tangible results .
As you know , Parliament and the Council reached an agreement on the Long-term Residence Directive , and it will be adopted officially by the Council in a matter of weeks .
With regard to the Qualification Directive , the Hungarian presidency has been given the mandate to begin the informal trialogue .
Our goal is therefore to start this as soon as possible , and we ask the European Parliament to be our partner in this regard .
As regards the Dublin and Eurodac Regulations , there has been significant progress in the Council , and only a few questions of a strongly political nature remain unresolved .
As far as the Procedures and Reception Conditions Directives are concerned , the Commission announced that it intends to submit a new proposal .
In the previous cycle the European Parliament closed the first reading of the Reception Conditions Directive , and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs is currently examining the Commission 's proposal for the amendment of the Procedures Directive .
This means that both the European Parliament and the Council are currently clarifying their positions .
This will enable the two legislators to begin talks on the Qualification Directive and the Dublin and Eurodac Regulations .
As soon as the Commission submits its proposals concerning the Procedures and Reception Conditions Directives , work can continue on these two laws as well .
As regards North Africa , I mentioned the Presidency visits to the frontier zone due to the current situation .
We will evaluate the migration situation at the 11 April meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
However , I would like to indicate already at this point , as there has been some criticism here in this regard , that the current draft conclusions of the European Council also make reference to the importance of the refugee situation .
If we deem it necessary , we will assess the progress of the work .
We are also prepared to schedule one more special meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council during the Hungarian Presidency .
We are therefore endeavouring to accelerate the legislative work .
We would like to inspire you , as well as the European Commission , to do the same .
Many , including Mr Coelho , have mentioned this problem related to the amendment of the asylum decision .
Well , as I have also said in my introduction , there is agreement on the political content , and we are now trapped in a legal issue .
As , by the way , there is a debate between the Council and Parliament as to whether we should resolve several issues , from novel food to various foreign policy and external financial instruments , by way of an implementing act or a delegated act .
I would like to state that this is a very important question .
This legal procedure , and the question of what implementing or delegated act means , takes quite some effort for citizens , for EU citizens , to comprehend .
Our task is to find solutions to matters of utmost urgency by whatever legal formula .
I strive very hard to adhere to the Treaty of Lisbon with every action I take .
The Treaty does not draw a clear line between the individual acts .
We believe that this is an implementing act , and the issue should therefore be regulated in this manner , by way of an implementing act .
Let us talk about it and consult .
We would , however , very much like to avoid becoming entrapped in legal matters .
Our original plans for the June European Council already included that we address refugee issues , and this has now become an even greater priority .
However , I believe that if we can fill the Council meetings with the appropriate substance - and it is our duty to do so - then the European Council , too , will be able to take decisions of greater importance than we had otherwise hoped , let 's say , just one or two months ago .
I was also asked a question as to what will happen if the flow of refugees comes in this direction .
I think that we should not yet be imagining things .
We have done a great deal so far in the area of refugee issues in the various Council formations .
The Commission is holding its ground exceptionally well on humanitarian issues , as do , by the way , the Egyptian and Tunisian authorities and the local population , as well as the international refugee organisations .
It seems to me that everyone is in control of the situation .
Repatriation , which is the most urgent issue , is proceeding .
This does not mean that these resettlements , for example , are not relevant .
By the way , despite the fact that we have a legal problem that we have been unable to settle as yet - anyone is free to do so on a voluntary basis - , as far as I know , Italy has already voluntarily resettled 125 people , meaning that the issue is already partially being resolved after all , thanks to the honest efforts of the Member States .
This does not mean that there is no need for the legislation .
There is a very real need for it .
Let us try to come to an agreement .
Thank you very much for your attention , and as the Hungarian Presidency announced at one time that it will be a presidency that can prove that it also has a heart , as also expressed by our focus on the Roma strategy , I would like to assure you that this is also the case with regard to refugee matters . Thank you very much .
author . - Mr President , my comment is methodological in nature .
The Council has told us that they agree with everything except for Article 290 , so after coordinating with our shadow rapporteurs , and as rapporteur for resettlement , I would like to make two comments on methodology .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Tavares , I hope you will forgive me , but we are so far behind schedule that I had to cut you off .
The debate is closed .
US subpoenas and EU data protection rules ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on US subpoenas and EU data protection rules .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , Parliament is representing the concerns of many European citizens as it pays increased attention to US authorities requesting data from media communications companies after WikiLeaks ' leaking of American state secrets .
The Council naturally shares Parliament 's concerns about respect for EU data protection rules .
However , it is not in the possession of information from which it could determine whether the US court procedure was in violation of EU data protection laws .
As regards the case of WikiLeaks , as referred to by several Members , the United States Attorney General has publicly admitted that there is an ongoing criminal investigation .
As far as I know , US attorneys urged , in connection with this investigation , that an American court order Twitter to hand over specific data in a ruling , and the court did adopt the relevant ruling .
It is not the task of the Council to comment upon how the US judicial authorities take their decisions .
Additionally , it does not even possess information on the basis of which it could question the validity of a reasoned court ruling .
There have been court proceedings in the United States where Twitter was able to defend its own position .
This is also proven by the fact that the American court upheld Twitter 's request to inform its clients about the court ruling .
The European Union generally respects the court proceedings of third countries .
It is self-evident that when investigating a suspected criminal offence , prosecution authorities must obtain information .
It is also a well-known fact that the US procedure for obtaining information differs from that followed by the majority of EU Member States .
The main difference lies in that it has a wider scope , meaning that it allows for far more information to be requested from a far greater number of persons than a general European criminal investigation or procedure .
This is quite simply the result of the development of US law , meaning that it is not a matter upon which the Council should express its opinion .
The enforcement of EU data protection rules is generally the responsibility of Member State authorities , and , more specifically , data protection authorities .
These authorities must ensure that data protection rules are respected , and it is these authorities that have competence over matters of jurisdiction and compatibility with European or national data protection laws .
It would be inappropriate to make matters investigated in court proceedings the subject of political judgement .
Considering the broader context of the issue , the Council is unaware of a similar court ruling having been adopted before .
When US authorities previously intended to obtain information relating to EU citizens that was stored within the territory of the EU , the European Union engaged in negotiations with the United States for the conclusion of an international agreement on handing over and processing the aforementioned data .
This was the case , for example , with regard to the Passenger Name Record or PNR , in connection with which there is a PNR agreement , concluded with the United States in 2007 , the renegotiation of which is currently in progress , upon the very initiative of Parliament .
A similar case is that of handing over financial messaging data stored in the European Union to the Terrorist Finance Tracking Program , or TFTP , of the US Department of Finance .
The relevant TFTP agreement was approved by Parliament in July 2010 .
Finally , I would like to stress that the Twitter case is completely different from the PNR or TFTP cases .
The latter two involve US authorities systematically and continuously requesting personal data for the purpose of combating crime , and especially for the fight against terrorism .
The Twitter case , on the other hand , is about a specific court ruling adopted by a court in a specific criminal investigation .
It is important for us to recognise the rulings of the courts of other countries as much as possible .
Except , of course , in cases where there are factors justifying the opposite . Thank you very much , Mr President .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , in a globalised world , the protection of personal data transferred to third countries is an increasingly important and legally very complex issue .
It goes without saying that the fundamental right to the protection of personal data also applies in the electronic world and in cross-border data processing .
Nevertheless , as with other fundamental rights , there may be limitations to this right ; any such limitations must comply with the law and they must be proportionate .
They must also be justified by legitimate interests : national security , public safety , prevention of disorder or crime , protection of health or morals and so on .
Under US law , a subpoena is an administrative order compelling an individual to provide a State or local administrative agency with specific information .
The legality of an act must be determined on the basis of the law of the country where the act is carried out .
Therefore , the assessment of the legality , proportionality and necessity of the US Government 's requests must be based on the US Constitution and its legal system .
The Commission has no competence as regards the manner in which a third country applies its judicial procedure in investigating suspected criminal activities .
When European citizens use Twitter , they express their consent to Twitter 's privacy policy .
This policy describes its procedures on the collection , use and disclosure of personal information to third parties , including when it is necessary in order to comply with laws , regulations or legal requests from the US Government .
Furthermore , as these personal data are sought from Twitter by the US authorities in the context of criminal investigations , the EU 's data protection legislation is not applicable .
The EU 's Data Protection Directive does not apply to state activities in the area of criminal law , nor does a framework decision on data protection in police and judicial cooperation apply in this case , given that no EU Member State authority is involved in executing the US court order and that no personal data is transmitted or made available by the competent authority of another Member State .
So that is how the law stands today .
The global dimension of data processing should not , however , imply a lowering of the level of protection for EU citizens .
Indeed , global processing activity demonstrates how important and necessary it is to protect data subject rights and clarify the applicable rules .
This is particularly important nowadays , when more and more data are in the cloud .
So what are we going to do about this ?
First , the Commission 's forthcoming proposal to reform the EU data protection framework will focus in particular on the challenges posed by globalisation and modern technologies , most of all when third-country operators target EU consumers .
Second , as you know , on 3 December 2010 , the Council gave the Commission a solid mandate with clearly defined EU objectives for negotiating the future EU-US data protection agreement in the area of police and judicial cooperation .
One of the EU 's main objectives in the forthcoming negotiations is to ensure enforceable data protection rights to data subjects on both sides of the Atlantic , regardless of nationality , and providing effective administrative and judicial redress .
I am counting on Parliament to help this happen .
So what are we doing in the meantime , before that new instrument becomes effective ?
I would strongly recommend that operators be very transparent upstream with their consumers and that they indicate clearly that their service is operating primarily under US law as far as criminal investigations are concerned .
Therefore it is clear that consumers are leaving EU jurisdiction even if they do not leave EU territory themselves .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission for the clarifications .
We are faced with a problem that is typical of the globalised world in which we live .
The fact is that we , naturally , respect US law .
It is also a fact that we are aware of the difficulties that arise with the global medium of the Internet and law enforcement .
However , the fact that law enforcement agencies are now accessing private databases on a routine basis is something that requires a response from us .
Commissioner , your words struck a chord with me because I share your ideas about how we should proceed , namely that we should regulate this matter in a dedicated future revision of the EU data protection framework , while at the same time taking the opportunity to say that we also wish to regulate and promote the EU-US Data Protection Framework Agreement because we see the need to regulate such data transfers in this global world .
It is therefore important to remain focused on this issue , as I said earlier .
Naturally , it is not our intention that such a process should cast a negative light on the processing of data .
However , it is good to provide a positive example here by drafting good laws , developing the framework agreement and , in particular , better illuminating and regulating the area of law enforcement in relation to access to private data and the criteria for permitting and ending such access .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I think that the Commissioner , skilfully as usual , anticipated the questions that we have .
First of all , what do we do in the meantime when it is now public knowledge that the US has issued a number of subpoenas directed at social networks and internet service providers like Yahoo , Twitter and Google ?
This clearly gives the US access to information about data-sharing between WikiLeaks and third entities .
Of course , it is the third entities - European citizens , people who are perfectly innocently accessing the internet , young people , people who are curious - who will be the targets and who will be damaged by this data regime .
This has huge implications for the right to privacy of all EU citizens .
Those who signed up to tweets by WikiLeaks due to an interest in the ongoing Assange case are ironically left vulnerable to US subpoenas and collection of their personal data .
Sites like Twitter are subject to US legislation , as their servers are based in the US .
Although I understand when you say that we cannot affect the law of third countries , we can do something in the interim .
I think it is a legitimate concern for all of us in this House that we have to explain to our constituents what protection they can have from the European Union .
What is the point of ensuring data protection standards for EU citizens if they can simply be lifted at the request of a US subpoena ?
It is clear that more has to be done to safeguard the personal data of EU citizens , who should be protected by strong , high-level EU legislation .
I know that you are working on that aim .
Until now , Framework Directive 94 / 46 has provided very strong protection in the internal market , but the time has come to review the directive , increase the level of protection and extend the same protective measures to judicial and police cooperation .
We will ensure that these objectives are reached through our future legislative work , and you have mentioned that .
In this respect , one of the main elements that the Commission intends to introduce in the review is EU protection to withstand the US subpoenas .
We must remember that this issue does not stop at sites like Twitter , but can apply in cases of national jurisdiction .
We have this in one of our own Member States today with the UK census , which is a massive undertaking being overseen by an American company .
This is a genuine and ongoing concern of EU citizens .
You have given some partial answers today , but I think we are right to raise this and to get more detailed answers .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Council and the Commission .
I am pleased to note that they share our concern .
Let us be very clear : I do not think anybody here is claiming that the US was acting outside its jurisdiction .
That is not the problem .
The problem is that its jurisdiction , through the internet , becomes extremely vast .
Its jurisdiction seems to extend even into the European Union , because the problem here is that although the vast majority of the internet-based companies we are talking about are based in the US , many of the users are based in the European Union .
I should point out that this oral question is already a bit out of date , as there has been another court ruling in the meantime , but the argument that is being used by the American courts is that once you use Twitter , as in this case , you cannot have a legitimate expectation of privacy any more .
That means that anybody based in the European Union - EU citizens - no longer have any legal protection , because Twitter is US-based .
As Commissioner Reding pointed out , that is a huge problem that must be addressed in the context of the review of the Data Protection Directive .
Commissioner , you say that once someone has used Twitter they have given consent , but what does ' consent ' really mean ?
It means that we become outlaws , that we abandon our rights to legal protection .
I realise there is very little that we can do here , but I would like to ask what the Commission and the Council will do to provide legal protection to EU citizens .
Will they talk to our American counterparts and try and get more information ?
There are probably other companies that have been subpoenaed .
Finally , you say , Commissioner , that this case cannot be compared to SWIFT because it concerns a very specific investigation , which is true .
At the same time , they have requested large amounts of ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that this is yet another case in which we are debating the fact that different legal cultures obtain on either side of the Atlantic when it comes to personal data and , in particular , when it comes to police and judicial cooperation .
I am actually shocked by the response from the Council , stating that the company Twitter is located in the territory of the United States and therefore the measures and legal framework applied there has nothing to do with us .
I think that is wrong .
I also believe that the citizens of the European Union will view things differently ; after all , we are continuously increasing international cooperation at policing and judicial levels , particularly with the United States ; people are increasingly confronted with the laws of other states , by which I do not just mean the laws of different Member States within the European Union , but also , in particular , US law .
This is particularly the case when it comes to personal data .
I would expect the Council , as the governing body of the European Union , to take up this problem and to enable the citizens of the European Union to have confidence in the laws that they encounter on the Internet , in particular as they affect their civil rights and liberties .
( NL ) Mr President , the delegation of the Dutch Freedom Party attaches particular importance to everyone 's privacy and to data protection .
We are not being short-sighted here , just pragmatic .
However , privacy has its limits .
Privacy should be guaranteed wherever possible , but the security of civilians must be secondary to the prevention and detection of terrorism .
Mr President , contemporary terrorism is dominated by Islamic terrorism .
That is the reason why we all , unfortunately , need to sacrifice a little bit of our privacy , in order to protect the security of our citizens .
Obviously , the personal data of internet users , such as IP addresses , ought to be protected .
This right to protection , however , is outweighed where there is a strong suspicion that the individuals who are hiding behind that data have terrorist motives .
If the US authorities ask for data on individuals on EU territory who are associated with terrorism , they should simply be given it , but , obviously , only after proper consultation and where there are strong arguments for this , so that we can prevent abuse .
However , let us , above all , not forget that they are not asking for information just for kicks .
They have very good reasons for doing so .
( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Reding , I am grateful that you are here this late in the evening at this plenary debate in Brussels to listen to the Members of the European Parliament , and I would offer you my encouragement in your work on redefining EU data protection standards .
In particular , I should like to mention the Commission communication on data protection , which you should present as a real opportunity to bring into alignment the revolution in technology and knowledge tools , on the one hand , and , on the other , advances in European constitutional law like the Treaty of Lisbon and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , fundamental rights to privacy , and all rights linked to accessing , rectifying and cancelling any personal data , in line with the European public 's freedom to give their consent , but also in line with international law .
This is because we are talking here about a bilateral framework for the European Union and its Member States to negotiate with third countries , and with the United States in particular .
Messages on this need to be very clear : Council Framework Decision 2008 / 977 and Directive 95 / 46 / EC must be updated and brought up to the minute .
This is not just in order to be able to provide the United States with police and juridical cooperation in line with the technique of subpoena aid or with any judicial orders that could affect fundamental rights , but also to reinforce the principle of freely giving consent , of knowing what personal data are in possession of third countries and are transferred to third countries , and of how we can also update this right to rectify and cancel any data that affect personal privacy and that undergo automated processing of personal data .
Therefore , they are submitted to online processing .
What concerns me in particular is the issue of the rights of the child .
This is because there are limits on the capacity of minors to act and on their capacity to possess the right to exercise fundamental rights , about which we need information .
It is not just minors , but the minors ' surroundings that are affected by techniques and tools for protecting online privacy .
I therefore want you to know that we will follow this discussion very closely .
We will follow the process of updating data protection rights and bringing them up to the minute very closely and , in particular , the negotiation of bilateral tools with third countries , in particular the United States .
( DE ) Mr President , the old saying ' I love treason but I hate a traitor ' is something that is proven true over and over again .
Anyone who blows the whistle on wrongdoing is celebrated as a hero by the public and the media , but viewed as a betrayer by the affected institutions .
Thus , as we know , US Private Bradley Manning has gone to prison for passing information to WikiLeaks .
The way in which this explosive information is handled in the land of unlimited opportunity and liberty and the fact that Twitter was compelled to reveal personal data is worse than ominous .
It remains to be seen whether the widely rumoured demands by the US authorities for user data from other Internet companies such as Google , Facebook and Amazon prove true .
The approach taken by the US authorities and the fact that the courts do not view the publication of names , e-mail addresses and banking details as a violation of privacy are certainly symptomatic of overseas data protection provisions , which are obviously still in their infancy .
Mr President , I will reflect on some of these issues from the perspective of the Chair of the Internal Market Committee , because I think that very fundamental economic and internal market issues are at stake here , as well as the really important issues about the protection of our citizens ' rights that we have talked about today .
I have been writing a report for my committee on this issue .
I want to thank Ms Reding for the Green Paper on which that was based , because I think that one of the core , ambitious issues that she raised in there is at the core of what we have been discussing tonight .
She was saying that if , as a European citizen , my data was held on a server or database in a country outside Europe 's jurisdiction , I should have the same rights over that data as I would have if the server was within the European Union .
That is a really ambitious programme .
I hope we can achieve that .
It will need a lot of negotiation .
I would just say to my colleagues , particularly Ms in ' t Veld , that if we are going to offer that , then other countries will demand reciprocal rights as well .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I share the legitimate concerns of this House when it comes to the protection of the private data of European citizens .
Because I share this concern , I have presented an initial analysis on how the reform of the 1995 directive could look , in order to answer the questions which have been raised today and which do not have a legal answer under European legislation as it stands .
There is good news regarding relations with our American counterparts .
On 16 March , the White House took a decisive step in announcing that it intends to work with Congress to produce a privacy bill of rights .
That is a huge change in the United States , and it could also help us in our efforts to conclude a general EU-US agreement on data privacy concerning police and judicial cooperation .
I hope that we will be able to start the negotiations in this direction soon .
I am counting on Parliament to help with this endeavour and with the reform of the 1995 directive .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your understanding , that is , for not disputing that we cannot intervene from here in an ongoing criminal procedure , and that in all cases the law in force at the time of an offence must be applied .
I would like to inform you that nothing demonstrates the commitment of the Hungarian Presidency to data protection better than the fact that , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting in February , we adopted Council conclusions on the subject of data protection , comprising about fifty items .
In this we also addressed two very important questions to the Commission that are relevant to the present debate .
We called attention to the importance of informing citizens , as well as to the importance of Internet-related data protection , and I am certain , as the Commissioner has also mentioned , by the way , that the Commission will take these into account when drafting its proposal .
The Council also fully agrees that it is important to modernise legislation and adapt it to technical developments .
We are looking forward to receiving the proposal for a new data protection directive from the Commission .
We promised it for June , when the Hungarian Presidency will not have much time left , but we will do everything in our power , and I am sure that the Polish Presidency will approach the issue of data protection with similar commitment .
We believe , Mr President , and with this I conclude my speech , that we do not have to choose between freedom and security , namely data security , but that these can also be ensured simultaneously , and our goal is to create such a data protection legislation for the EU .
The debate is closed .
Consumer rights ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Schwab , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on consumer rights - C7-0349 / 2008 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by offering my thanks to all my fellow Members who worked on this directive and on the compromise under debate today .
I say this not out of politeness , but out of sincere gratitude .
They were Mrs Wallis from the Committee on Legal Affairs as the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee , Mrs Gebhardt , Mrs Turunen and Mr Rochefort , as well as Mr Triantaphyllides and Mr Bielan .

Reaching a decision was not always an easy process , with more than 2 000 amendments tabled over the course of two years , but the discussions were always constructive and I thank you all sincerely for that .
Despite all the technical differences on individual issues , which are given expression in the various compromises , there is general cross-group agreement on today 's signal from the European Parliament that we wish to develop the internal market in the interests of consumers and businesses .
After all , even twenty years after the internal market was established through the Single European Act , we still find that , despite a host of directives and regulations , true standardisation has not been achieved .
The Member States have exploited their room for manoeuvre , sometimes justly , but sometimes unjustly .
The directive before us today establishes a good middle way that regulates the issues relating to the internal market , while leaving legislative decisions on all other matters to the Member States themselves .
We can go far with this mixed approach and will garner support from all sides of the House .
This has involved supporting the Commission 's proposal , while also improving it considerably at many points .
We have ensured that consumer protection is given appropriate importance in this Directive by establishing a uniform fourteen-day right of withdrawal for all online contracts on an EU-wide basis ; by giving consumers dealing with door-to-door sales the choice of whether to receive a printed copy or an electronic copy of the contract document ; by providing a ' button solution ' to bring greater transparency to Internet business and at the same time to really step up the fight against Internet scams ; and , by finally establishing uniform obligations to provide information , in particular in relation to pricing , in other words full pricing information for all Internet and door-to-door transactions .
However , we have also made the directive practicable for small and medium-sized enterprises and small contractors by providing greater flexibility and exclusions for services , in particular , in many areas ; by permitting consumers to withdraw from agreements by telephone ; by removing some opportunities for businesses to implement unfair contract terms , while at the same time setting down clear conditions for consumers for the return of ordered goods when a purchase is cancelled ; and , by finally establishing a uniform withdrawal form that will make it easier for many people throughout Europe to access and exercise their right of withdrawal .
In the end , thanks also to the process of consultation between the Member States , we will succeed in making further legal developments in this important area of consumer protection much less complicated at Council level than has been the case in the past .
The Commission will have a clear right to be heard at Council level because there can be no doubt that a common market requires common rules .
We saw this more clearly than ever during the Euro crisis .
It is not enough to espouse common principles only to allow the Member States full freedom in the end - common principles must be adhered to through common rules .
That is why this Directive aims to protect consumers .
After all , consumers will be aware of their rights if they are the same throughout Europe and will be able to pursue these rights more effectively against businesses who break the rules .
The directive also protects small and medium-sized enterprises , above all , because a uniform set of regulations engenders legal certainty , enabling the cultural and commercial diversity we so often hear about to flourish .
Thank you for your cooperation .
I look forward to the forthcoming debate .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Schwab , honourable Members , it is a great pleasure for me that we were finally able to include the debate on this proposal in the agenda .
As you know , the Council came to an agreement on the subject in December last year , and on 24 January 2011 , already during the Hungarian Presidency , the Council officially adopted its preliminary position , that is , the general approach .
In order to reach an agreement , we had to negotiate for over two years in the Council about what the ideal balance between EU and Member State legislation granting consumers ' rights would be , and which aspects of consumer rights could be harmonised accordingly .
Nothing illustrates the difficulties surrounding this proposal better than the fact that the Council working party needed more than sixty meetings to create a text that the qualified majority of the Member States could support .
Additionally , it has proven impossible to reach an agreement on chapters four and five of the Commission proposal , which concern the sale of goods and unfair contract terms , respectively .
Due to the prevailing difficulties , the Council finally decided to omit these two chapters from the text and to focus instead on off-premises and distance contracts .
This approach was also supported by the Commission , since the Council 's text creates added value with regard to such contracts at EU level .
The Presidency believes that the European Parliament could give further impetus to the debate .
This is why tomorrow 's vote on the proposed draft amendments will be so important .
If the European Parliament decides in tomorrow 's plenary sitting to refer the dossier back to the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , the Hungarian Presidency will endeavour to ensure with great commitment that an agreement is reached at first reading .
We are prepared to make every effort necessary to this end .
Naturally , a very great deal will depend on what kind of amendments Parliament proposes .
As I have already mentioned , there is a significant difference of opinion between Member States concerning the contents of chapters four and five , that is , the issue of whether certain aspects of sales terms and warranties , as well as unfair contract terms , need to be fully harmonised .
The Presidency believes that the reason why it would be necessary for us to focus on other provisions of the directive , that is , chapters one and three , is that this is where we can create true European added value .
As regards these points , the Council 's general approach does not differ significantly from Parliament 's draft amendments , which were carried by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the IMCO on 20 January and 1 February , respectively .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , we are ready to cooperate fully with Parliament and the Commission in order to achieve success .
I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the rapporteur and Chair of the IMCO Committee , Mr Harbour , and all members of the IMCO Committee for their full cooperation which they have so far provided to the Hungarian Presidency .
I do not know what the final outcome will be , and whether we will be entirely satisfied with the results of our negotiations , but I am convinced that we must not waste the opportunity to grant EU citizens consumer rights that have a far broader scope than before .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , next year we will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the single market .
We have to ensure that the single market brings benefits to consumers and to businesses .
Over two years of negotiations have shown that it is politically very difficult to reach an agreement on the whole directive on the basis of what was proposed by the Commission .
Many of you do not want to see - and rightly so - a decrease in the level of national consumer protection .
We are now well into the third year of discussion on this piece of legislation .
I believe it is high time for the co-legislators to find a solution .
In this regard , I am particularly grateful to your committees , to the rapporteurs , to Mr Schwab and Ms Wallis and to the shadow rapporteurs for their hard work in search of a compromise .
The Council agreed on a general approach at the beginning of the year .
It has decided to considerably narrow the scope of the proposal and to specifically target distant and off-premises contracts .
The Commission believes that the Council 's general approach is a good starting point in our search for a good compromise .
In broad terms , it is consistent with the aim of improving the functioning of the internal market while creating added value for consumers .
I know that , by your amendments , you seek additional improvements .
I can see many reasonable suggestions for further increases in consumer protection and , as I have said before , the Consumer Rights Directive should be a rights directive .
It should be worthy of that name .
To give you some examples : I could easily except your Amendment 122 , which ensures that consumers will not be charged for sending back goods after a withdrawal if they are worth more than EUR 40 .
I am also not opposed to the extension of the withdrawal period to one year if the consumer was not informed of his right of withdrawal ( Amendment 116 ) .
I could also support a harmonised solution for fighting so-called internet cost traps ( Paragraph 1 ( a ) and ( b ) of Amendment 107 ) .
It will not come as a surprise to you when I say that I cannot accept all your amendments which are now on the table .
For example , Amendment 141 .
Even if my goal is also to serve the internal market , it is going a step too far to oblige distance traders to supply goods or deliver services in any other Member State .
After all this time , and notwithstanding the differences which do remain , I see light at the end of the tunnel .
I am confident that an acceptable and balanced compromise is now within our reach .
I will do what I can to help you reach such a compromise .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Mr President , we have all been on a very long journey together and we are still travelling , hoping that we will reach our destination soon .
I would like to thank Mr Schwab for his work on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Over the years , we have clearly seen the difficulties posed by differing legal concepts , which form a barrier to real consumer possibilities and SME possibilities within the internal market .
We have made some progress with the agreement that we now have in Parliament .
Sadly , I think that the Legal Affairs Committee would have liked to have done more , for example in Chapter 5 on unfair terms , and particularly in the area of transparency .
Our committee would really like to make progress in that area .
I know that the Council feels that it is perhaps a step too far .
For us , however , it is a step that could be very important in terms of the internal market and , indeed , in terms of consumer rights , as you put it so well , Commissioner .
We have come a long way .
We have reviewed the consumer acquis .
We have not gone through all the directives that the Commissioner 's predecessor wanted us to review .
We may make some small steps forward .
I hope we will keep talking , that we will keep discussing .
Maybe we will produce something of worth .

rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank my colleagues for their excellent cooperation , especially Mr Schwab from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for his endless and very cooperative efforts to bring this report forward .
The Commission 's proposal left quite a lot of room for improvement .
From the ECON Committee 's perspective there are three issues which I would like to raise .
It is good that digital goods are included in the proposal .
It is good that there is a clear signal for the development of alternative dispute resolution methods in the future .
Small and / or innovative financial products should be dealt with either in specific financial sector directives or in a future consumer protection directive .
Last but not least , I would hope that the next steps taken by the Commission ensure a high level of consumer protection which could ultimately lead to full harmonisation of consumer protection regulation in the European Union .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate Mr Schwab on the work he has done so far and the excellent cooperation between the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Providing for varying degrees of harmonisation of standards will allow us to achieve important results , which will provide real added value for European citizens .
Significant among these are the fourteen-day right of withdrawal and the new rules on information requirements , not only on price but also on the identity and address of the seller .
These improvements will increase consumer confidence , especially in cross-border shopping by providing the legal certainties essential for the development of e-commerce .
This directive will also lay the foundation for other complementary measures , from the reform of European contract law to the process of reviewing alternative dispute resolution mechanisms .
This fundamental harmonisation action is an essential condition for the development of an internal market focused on the rights of its consumers and serving the citizens of the European Union .
About a year ago , Professor Monti said in his report to President Barroso : ' Consumers and consumer welfare should be at the centre of the next stage of the single market ' .
First , the law-maker should reach early agreement on the draft directive on consumer rights , to ensure a high level of protection in an integrated retail market .
This provision fully meets the demands , and I am convinced that Mr Schwab will maintain the necessary determination in the complex negotiations that will follow before the final adoption of the text .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we did indeed experience some very tough negotiations , Mr Schwab , as opinions were very divided at the start of discussions .
Likewise , it was not easy to decide on a reasonable course of action .
However , these negotiations did succeed in achieving significant improvements , even after the vote at committee level , which finally made it possible for my group to vote in favour of this compromise package tomorrow .
After all the discussions we have held , you will be aware of how much this means .
We have indeed made a number of improvements .
Accordingly , the fundamental principle followed in the directive is now , once again , minimum harmonisation - with the exception of the areas that are to be fully harmonised , which was an important concern for us .
We excluded social services , healthcare services and games of chance from the scope of this directive because these are the areas that require special regulation .
You cannot apply the same principles to them as to commercial services , commodities or retailing and so this was an important consideration .
We have significantly strengthened the obligations to provide information to our citizens , the consumers .
For this reason I would like to make it clear to the President-in-Office of the Council that the idea of dropping Chapter 2 , in other words removing exactly the areas where this obligation to provide information is to apply , is something that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament will not tolerate .
We have included electronic products in the scope of the directive , something not envisaged in the Commission 's original proposal .
However , distance selling via the Internet is one of the key areas that has been included .
As we reached the home straight , we also succeeded in improving the provisions on door-to-door selling .
These are positive improvements that have enabled us to lend our support .
I cannot deny that a few problems still exist , in particular the clauses relating to unfair contract terms in Chapter 5 . We are very dissatisfied with these provisions and will either have to do some more work here or , if necessary , omit this section entirely .
However , something that causes even more difficulty is the fact that financial services have been completely excluded from the obligations to provide information .
I think we have a serious problem here .
We will have to discuss this further , Commissioner , because financial services were included in your proposals and this should remain the case .
To summarise : we will vote in favour of the compromise package and will also vote to refer the directive back to committee , but this does not mean that we agree to adopt the directive at first reading .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this text is important .
It is not a revolution : we cannot say that everything before was bad and now everything is perfect .
Nevertheless it does offer a number of major advances at this provisional stage in our work .
To my mind , the main advances concern better regulation for distance selling , especially over the Internet ( chapter III ) , for consumer rights in this area need to be enhanced .
E-commerce is very useful : it widens consumers ' choice , allows them to find the lowest prices and also enables small and medium-sized enterprises and craftspeople to find new outlets .
To move forward in this area , we needed to do it in a genuinely European way , namely by carrying out , for a few very specific points , a complete harmonisation of everyone 's rights and duties .
In very specific terms , an Italian customer buying something on a Belgian or German website will know that from now on , he or she will enjoy the same rights and the same protection .
This is what this directive will enable .
It means that the consumer 's cooling off period will be extended to 14 days throughout the Union .
It means that he or she will know straight away the total amount to be paid , without fearing a nasty surprise later on .
It means that with the double-click , he or she will review the order correctly .
Obviously , all this is going to upset a few habits .
In many Member States , national law contains subtleties that are regarded by everyone as fundamental , when often these are nowhere to be found in neighbouring countries .
Living together in Europe is about learning to change one 's habits slightly for the benefit of Community and general interest .
Let us be clear : this text still needs to be improved and we will have to do so in the coming weeks , with the Council and with the Commission .
I welcomed the openness that has just been shown in this respect .
We have already done a substantial amount of work thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Schwab , whom I wish to thank wholeheartedly .
Yet the real achievement of this work is above all the fact that the amendments will be adopted tomorrow by all political groups .
Consumers ' confidence in the Union 's internal market is very fragile .
We needed this unanimous political support in order to preserve this confidence and to hope to strengthen it .

Mr President , I would like , firstly , to express my thanks to Mr Schwab , the rapporteur for the report under discussion , for showing such great commitment to the work on the draft of this directive .
Two and a half years of intensive work on this document have led to the achievement of a compromise , which in its final form - I hope - will guarantee greater legal certainty to the consumers of the 27 Member States in the area of distance selling , and in particular when making Internet transactions .
I hope , too , that thanks to this directive consumers will have greater confidence in cross-border trade and online purchases as a result of improvements to and harmonisation of some new rights and the greater clarity given to those which already exist .
Moreover , by standardisation of information requirements for distance and off-premises contracts , for example , the directive is also intended to encourage a greater number of traders to enter the new markets in the European Union , which should in turn improve the performance of the internal market .
I hope this will be a favourable stimulus , in particular for the popularisation of online selling .
I hope , too , that it will benefit consumers by increasing competition for them in the internal market .
I would like to highlight some of the most important matters .
Firstly , we endeavoured to draft a text which would be balanced and which would work to the advantage of consumers throughout the Union , but also one which would not have an adverse effect on traders , and in particular on the operations of small and medium-sized enterprises in the Union .
Secondly , I am pleased that we were able to negotiate a pragmatic text , with the adoption of a mixed approach of minimum and maximum harmonisation , which means , therefore , that those Member States which already have a very high level of consumer protection on some matters have not suffered .
We also managed to introduce uniform and clear provisions in specific cases , which means that transactions made over the Internet , for example , will be easier .
I am pleased , too , that in the Committee on Legal Affairs we managed to negotiate Chapter 5 on unfair contractual terms in a constructive form .
This chapter regulates contracts which are not usually individually negotiated by consumers and are often a source of many abuses on the part of dishonest traders .
I regret , however , that despite the fact that we have reached agreement , the text of the directive still contains certain shortcomings .
However , I am certain that with commitment we will be able to correct them at the next stage of negotiations and achieve specific benefits for consumers and for European traders because , after all , they must not be forgotten either .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schwab , the EU 's internal market is a cornerstone of our European cooperation and , as the Commission quite rightly wrote in its draft of the Single Market Act last year , citizens - we Europeans - must be at the centre of the work to develop the single market .
It is important to remember that when we vote on the Directive on consumer rights in Parliament tomorrow - a directive that we have now been working on for many years .
As we all know , the text that we are to vote on tomorrow has been comprehensively revised in relation to the draft that we received from the Commission in the autumn of 2008 , as here in Parliament our focus has been on those areas where common EU rules will be of real benefit to both consumers and businesses .
In turn , we wanted to allow the Member States to produce additional legislation where that makes sense .
In specific terms , this means that European consumers will notice changes first and foremost when they shop on the Internet in foreign online shops .
The new directive will mean that there are uniform rules for Internet trading in Europe , and that brings a number of advantages for consumers .
Allow me to mention just three examples . Firstly , all consumers in Europe will have a 14-day withdrawal period when they buy something in an online shop in an EU Member State .
Secondly , the overall price of the product must be specified before a consumer agrees to purchase a product .
Thirdly , it has to be possible to contact the seller easily if problems arise .
A fourth aspect that was very important to us in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance was to future-proof this Directive .
A product is not only something that we can physically touch - these days it also includes intellectual goods .
This could be an item of software or a piece of music that we download .
I am therefore very pleased that digital products have now been included in the text .
The proposal that will be voted on tomorrow , and which the Group of the Greens is able to support , is not a perfect piece of legislation .
We wanted a broader , more ambitious directive , and we wanted to see progress in all areas .
However , politics is also about the art of the possible , and this is what is possible right now .
Overall , I believe that Parliament has achieved a reasonable result that will benefit consumers in Europe .
Mr President , as a political group , we established the principle of preventing any reduction in consumer rights in the European Union from the outset .
Although very ambitious , the Commission 's initial proposal was unable to meet the needs of all consumers in the European Union .
That is why a red line was drawn through the proposal for a fully harmonised directive , when it became clear that it would equate to a lower level of protection for EU consumers .
There are two especially important elements in Parliament 's proposal for the directive .
We have before us a completely new proposal by Parliament , very different from that proposed by the Commission and with a different outlook from the Council .
The nucleus of this proposal is a mixed approach in terms of harmonisation , leaving the Member States free , if they so choose , to set a higher level of consumer protection .
The second point has to do with exemptions from the scope of the directive .
We insisted from the outset that social services , health services and gambling should be exempted from the scope of this directive , as they have nothing to do with the relationship between trader and consumer and take a different approach .
We are satisfied that this was taken into account .
Support for Parliament 's proposal does not under any circumstances signal unconditional support for the Commission proposal .
On the contrary , we are seeking a strong cohesive position and we call on the Commission and the Council to take very serious account of the nucleus of Parliament 's proposal , especially as regards the degree of harmonisation and other provisions for sales contracts .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , customer rights is only one of many examples of how European institutions have enormous difficulty in performing acts of great legal and political importance at this historic moment .
We do not want to waste all the work done and the positive things achieved , for example , the contribution of our amendment on the right of recourse , aiming to introduce a distinct improvement in the activity of small traders without harming consumer rights .
If the outcome of negotiations with the Council will be to cancel out the good things that the rapporteur and the groups introduced in a proposal that was bad from the outset , or whether the outcome will be to raise the general level of harmonisation of the Directive , we will have no option but to vote against it .
In any case , the responsibility for this situation lies not with Parliament but with the European Commission .
Over certain issues , we eurosceptics in the Northern League are ready to say yes to a high degree of harmonisation , but only when it coincides with common sense , the public interest , the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises , and why not , the prerogatives of Member States .
An approach that takes account of all this was needed from the outset for an issue as complex as consumer protection .
We welcome the withdrawal of many amendments that called into question issues that had been resolved .
It is essential that the Council should accept the text that leaves the Chamber in full if it is compliant with the agreed amendments .
( DE ) Mr President , sometimes it is made more difficult for consumers to understand the consequences of their actions , for example , when they download digital content .
Everyone is used to downloading content from the net free of charge .
However , in some cases the charges are concealed from consumers and , therefore , they download a subscription without realising it , despite the fact that they only wanted a one-off service .
What is needed here is a legal right of withdrawal .
Another area which is open to criticism is the combination of distance and door-to-door sales , because it is much easier for people to be taken unawares on their own front doorstep .
On the other hand , we must not impose unnecessary burdens on small and medium-sized enterprises with regard to off-premises contracts .
For example , when consumers invite a tradesman or a hairdresser into their house of their own accord , they have no need of increased protection , because there is no question of them being taken by surprise .
Therefore , we need sensible , wide-ranging protection for consumers , but it is also important for us to take the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises into consideration .
Mr President , the compromise we have in front of us is a very good step in the right direction .
I welcome the consensus we have reached on the right to withdraw and on an information requirement for distance and off-premises contracts .
However , we must have the courage to go further , in particular on remedies for lack of conformity , guarantees and unfair clauses .
I have listened carefully to the arguments for years , but my vision has been and remains full harmonisation .
I am convinced that common rules are win-win for consumers and business .
Transparency , legal certainty and competition increase free choice for the consumer and decrease red tape for business .
The challenge is to strike the right balance .
For high consumer protection and low costs for business the Consumer Rights Directive should not become a tug of war between market and people .
Nor should we live under a false assumption that national rules protect consumers , while common European rules benefit business .
That picture is wrong .
There is no way round the fact that extra costs for SMEs will become extra costs for consumers .
Throughout the process the PPE Group has been flexible and constructive .
The left has been rigid and obstructive , reducing the debate to a nitpicking exercise of comparative law , bargaining between national rules .
I believe instead that the common interest of the European people should prevail .
Minimum harmonisation and national exceptions , as advocated by the Social Democrats , simply hinder citizens from taking full advantage of a common market .
At a time of crisis , faced with rising protectionism , it is as easy as it is irresponsible to be populist .
I fully support Andreas Schwab in his wonderful job and I wish him well in the negotiations ahead .
I conclude by saying that the Consumer Rights Direcive is a milestone in the relaunch of the single market to inject confidence , to boost growth , competitiveness and the jobs that the European people are looking forward to .
( ES ) Mr President , there are fundamental points that still require improvement , so we have to send the report back to committee .
The parliamentary passage of this report is not over , therefore .
The initial draft was a bad one .
That is what consumers ' associations at national and European level told us .
In particular , I have a high opinion of the Asturias Consumers ' Union and its President , the tireless Dacio Alonso .
We have managed to have the old Article 4 's general principle of the maximum possible harmonisation reconsidered .
We must state very loudly that establishing the maximum possible harmonisation across the Member States would reduce the protection of many consumers , since in many countries there is a greater tradition of protecting consumer rights .
In any case , I should like to stress that it is essential to ensure that the list of unfair contract terms not be exhaustive , meaning that each Member State could increase the number of clauses that it considers unacceptable and invalid in contracts with consumers ; that the burden of proof be reversed so that it becomes the trader that has to demonstrate that terms outside the norm have been negotiated individually ; and that contract terms be expressed in a clear and comprehensible way .
We remain opposed to the establishment of the maximum possible harmonisation as regards unfair terms .
Eurobarometer indicates that 79 % of traders believe that full harmonisation in this field will have little or no effect on their foreign activities .
Mr President , I think you will find that I have two and a half minutes , because not all my colleagues are here .
As Chair of the committee , I first of all want to pay tribute to all the Members who have worked on this .
I am pleased that they are all here this evening , led by Andreas Schwab , with a very strong team of shadow members who displayed really intense interest and expertise in this whole complicated area .
I think that it is right , as Viviane Reding says , that the co-legislators now have to move forward and make some decisions .
The time this has taken is an indication of the political difficulties , both on the Council 's side and on Parliament 's side .
I think that Parliament , as in many dossiers in the past , has shown that it has the ability to broker a compromise .
I think that Parliament should vote on the amendments tomorrow , send a clear political signal about what we want , and then refer this back to committee .
I want to thank the Presidency and Ms Győri , who has been a most active advocate for the Presidency , for being open to our position as a result of that change .
That does not mean that we are in any way committed to moving forward and closing those negotiations .
However , we owe it to citizens and consumers to hold , at the very least , an open meeting to see if there is some basis for agreement .
I think all colleagues are in tune with that .
Looking at what we have here , I would say , first of all , that I admire Ms Corazza Bildt 's enthusiasm , but I do not really see this Consumer Rights Directive as a milestone .
Frankly I think it is more a stepping stone , because there are still plenty of difficult waters around where we are treading at the moment .
I think it is a first cautious step towards dealing with harmonisation on issues that cause great emotion and a lot of political agitation .
Understandably , consumers and consumer organisations in different countries do not like to see rights taken away .
I think that has been one of the biggest problems we have faced .
I think we have a compromise that adds real value for consumers and for businesses , particularly in the areas of internet and cross-border trade .
We must sustain those and also certain other areas , but my final word to the Commissioner is this : we desperately need a framework within which to make progress towards more harmonisation .
We have a whole series of fragmented initiatives , including your work on consumer contracts , and other revisions .
We desperately need that long-term strategic approach that will complete the stepping stones towards the milestone .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by thanking Mr Schwab for the work he has put into this draft .
He probably knows better than anyone that it was not an easy task .
During our work on the directive we have often emphasised how important it is for consumers , but it is also important for trade , and in particular for e-commerce and cross-border purchases .
What consumers making online purchases want above all is a guarantee that the goods or services they have ordered will be supplied to them , and that they will correspond to the stated quality .
We should therefore guarantee that regulations protecting consumers are clear and transparent .
During this debate , however , we should not forget about traders , who expect regulations which do not place an excessive burden on them .
Have we managed to reconcile the interests of consumers with the interests of traders during our work on this directive ?
The discussions which have being going on for nearly two years have in my opinion brought us closer to this goal , but we have not yet achieved it .
I believe that European consumers would benefit much more from a maximum level of regulatory harmonisation .
It would make life much easier for companies operating in the field of e-commerce .
I am however pleased that in respect of several key issues we have managed to find solutions which ideally meet consumers ' needs , while at the same time making allowances for the realities of doing business .
As an example , I would like to mention the provisions stipulating a 14-day deadline for consumers to withdraw from a contract , and I also welcome the amendment giving traders the opportunity to make refunds dependent on the consumer supplying proof of postage .
This is an essential feature of the directive , indicating that in certain cases there are also obligations incumbent upon consumers , as well as upon traders .
Finally , I would like to encourage the Council and the European Commission to try to find an ambitious agreement .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , as well as all the shadow rapporteurs , in particular Mrs Gebhardt , for their work .
The Commission 's initial proposal was indeed absurd , as it endangered the level of consumer protection by wanting to harmonise it completely .
This is only justifiable so long as harmonisation is upwards and not downwards , as proposed .
Therefore I welcome most of the compromises reached , which leave the possibility for Member States to apply stricter rules if they so wish , while guaranteeing a high minimum level for all consumers in the Union .
Thus , maximum contract duration is limited to 12 months , information on distance contracts or telesales contracts is improved , with payment being required only when the cooling-off period , set at 14 days , has expired .
On the other hand , it is unacceptable to keep full harmonisation regarding chapter V , relating to unfair terms .
Not only is the chosen level of protection unsatisfactory , it is also tantamount to ignoring the reality of fraudulent practices , since these require a level of responsiveness that European legislation cannot offer .
That being the case , taking away all room for manoeuvre from Member States in this area seems like an irresponsible move .
Consequently I hope that the colegislators manage to come up with a balanced text which guarantees a genuine and common core of high-level protection .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I would first like to express my thanks and to applaud the work of Andreas Schwab , who has handled the 1 600 amendments so skilfully , achieving sensible compromise forms for the report .
I am pleased that he has managed to retain the two fundamental principles of the original Commission proposal : the principle of ' better regulation ' by simplifying and updating the rules so as to eliminate the barriers on the internal market encountered every day by entrepreneurs doing business in EU countries , and the second principle of achieving the greatest possible harmonisation in consumer law , eliminating the many exemptions applied by individual states .
Despite the fact that we failed in the end to agree on full harmonisation in all chapters of the directive , this new arrangement will be a very significant step forwards , involving the elimination of barriers to cross-border trade and , in the final analysis , greater competition on the internal market .
( DE ) Mr President , I am afraid that I am going to be the person to pour cold water on this .
Despite the many improvements to the Commission proposal that were introduced during the consultation with the committees , for which we mainly have the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , to thank , in my opinion the current package contains an excessive number of regulations and will result in over-complex legislation .
This will be very difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular to cope with .
In addition , it will not really benefit consumers , it will have very little effect in terms of harmonisation and it will not allow us to make progress with the internal market and with Europe as a business location .
Given the small amount of time available , I can unfortunately only look at one point .
The Commission proposal has massively extended the scope of two definitions and in this case it has gone much too far , which is clear from the fact that 1 600 amendments have been tabled .
It has been difficult to discuss this sensibly in Parliament .
In addition , the Commission has not given any justification for extending these definitions .
Nowhere in the annexes or in the documents submitted to Parliament is there any form of justification for this .
One of the two cases concerns distance sales contracts .
Thankfully , this extension has been returned to the consultation process and has been amended , which is a very welcome move .
However , the second case relates to off-premises contracts , which I would like to look at here .
In future , any contract which is concluded outside a company 's business premises will be subject to a whole raft of regulations and rights of withdrawal , even if the consumer , as Mr Obermayr has just mentioned , has asked an electrician , decorator , painter or carpenter and so on to come into his house .
I am aware that there is a whole series of exceptions to this which you , Mr Schwab , and the committee have improved , both in terms of their content and their wording .
Nevertheless , this still leaves a huge number of legal pitfalls in place , which could prove disastrous for micro-businesses and small tradesmen and could even put their very existence at risk .
In my opinion , this part of the proposal is superfluous .
It could be deleted without causing any problems , together with chapter 4 and chapter 5 .
In that case , the rest of the proposal and the consultations would not be bad at all .
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , and the shadow socialist rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt .
I wish to thank them and , at the same time , to praise them , because they demonstrated a great deal of persistence and a great deal of patience in bringing us to the point that we have reached in the debate today and which , I think , provides a very good working basis for Commissioner Reding , whose words , in my opinion , give us reason to be optimistic .
I personally consider than minimum harmonisation is a very good and , at the same time , a very pragmatic working basis .
I come from a State , Greece , which has achieved a very high level of protection for consumer rights .
As you will understand , I would not want this high level of consumer protection to be compromised .
I admit that I was very concerned when Mr Schwab spoke - and this was the first I had heard of it - of maximum harmonisation .
I remembered something I had read in a magazine : someone tried to make the most beautiful woman using an actress 's eyes , a singer 's nose and another actress 's mouth .
The result was monstrous .
I make this analogy in order to demonstrate that we can start with the best intentions and fail to achieve the desired result .
That is why I consider that minimum harmonisation is the right working basis .

( FR ) Mr President , I should first like to pay tribute to the work by our rapporteur , Mr Schwab , which enables us today to reach a broad consensus across all political groups on this text , despite it getting off to a bad start .
Yes , Europe should be synonymous with progress and practical achievements , and we see this with these proposals concerning consumers .
Europeans , from now on , will be entitled to the right to withdraw from the contract when they purchase items on online auction platforms such as eBay .
We have succeeded in presenting a text that will , on the one hand , strengthen the framework conditions for increasing cross-border trade within the European Union , and , on the other , save us from having to lower the level of consumer protection in Member States ; on the contrary , the latter will be increased .
First of all , I subscribe to the view that in order to consolidate our exit from the recession , we have to create new sources of growth , and that thanks to the simplification and rationalisation of European law , our businesses will be able to benefit more fully from the potential of the single market .
Did you know that only 22 % of purchases in Europe are cross-border ones ?
Providing a better regulatory framework for businesses is therefore also about contributing to economic recovery .
When negotiating this text , we wanted to take an ambitious yet pragmatic approach .
The principle was simple : no harmonisation without an equivalent level of protection .
This is the reason why I am delighted that we have been able to keep certain aspects of national laws which the consumers of one or other Member State are very keen on .
As far as we are concerned in France , our consumers can continue to take advantage of the protection offered by the ' latent defect ' guarantee or the preservation of our very protective legislation for door-to-door selling .
Furthermore , we are showing today that the European Parliament , right-wing and left-wing parties together , is capable of responding to people 's day-to-day concerns , and I welcome that .
The solution is of course more Europe , but not any kind .
We need a Europe that protects , a Europe that reassures and a Europe that provides opportunities to Europeans , to citizens , to consumers and to businesses .
- ( CS ) Mr President , in times gone by , the slogan that the ' customer is king ' held true , lifetime guarantees were not the exception , and quality was a matter of honour .
Today 's world is evidently different .
Today we must think about the rights of consumer , protection for consumers , and the legislation that will secure this .
Customer satisfaction , it seems , is no longer always the best commercial policy , and there are almost too many examples from everyday life suggesting rather the opposite .
That is why it is so important to have a thorough debate on this legislation , which must not bring about a deterioration in consumer rights , but will have to respond to new challenges .
We need to realise how different the starting points of the various EU countries are in respect of consumer rights .
Our aim should be to enhance consumer protection in those places where legal chaos and uncertainty have prevailed so far , attracting a variety of crooks and undermining confidence in the internal market .
On the other hand , we must retain a high level of consumer protection in those places where it already exists in an effective form .
This is the basic approach taken by the Consumer Rights Directive , and I therefore fully support the position of my group .
I would also like to thank all the rapporteurs , of course , for the extensive work they have carried out .
Consumer protection is really not against the interests of honest businessmen .
Quite the opposite is true .

( PT ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Schwab on the persistence in negotiations that he has brought to this important compromise , and I would also pay tribute to all those who worked alongside him on this report .
We not only wish to ensure a higher level of protection for European consumers , but also that European companies , whatever their size , should be able to provide consumers in all 27 Member States with goods and services without unnecessary legal obstacles .
This new directive will put an end to the legislative fragmentation that has been damaging the participation in the cross-border market and will give the internal market a significant boost .
I stress the new provisions relating to the supply of information to the consumer : this information needs to be clear , intelligible and provided in good time .
It is also important that the burden of proving compliance with information requirements falls on the trader .
The rules regarding distance contracts , especially those concluded over the telephone or the Internet , will have to be set out and the consumer protected using simple , effective mechanisms .
We are sure that , when the institutional negotiations have finished , the new directive will contribute to making the European Union more competitive and dynamic , as can be expected in a global economy .
( ES ) Mr President , achieving a Consumer Rights Direcive , so establishing a horizontal instrument that will simplify , summarise and complement the four already-existing directives , is positive .
An internal market characterised by a high level of consumer protection is key to sustainable growth and employment .
To achieve it in accordance with the Treaty , the Member States must not be prevented from adopting measures that increase consumer protection .
Therefore , full harmonisation should only be used on those aspects necessary to achieve a consistent framework for cross-border transactions , in order to add value .
There is a broad consensus in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs that financial services must form an integral part of this regulation in order to make it truly horizontal , that it should be coordinated with sectoral legislation at EU and national level so that there are no gaps , and that specialist advice should be sought .
This guideline is not satisfactorily reflected in the text so it needs to be fine-tuned before the final vote .
We still also have yet to make progress toward a European Consumers ' Charter in the field of financial services .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let us thank Mr Schwab for the valuable work he has put forward .
Uniform consumer protection rules , and concepts that mean the same everywhere , give citizens confidence and at the same time guarantee increased legal certainty .
All this matters most to those citizens and enterprises who wish to freely exercise their rights in commerce in the internal market .
The rapporteur 's proposal that the minimum level of harmonisation in consumer protection should be accompanied by the full harmonisation of technical rules is the only acceptable regulatory solution in the present situation .
The combination of minimum and full harmonisation can become an option that is acceptable for everyone .
The currently existing barriers to cross-border transactions hinder traders ' and customers ' activities across Member State borders .
Statistics show that many are still averse to EU purchases over the Internet , and it would be welcome if we could change this , too .
Furthermore , I would like to say , and here I am thinking mainly of Central and Eastern European Member States , that there is a great need for a comprehensive and constructive regulatory framework .
A system founded on more transparent , common rules enhances consumer awareness , which is not yet fully mature in this region , but has been known in Western Europe for a long time .
A developed consumer protection policy is also a means of supporting SMEs .
We must therefore be cautious not to complicate their situation through legislation that is too strict .
A more precise definition of traders ' information obligations is a key aspect , which would contribute to increasing the number of market transactions that comply with the law and are fair from a commercial perspective .
It is no coincidence that the Hungarian Presidency , too , considers this proposal for a directive as one of the priorities for its six-month term .
It is symbolic and a signal that Parliament put this report on its agenda a couple of days after World Consumer Rights Day .
By making the right decision , we can make life easier for nearly 500 million consumers and 22 million enterprises on the internal market of the European Union .

( GA ) Mr President , firstly may I congratulate Mr Schwab and his colleagues for the good work they have done for over two years now .
Undoubtedly it has been a great achievement on their part .
May I also commend Mrs Győri from the Hungarian Presidency : she is very enthusiastic , is here all day and is always in Strasbourg as well .
I do not think that I have seen anyone else as enthusiastic as her so far .
This is about the internal market , harmonisation , adding value : all very important .
It is not the final product , but it is a work in progress : particularly noteworthy are things such as the right of withdrawal , unfair contract terms and particularly the flexibility clauses which give flexibility to national governments .
If we had the same in other directives such as the EGAF , they would work better .
Finally , I just want to say that it complements work such as the Services Directive and the Data Protection Directive which I am working on .
Therefore it is good progress .
( GA ) I commend Mr Schwab for bringing the work to completion .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , please allow me to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , and Mrs Gebhardt on the work they have done .
I have a general thought .
It is not that protectionism is increasing , but rather that it is a case of not removing rights that already exist in some of the Member States .
This is because if we want to set up a genuine internal market for relationships between companies and consumers and are pursuing that , we must establish , at the same time , a balance between a high level of protection for consumer rights and defence of companies ' competitiveness .
This balance involves agreeing on a minimum level of harmonisation , as well as the possibility of allowing the Member States to keep or adopt any additional regulations that improve consumer protection .
We cannot allow the adoption of EU legislation to mean that many consumers and users end up with less protection .
I welcome the fact that negotiations in the European Parliament have improved , but I should like to insist that already-established rights not be removed .

Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Schwab and his team of rapporteurs for opinions and shadow rapporteurs for their very good work on this report .
It took a long time to choose a line that would be balanced enough for both consumers and businesses .
I welcome the overall compromise that has been agreed by all political groups and I believe that this is an important step forward for all consumers in the European Union .
There are significant improvements such as the provision of clear information requirements in contracts , and the harmonisation of the provisions on the right of withdrawal .
Of course it is a compromise , it is not perfect .
An example is Article 22a which obliges the trader to deliver in other Member States .
There are products and services which due to their nature should not be covered here , namely perishable goods .
Problems might also arise with digital products .
The initial intention of promoting cross-border business is very important and is very good , and I really hope that during the forthcoming negotiations with the Council we will manage to make these adjustments to achieve an optimal result .
( RO ) Mr President , I think that every consumer should have the right to receive information prior to signing the contract .
Retailers should inform consumers and obtain their consent , including in any circumstance where an amount is stopped on their credit or debit card .
It is also important for us to protect consumers against unfair contractual terms .
Unfortunately , in the case of banking services , insurance , electronic communication services or tourist services , the contractual clauses are very often written overleaf in tiny letters .
However , customers very frequently sign the registration form or invoice without even reading the contractual clauses overleaf .
Even in cases where customers read all the contractual clauses and state that they disagree with one of them , they do not have any negotiating power .
In this instance , the first response the consumer receives is that there is a standard company contract and it cannot be amended .
National consumer protection authorities should check these standard contracts to protect consumers against unfair terms .
- ( CS ) Mr President , I would like to thank Andreas Schwab for an excellent piece of work , and for supporting my proposals .
The fact that consumers are acquiring the right , under certain conditions , to the supply of goods and services ordered via the Internet to every Member State , marks a significant change in online shopping .
One third of sellers refuse to supply goods across borders , particularly to the new Member States .
I also believe that the Council will adopt our compromise version , including my proposals regarding an obligation to indicate the interoperability of computer equipment and electronics , the readability of contractual terms , the rights of consumers in organised sales tours and the option for Member States to extend consumer rights , including guarantees , to voluntary organisations and small businesses .
The significance of this directive is clear .
Equipping the European consumer with unequivocal rights is the best way to bring about fair internal trade in the EU .
( RO ) Mr President , according to the EU 2020 Strategy , a high level of consumer protection guarantees high-quality products , but it also guarantees consumer confidence , thereby making the internal markets more effective .
With regard to consumer rights , the current minimum regulation offers all Member States the freedom to adapt EU regulations to national principles , and I think that this approach must be maintained .
The European Union can facilitate better harmonisation of the internal market with a high level of consumer protection by raising the current minimum level of harmonisation up to the level of the best existing national practices .
I believe that the European system of liability for lack of conformity must be fair so that consumer protection and confidence in the markets are improved , thereby increasing the service life of products .
( HU ) Mr President , the European consumer rules currently in force follow a principle of minimum harmonisation .
They give Member States the option for derogations , while all this also represents a competitive disadvantage for the EU .
It is to my satisfaction that Mr Schwab prepared such an excellent report .
After several years of negotiating , the moment has come to reach an agreement on this matter , and , as Minister Győri has said , the Hungarian Presidency will also strive for this .
In order to reduce the fragmentation of the EU internal market we need a stronger enforcement of consumer rights , and to enable consumers to take better decisions without putting enterprises at a disadvantage due to the new legislation .
The single internal market requires single European consumer rules .
It is therefore important that we reach an agreement at first reading .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , that was a very constructive debate in this Chamber , I must say , with all benches agreeing that we need to have a better , more constructive , more efficient Consumer Rights Directive than we have today - and also agreeing that while we might not have the perfect one , at least it is better than the existing one which is far from perfect , as everybody agrees .
I have also rarely seen such unanimity as there has been today in the House in praising the rapporteur Andreas Schwab and his co-rapporteurs .
I hope that this unanimity will continue , because we are now entering into a very original process , and there is a very short timespan during which we can try to achieve this better legislation that all the Members who have taken the floor from all the political parties want to have .
Accordingly I encourage you to give your rapporteurs this report as the starting-point for negotiations .
I know the Hungarian Presidency will do everything in its power to bring this original proceeding to a positive conclusion .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to join those who said that this has been an excellent debate .
It has been a very constructive debate and , on behalf of the Hungarian Presidency and our experts , we would like to thank you for your support , and I hope that we will be able to continue further consultations in the same atmosphere .
Let me address some specific questions that were raised in the debate .
Many have urged for the regulation of the lists of unfair contract terms .
We agree with the European Parliament in that there would be added value in having a list at European level .
However , although the legislation in force contains an indicative list of examples , added value would in fact be in the creation of a single European list .
There is not yet sufficient support for this in the Council , however , and this is one of the reasons why the Council decided to omit the issue .
There were some who asked , although Mrs Gáll-Pelcz answered this one for me , why it would be necessary for us to reach an agreement at first reading .
As it has been said , we began negotiations in October 2008 , during the French Presidency .
Over the course of two and a half years we held more than sixty working party meetings , and we therefore consider that there are no more possibilities for adjustment in order to resolve the blocking minorities , and that is why we had to decide on a significant narrowing of the scope of the directive to distance and off-premises contracts .
The narrowed scope and thus the targeted harmonisation will , I am convinced , lead to a more rapid agreement , and I do not see what added value could come forth from continuing and having a second reading .
The preliminary position of the European Parliament is in several respects close to the general approach of the Council , and I therefore believe that we should not , and urge us all not to waste this opportunity to have an agreement at first reading .
I liked Mr Harbour 's comment on whether the current situation is a stepping stone or a milestone .
If we want to be realistic - and I am not a person who likes to exaggerate - I think it is a stepping stone , not a milestone .
It could have been a milestone , but the conditions were simply not right .
We can see it as a stepping stone when we consider the interests of our citizens and our consumers .
We all know that there are very different legal conditions in the Member States .
Fuller harmonisation at this stage would not have been possible .
It is much better to have a smaller scope and be able to have an agreement .
This will really help increase consumers ' rights and therefore also help us move towards completion of the single market .
Mr President , the question of whether or not this is a milestone is one which could be discussed at great length .
It is clear , for example , that the founders of the European Community , such as Altiero Spinelli , whom we have named our group meeting room after today , were able to deal with more fundamental questions in Europe .
However , I am convinced that nowadays progress in Europe takes the form of small , constructive steps .
For this reason , I would like to thank all the Members who have taken part in the discussion and who have made this compromise possible as a result of their contributions to the amendments .
A compromise is always an opportunity to achieve a balance between different interests .
No one will be completely happy , but everyone will be prepared to improve the approach that has been taken even further .
This is why I believe that we are on the right track .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Vice-President of the Commission , Mrs Reding , for her ongoing commitment and for her support and encouragement both today in this debate and in many other meetings .
I hope that we can continue to count on her during the consultations with the Council .
I would like to thank the committee chair , Mr Harbour , for his patience with the rapporteur and the other members of the committee , together with Mr Lehne , the chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
In the case of the Council , I would like Mrs Győri , a former Member of this House , to understand in her role as President-in-Office of the Council that the European Parliament may be obliged to amend the proposal which has thankfully been adopted by the Council on 24 January .
In some areas we would like to go further and , therefore , in the next few weeks we will be holding constructive discussions in order to find a positive solution . Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome what is being done to strengthen consumer rights in the EU .
I also support the proposed measures for facilitating cross-border trade , and the measures for clarifying EU rules on consumer protection in order to eliminate the current uncertainty .
Transparency and better information for businesses and consumers would greatly contribute to consumer confidence in the market , and this would encourage economic growth .
That said , however , I am quite worried about some of the measures and their impact on small and medium-sized enterprises .
While these businesses are certainly in favour of measures that would create a clearer legal framework and complement existing consumer protection mechanisms , some of them are worried that some of the new provisions could impact on the day-to-day running of enterprises .
Such measures can greatly increase red tape and the unnecessary administrative burden .
In protecting consumers , we must be sure that we do not finish off the enterprises and services that cater to those consumers .
in writing . - ( CS ) The proposed Consumer Rights Directive harmonises into one legal document a total of four directives dealing with off-premises contracts , unreasonable terms in consumer contracts , consumer protection in distance contracts and certain aspects of the selling of consumer goods and guarantees .
The aim of merging these four directives is to enhance the internal market and promote cross-border trade .
A high level of consumer protection will enhance product quality and increase consumer confidence , thereby boosting the efficiency of the internal market .
We must reject the attempt to stipulate a strict two-year guarantee period , because this provision would weaken consumer protection in many states , as these Member States would have to reduce the guarantee period in their national law , thereby weakening the position of the consumer .
The objective of boosting consumer confidence in cross-border purchases , where consumers feel the greatest barriers in terms of language problems , lack of confidence in the payment system and the unwillingness of business to trade across borders , is correct .
The criticism from the rapporteur of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who regrets the fact that the bill fails to take account of new products emerging through changes in product development and innovation , for example digital products , is quite correct .
In the area of entertainment and consumer electronics , products which include software and other intangible services are becoming increasingly common .
in writing . - ( SK ) The lack of unity between existing laws and standards is often a disincentive for consumers and businesses who are considering participating in cross-border trade .
Consumers and businesses encounter obstacles in relation to the differences in market conditions .
There is a need for extensive harmonisation of the contract in question , with a view to retaining a high level of consumer rights protection in particular .
In addition to sectoral variations , the scope of the directive would be limited mainly to off-premises contracts .
It is these contracts that account for the greatest number of cross-border transactions .
Also the issue as to whether a given contract is subject to the harmonised rules depends mainly on the wording of the defined terms .
Some of these are often deficient and unsatisfactory from a legal perspective .
There is a real need to ensure that consumers in all EU Member States are guaranteed a high level of consumer protection and for them to be able to have goods supplied and provided without unnecessary legal obstacles .
This would help to boost consumer confidence , and also to make businesses more interested in cross-border transactions .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am anxious to thank Mr Schwab and the shadow rapporteurs for their work .
The Commission 's initial proposal was unacceptable because it intended to harmonise fully the rules concerning consumer rights , without systematically bringing them into line with the most favourable national legislation .
In other words , many Member States would have had to remove from their national legislation provisions that in fact granted better protection to consumers .
In France , two major acquis would have to be abandoned as a result : the ' latent defect ' rule and the ruling that a doorstep seller is prohibited from collecting payment before the end of the cooling-off period .
However my socialist colleagues and I succeeded in getting this approach altered and in making minimum harmonisation the norm .
We also managed to enhance consumer rights on a whole range of points , in particular concerning information that has to be provided by the seller and provisions pertaining to the cooling-off period .
One problem remains however : chapter V. We cannot accept that the rules on unfair terms be fully harmonised , because that would deprive Member States of their ability to react when faced with commercial practices that change daily and sometimes involve serious risks for consumers .
in writing . - Studies from the Commission show that one in three EU citizens purchase goods online , but only 7 % do cross-border online shopping .
Thirty-three per cent would be interested in buying cross-border .
The field is still unregulated and it is complicated to purchase goods online , especially with regard to delivery and transaction costs .
The proposal for a directive on consumer rights aims to reduce the complications for online actions .
I very much welcome improved rights for consumers purchasing online .
We need to have full information on the traders , with their names , addresses and contact details .
The rules across the EU need to be harmonised , so that we do not face unpleasant surprises and extra costs .
I welcome the harmonisation of the right of withdrawal within 14 days .
We have to protect the consumers , but we also have to boost the economy .
I fully support the rapporteur 's efforts to balance this .
Implementing the consumers ' rights directive is one aspect of the problem , with full integration and implementation of single digital market , the EU 's internal market and the services directive being another issue .
The EU and its Member States have to focus on both .
The adoption of the new harmonised European Consumer Rights Directive is certainly one of the more important pillars for a better functioning internal market .
The harmonised directive , which brings together a number of directives relating to consumer rights , will considerably simplify the legal framework , help increase consumer confidence and encourage cross-border trade .
In order to make trade , or the supply chain , more transparent , especially in e-commerce , we need to ensure that traders ' contact details are available so that the consumer is able to contact them directly if necessary .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's proposals to this effect .
The directive is quite a balanced one from the point of view of consumers and entrepreneurs , and it is flexible enough to accommodate differences between the Member States .
Full consumer protection legislation is still not a reality in the European Union .
Nevertheless , this is a big step towards better consumer protection and trade .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has for many years been consistently emphasising that consumer protection and the completion of the internal market are not conflicting objectives and that they , in fact , go hand in hand .
This horizontal instrument codifies and clarifies the rights and obligations of consumers and traders throughout the EU .
It also indicates that the EU is serious about meeting the needs of the most vulnerable consumers .
Existing shortcomings in the field of online or cross-border purchases will largely be eliminated .
This will create opportunities , not only for consumers , but also for our SMEs , which will , from now on , find it easier to benefit from the scale advantages of the internal market .
However , if we want the best for our SMEs , we should not impose any unnecessary burdens on them .
We therefore need to make SME-friendly amendments to the Commission proposal .
Europe should not settle for anything less than ' cum laude ' in the SME exam .
in writing . - ( IT ) Our supermarkets are located further and further away from home and we are less and less likely to wander around the shelves , with a product in our hands , surrounded by the smells of fresh food and people 's comments .
Our purchases are increasingly remote and the Internet has now completely changed our habits , partly because our lives have become increasingly frenetic .
This is a specific , tangible manifestation of something that textbooks refer to as the ' global economy ' .
What is the difference between the Internet and the supermarket ?
On the Internet you cannot stop to ask the shopkeeper for advice about what there is to choose between one product and another or even go back to the supermarket if there is something wrong with your product and pick up another from the shelf , after showing your receipt to the cashier .
That is why the European Consumer Rights Directive is fundamental due to the obligations it imposes over product information and due to the rules it imposes over defective products , which must be replaced , repaired or reduced in price , to ensure that protection for online sales no less strong than that for on-the-spot sales throughout Europe .
In my opinion , the Consumer Rights Directive is one of the most important legislative texts we will debate in the first half of this year .
Better access to information and greater consumer protection are particularly important issues , for example for the development of the online market and for economic growth throughout the EU .
The online market is still developing relatively slowly in Europe in comparison with the United States , for example , and my home country - Poland - takes only 17th place among the EU Member States in this regard .
Only 23 % of Polish consumers make purchases over the Internet , and a lack of confidence appears to be one of the main reasons for this .
One of the most controversial points in the proposal for a directive is the extent to which regulations should be harmonised .
I am pleased that the rapporteur from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection agreed with the arguments put forward by my group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , criticising the European Commission 's goal of full harmonisation , which would make it impossible in reality for Member States to adopt higher standards than those provided for in the directive .
I believe that countries wishing to maintain higher standards should have the opportunity to do so .
in writing . - Unfortunately the rights of consumers purchasing industrial or food products are better protected than those of users of transport , medical care or education services .
This is because it is difficult to prove that the service rendered was of poor quality .
For example , the Latvian airline Air Baltic , 51 % of which belongs to the state , currently enjoys a monopoly .
This leads to abuses in terms of passenger service and service supply .
The director of the company , Mr Flick , has not seen fit to respond to questions from MEPs and simply ignores complaints from the general public .
Air Baltic , with its machinations , is trying to make a fool of the European Parliament .
It is selling business-class tickets for aircraft on which business-class service is not provided .
In parallel , Air Baltic is concealing frequent cases of aircraft malfunctions and thus continues to risk the lives of thousands of passengers .
It is necessary to establish an enquiry committee to look into the practices of Air Baltic , otherwise the results could be tragic .
in writing . - ( FI ) The Commission 's original basic proposal was fairly problematic from the point of view of both consumers and companies .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job , though , as a result of which important steps can be taken towards more consistent consumer protection in the development of the internal market without compromising on a high level of consumer protection .
Hopefully , this will promote crossborder distance sales .
We have to remember , however , that there are many other factors that are still hindering the growth in ecommerce in Europe .
In the future , we will have to work , for example , to speed up payments traffic and make the collection of crossborder payments a more effective exercise , allowing small and mediumsized enterprises to venture more readily into the European emarket .
I would like to express my gratitude that , after tomorrow 's vote , we will be able to have a legislative framework guaranteeing better harmonisation of consumer rights in the EU .
On the other hand , I would like to congratulate the European Commission for initiating this draft directive , which combines four existing directives into a single legislative instrument .
I also want to stress that once this directive has been implemented , we can finally guarantee citizens in the European Union 's 27 Member States that they can be confident of a high level of consumer protection .
At the same time , I want to congratulate the rapporteur for his fine work and because he added vital articles to this report which will regulate the rights of those who purchase goods and services on line .
I would like to thank Mr Schwab and the other Members for the work they have put into this draft .
I welcome the efforts that have been undertaken with the aim of EU-wide harmonisation of distance selling regulations , which are aimed at protecting consumers and making it easier for traders to operate .
What is undoubtedly needed is a compromise which will both guarantee a high level of protection for consumers and make it easier for traders to provide services throughout the EU .
I believe that it is right to guarantee a high minimum level of consumer protection throughout the European Union , provided that the Member States will also be able to impose more stringent regulations on their territory if they believe that the level of protection guaranteed by the EU is insufficient .
However , we must not ignore the needs of traders , whose lives should genuinely be made easier by the EU-wide harmonisation of regulations , in both operational and cost-reduction terms .
It is therefore advisable to formulate a position which will safeguard the interests of both consumers and traders .
There can be no question that making transactions safer and harmonising regulations will increase confidence in distance selling , and act as an incentive for consumers to make distance purchases more frequently .
Implementation of the Fuel Quality Directive ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the implementation of the Fuel Quality Directive , including an EU default value for tar sands and oil shale , by Mrs McAvan , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B7-0209 / 2011 ) .
author . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the Conference of Presidents for making time for this debate this week at very short notice .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for coming here at such a late hour to discuss this issue , which is very important for our Parliament .
On the face of it , this looks like a very technical issue .
It is about implementing measures for the Fuel Quality Directive and setting baseline or default values for greenhouse gas emissions for transport fuels .
The real , very serious issue is : how serious are we in the European Union about tackling emissions from transport ?
We know that around 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions come from transport .
We know that figure is rising , unlike in the housing and energy sectors , where the figure is falling .
Cleaning up our transport fuels is a key part of the fight against climate change and that is why the Fuel Quality Directive is so important .
That brings me to this question of tar sands and oil shale .
Parliament was expecting the Commission 's implementing proposals on the directive at the end of last year .
There was a delay and we know the reason for this was because there was an internal debate in the Commission about whether to give a separate value to tar sands .
We were told that the reason we could not have the measures was because there was no scientific study to back up the Commission proposal .
In early drafts from the Commission , however , we saw there was a separate value for tar sands in the consultation papers , but in a later draft that value had disappeared .
Thanks to you , Madam Commissioner , we now have a study on tar sands .
That study , which came out two months ago , shows something that other studies have already shown , i.e. that greenhouse gas emissions from Canadian tar sands are on average 107.3g of CO2 per megajoule , compared with 87.1g for conventional fuels .
For shale oil it shows a rate of 122 and 139g of CO2 per megajoule .
In other words , it shows that these fuels are dirtier than conventional oil .
Now we have the studies , I am hoping that we will hear from the Commissioner tonight that we are going to see a proposal to implement the Fuel Quality Directive .
I said at the beginning that this is not just a technical issue .
Last week , many MEPs who are here tonight received a petition from thousands of European citizens who are very concerned about this issue .
They want what I want , which is proper , fair labelling of tar sands and oil shales .
We often hear that the EU is leading the way on climate change , but California has already put in place a low-carbon fuel standard which assesses tar sands as high-carbon .
I know there has been a lot of lobbying about this , we have all heard about it , we have met the different lobbyists , and even now that we know that tar sands and oil shale are dirtier than conventional oil , we are now being told ' no , let us have more studies , let us have more time ' .
But we have the facts on tar sands now , so I do not see any reason to delay .
Tar sands are one of the most polluting ways of producing transport fuel known to man .
It follows that they should be given a different categorisation in the Fuel Quality Directive , otherwise there is nothing to stop transport fuels getting dirtier under the Fuel Quality Directive instead of cleaner .
Commissioner Hedegaard , I know you will hear in a moment how many of our colleagues from all groups across the House share our concerns .
You are known for your commitment to tackling climate change and are respected for it in this House .
We want to work with you to deliver your low-carbon roadmap to actually cut emissions from transport by 60 % as you announced last week , so I hope that tonight you are going to come here with some good news for us and tell us that in the next few weeks we will have that implementing standard and we will have a higher value for tar sands and oil shale .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we have just heard from Linda McAvan that she and the Commission share the same view of how important it is actually to tackle emissions from transport ; that is also reflected in the White Paper on transport which will be coming out today .
Unfortunately , development of the implementing measure linked to the greenhouse gas intensity reduction target contained in the Fuel Quality Directive has taken longer than anticipated .
However , the delay will not affect the ability of suppliers to meet their requirements under the directive , as no Member State has set an intermediate target for 2014 .
In preparing its proposal the Commission has considered that the appropriate legislative approach needs to balance the accuracy and complexity of the reporting method with the degree of variability in the GHG intensities of different fuels .
During last autumn and the first weeks of this year , extensive internal discussions have taken place within the Commission which are currently being finalised , and thus a proposal could be discussed with the Member States in the coming months .
As concerns the default values for oil sands and oil shale , I am pleased to report that the Commission has recently published reports indicating an average default value for oil sands and a range of indicative default values for oil shales .
These reports are available on the Commission 's website .
Given the wide interest in this matter the Commission believes that it would be useful to subject these reports to a limited peer review process .
In taking this issue forward I have liaised closely with my colleague responsible for trade matters to ensure that our approach is robust in terms of our obligations under international law , and I will continue to do so .
So without prejudging the outcome of the peer review process and the subsequent Commission internal consultation , it is the Commission 's intention at this stage to present a draft implementing measure to the relevant regulatory committee that will include default values both for oil sands and for oil shale , as well as for other unconventional fuels such as coal to liquids and gas to liquids .
It is also foreseen that the draft implementing measure states that the Commission will examine the GHG intensity of other categories of feedstock with high greenhouse gas emissions and , if scientifically warranted , the implementing measure will be amended through the addition of new feedstock categories .
This would make the measure non-discriminatory by demonstrating that the list of feedstock categories is open and that the Commission is actively looking at other categories and is ready to extend the list when enough evidence and data is gathered on other categories .
So , given that some weeks are necessary for the peer review and subsequently the finalisation of the Commission 's internal discussions , there will be some delay before the draft implementing measure of the whole package can be discussed with the Member States .
But as soon as it is approved by the regulatory committee the measure will be transmitted to the European Parliament for scrutiny .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs McAvan for tabling this question .
The revision of the Fuel Quality Directive would not only oblige fuel suppliers to reduce greenhouse gas emissions produced throughout the life cycle of the fuels , for example during transport and during the refining process , and to measure the reduction , but also to cut the emissions per energy unit by 1 % each year from 2011 onwards and by a total of 10 % by 2020 .
However , I believe that it is only possible to measure the reduction in emissions during the life cycle of the fuel if there are corresponding standard values in place .
These must finally be identified and made public .
However , when Mrs McAvan tabled her question , I had the feeling that she would have preferred to have stopped production in this energy sector .
I would like to warn against taking this approach , because the figures and the findings on emissions produced by the extraction of crude oil or of oil from sand or shale vary widely .
Only an hour ago , I was speaking to a representative of the chemical industry who said that there is so much potential for technical development that it could be possible to achieve much better results in this area .
I would like to remind the House that we are constantly talking about independence from energy sources outside the European Union .
This raw material is available to us here in the European Union , so we should include this in our discussions .
However , all of this will only work if there are standard values in place which must be checked .
Therefore , I am calling on the Commission to act quickly .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are indeed debating a very crucial issue : emissions from the production of oil from tar sands are three to five times greater than from other production methods and this much-desired indicator that we want in the directive will ensure that we do not subsidise this catastrophic production method .
You said that the study has been completed .
However , although we have a study , because we said that we needed a study in order to proceed , we now want to subject this study to peer review .
The question , Commissioner , is when will this procedure be completed ?
What are the timelines ?
How much longer do we need to wait until this indicator has been reviewed , using this methodology , so that we can , at long last , include it in our legislation ?
In fact , the problem with tar sands is not just the emissions .
It is the destruction of unique forests , the Canadian arctic forests , our vital allies against climate change .
At the same time , we are destroying the native land in which this massive destruction is taking place and , if we do not include the indicator in our legislation , this destruction will spread to other countries .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I want to thank Commissioner Hedegaard for her long-standing efforts on this issue and for her positive announcement this evening .
Commissioner , you have met MEPs on a number of occasions and we appreciate that the stumbling block has not been of your making .
Nevertheless the lack of progress has been deeply frustrating .
First of all we were told it was not enough that there were a dozen studies that all showed that tar sands had higher greenhouse gas emissions than conventional oil .
We were told that there had to be a study using exactly the same methodology .
Now that we have that study from the Joint Research Centre - and it shows the value of 107g per megajoule , way above the 87.1g average for crude oil - opponents are saying that we need a peer review .
It really does feel like timewasting on a grand scale .
It is a pity that the lobbying against a separate value for tar sands has come so heavily from one quarter , because it is absolutely not about discriminating against Canada .
There are many other potential tar sand sites , some of them , as we heard just now , within the EU itself .
The fact that these alternative sources of oil are attracting investment interest across the globe is precisely why we must insist on a separate greenhouse gas value for them .
Otherwise , as tar sands creep up as an increasingly large part of the energy mix , we will find ourselves in the situation where we are complying with the Fuel Quality Directive 's 6 % reduction target on paper , but in real life we are producing fuel with even higher emissions than today .
It would be very helpful , Commissioner , if you could explain to DG Trade , as I am sure you have , that this is not an attack on Canada , and that apart from anything else , Parliament would want this issue of the default tar sands value to be sorted out in order to ensure a smooth passage for the EU-Canada trade agreement .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as part of the climate package , we decided that the carbon footprint of transport fuel should decrease by 6 % by 2020 .
It would be completely inconsistent and senseless if we now turned a blind eye to the dirtiest fuels of all , like oil from oil sand , at the same time encouraging their production around the world , in Canada and Africa , for example .
It is quite obvious that we should have our own default values for the carbon footprint of oil from oil sand and oil shale .
We also need to differentiate the other sources of crude oil as soon as possible .
In my view , the Canadian Government has very inappropriately put pressure on the EU , and we should not give way to it .
If Canada 's footprint from tar sands oil is lower than the reference value , Canada can prove it .
Should we not adhere to the same principle with fossil oil as we do with biofuels , which is that the default values are differentiated according to the source of the raw materials ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , global reserves of bituminous sands are very extensive .
It is estimated that reserves of bituminous oil are over double the size of reserves of crude oil extracted using conventional methods .
Present-day technologies make it possible to exploit deposits of raw materials in places where no one would previously have supposed it to be possible .
At the same time , however , environmental protection requirements have become more stringent , and so there is a clash between environmental standards and the pursuit of raw materials and the desire to extract them at any cost .
This results in land degradation , deforestation and the exploitation of water resources .
Extracting companies must be forced to recultivate the land they have used , to make it possible for forests to grow there again one day .
Companies which make profits from the processing of bituminous sands must allocate some of these profits to environmental protection , for example in the form of a deposit .
The European Commission should support such requirements and technologies for reducing CO2 emissions .
After all , Europe and Canada have such strong economic links that Canadian industry , whether it wants to or not , must adapt to European environmental protection requirements in order to operate on the European market , for example in this area .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs McAvan for taking the initiative in this case and Mrs Hedegaard for addressing the problem .
We are not happy about the speed at which things are happening , but we know that this matter is in good hands with Mrs Hedegaard .
We would like to support her during the discussions within the Commission and with everyone else involved .
The environmental impact of tar sands is clear .
There is an exhibition outside Parliament which makes it clear that , although we may question some of what is said or some of the figures , we have a serious environmental problem on our hands .
This is indisputable .
Given that we have discussed the effects of biofuels in such detail and even planned to carry out indirect investigations of movements in food cultivation , we must look at this problem , which is so obvious , much more closely .
For this reason , this is an important initiative .
During the debate and during the preparations , I had a sentence running through my head which has been said repeatedly by the German Environment Minister , Norbert Röttgen : We have already picked the low-hanging fruit when it comes to fossil fuels .
This becomes clear in the context of this subject and in the light of the exhibition outside Parliament .
Extracting all our additional deposits of fossil fuels will involve a huge amount of work and give rise to new problems .
Therefore , I would like to point out once again this evening that we all have cause to think more carefully about energy efficiency , especially given the events of recent days .
I would like us to exert greater pressure on the Commission and on Mr Oettinger to follow up the 20 % target for energy efficiency .
I hope that the Directorate General for Mobility and Transport and the Transport Commissioner will be able to come up with specific measures rather than just empty words over the next few years and that they will not wait to do so until the next parliamentary term .
( NL ) Mr President , in the square outside our Parliament there is a photographic exhibition on the tar sands in Canada .
One of the photographs really chills you to the bone .
You see beautiful virgin forests and then a sharp line which marks the beginning of a polluted black oily lake measuring 170 sq. metres .
This really chills you to the very bone and I would recommend that everyone goes and sees the exhibition this evening .
Apart from leading to a huge loss of biodiversity , tar sand oil also emits extremely high levels of CO2 .
As far as I am concerned , biodiversity and CO2 emissions alone are sufficient reasons for us to vigorously oppose the exploitation of the tar sands in Canada , as well as in other countries .
However , the least we can do is to include the polluting value of tar sand oil in the Fuel Quality Directive .
Having listened to what Mrs Hedegaard said , I assume that will happen , but I hope that she will also more vehemently oppose the exploitation of the tar sands in Canada and in other parts of the world .
( RO ) Mr President , significant results can be achieved in reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 if investments are made in measures for increasing energy efficiency in buildings and the transport sector .
We had wide-ranging debates at the time when the Fuel Quality Directive was adopted .
The car manufacturing industry thought then that , in order to increase the share of fuel deriving from biofuels , it needed a longer period for designing and manufacturing new engines capable of coping with increased vapour pressure .
However , the directive 's final text makes it compulsory for both car manufacturers and fuel producers to invest in reducing polluting emissions and improving fuel quality .
I think that , in order to reduce the polluting emissions produced by the transport sector , the European Union should invest as a priority in developing a pan-European smart electricity grid which is capable of receiving energy produced locally and regionally from renewable energy sources and will be integrated into the infrastructure required for using electric vehicles .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , I must say that this directive gives rise to serious concerns among the oil processing companies of Central and Eastern Europe .
This is not even because it has yet to come into effect , but rather because we are curious as to the methods by which emissions will be calculated .
Will it be the ' fixed ' method , which is based on an EU average , or the ' hybrid ' method , which will calculate emissions from the time and place of extraction ?
If it is the latter , producers working with Russian oil would actually have to reduce their GHG emissions by 12 % , since pollution is already high at the site of extraction .
Commissioner , I sent you a letter in this regard in January , together with four of my colleagues , and we have received your reply , but that reply has not dispelled our doubts fully .
I would therefore like to ask you to reassure me , if possible , that this law will not put oil processing companies that process Russian petrol at a disadvantage , and will consequently not put Central and Eastern European Member States in a discriminative situation .

( GA ) Mr President , I am not a member of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) ; I should be , I would like to be , and I hope to be a member of it .
If anyone is leaving it , or if they are thinking of expelling anyone , let me know and I will get a place .
The Commission brought out a very good document on energy efficiency a few weeks ago .
It pointed out the need for more work to be done on buildings and transport and I agree 100 % on that .
Regarding transport , much more needs to be done in putting strictures on those who produce vehicles to come up with more fuel-efficient vehicles .
That is a very important point and not enough has been done on that .
I am a member of the Delegation for Relations with Canada , and the Canadians made a presentation to us yesterday about this matter .
They are willing to take us out to show us how it works , and until such time as the technologies have been developed , we should keep a more open mind regarding these oil sands and shales .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank Parliament for the very clear message it has given here tonight .
I think it is very clear - including the impatience and sense of urgency .
Mr Schnellhardt said that we should act promptly and Mr Arsenis asked particularly , with regard to the timetable : when will this end ?
I am happy to say that we are talking about a rather short time now .
There is the peer review where we are talking about weeks , then it has to come back after that to the Commission , and there will then be the internal process .
It will not end there but at least we will start to get it through to the next stage which is with the Member States .
So we are coming close but , as Mrs Hall was saying , this is absolutely not a discriminatory initiative , and I think you all understand why it makes sense to take care that its documentation is robust .
That is what we have provided and we all know what the reasons are .
One of the reasons is that it was not included from the very outset when this case started several years back .
Now we are doing this work and so we can bring it to an end .
Let me finish by saying that , when it comes to this default value for tar sands the overall delay in the implementation of the directive means that we could get the default value included now in the same sort of round as when we are implementing the directive as such .
In that sense , when it comes to the default value for tar sands , we will be able to do it a bit quicker than some of us thought possible when we started this nine months ago .
Thank you for the very clear message .
As I hope you realise , we are working very hard to bring this to an end .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - Having visited the oil sands in Canada last year , I am an eyewitness of this phenomenon .
I had the opportunity to engage in extensive consultations with the Albertan Government and the Federal Government in Canada regarding this issue .
Before I went to Canada , Friends of the Earth Europe , WWF and Transport and Environment gave me questions to ask the Albertan Government regarding the oil sands .
I received answers to all of these questions from the Albertan Minister for International Relations .
It was conveyed to me that Canada is fully committed to reducing global GHG emissions and de-carbonising fossil fuels , and has pointed out that studies show that the GHG intensity of oil from tar sands can be equal to or less than some other fuels .
On the other hand there are remaining concerns about public health , biodiversity and local wildlife .
I would encourage the Commission to send an expert group to visit the oil sands in Canada to conduct an independent analysis of the oil sands , as it will be proposing amendments to the Fuel Quality Directive before December 2012 , with a possibility of introducing additional measures for suppliers to reduce by 2 % the lifecycle GHG per unit of energy .
in writing . - ( CS ) A struggle has been going on in Canada for many years between nature conservationists and investors , who are unfortunately showing ever less regard for the protection of nature as global prices and demand for oil rise .
The supra-national oil companies regard environmental protection merely as an expense item that must be reduced .
Their disregard does not even stop at the de facto genocide of local populations that depend on the environment for their livelihood .
The alarming growth in numbers of cancer sufferers among local populations is a direct result of reckless extraction .
We have become used to valuing everything in terms of money .
In the global variant of the board game Monopoly which we call economics , we see only the short-term profit .
We take no account of what we will ultimately pay for the further deforestation of the temperate zone and the grassing over of whole ecosystems in a much longer and more serious game of survival .
Under the current economic and political circumstances , resources will simply be exhausted , and the anticipated damage to the environment will occur .
The profits are too tempting , and the thirst for energy is too great .
Who will decide ?
The people and their democratically-elected representatives , or the money men and managers of oil companies ?
Unless Europe takes a firm stand over the unsustainable extraction of tar sands and oil shales , then we are merely engaging in political theatre , which shows we are interested in the issue , while in reality we have neither the will nor the power to change the situation .
Generalised tariff preferences ( debate )

The next item is the report by Mr Scholz , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 732 / 2008 applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences for the period from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2011 - C7-0135 / 2010 - 2010 / 140 ( COD ) ) .

Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr De Gucht , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing an important aspect of international trade policy very late in the day .
Given its importance , I would have preferred the House to be full , with all the seats occupied .
The European Union 's Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is a major achievement of European trade policy .
It opens up our market to the poorest countries in the world for all types of goods except arms .
It also gives developing countries trade concessions on a whole range of products .
GSP + is a valuable incentive system which offers developing countries further concessions if they sign and put into practice important international agreements on human rights , labour standards and protecting the environment .
However , the system does have weak points and it needs to be updated regularly .
Over the years , the European Parliament , partner countries , companies and non-governmental organisations have made important suggestions for improving the system .
The whole world is now waiting for the Commission to issue its proposal on the much-needed revision of the system .
The deadline for this proposal was 1 June 2010 .
The Commission has not delivered on time and its failure to do so has left the countries involved and companies both inside and outside the EU in a dangerous state of uncertainty .
The existing regulation must now be revised .
You are attempting to rescue the situation by means of a transitional regulation and this is what we will be voting on tomorrow , that is on Thursday .
The transitional regulation is simply an extension .
It does not change anything , it does not improve anything and it does not implement the new requirements resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon .
This has given rise to feelings not only of surprise but also of displeasure within the European Parliament and , as the rapporteur , I have felt the same .
It is the obligation of the Members of this Parliament to ensure that the rights , the duties and also the powers granted to the elected representatives of the citizens of Europe by the Treaty of Lisbon are respected .
It is also our obligation to make sure that the reduction in tariffs brings about a genuine improvement in the situation of the developing countries .
In order to protect the EU 's partners from the consequences of a long-drawn-out procedure , I suggested initially to the Committee on International Trade that only those elements of the regulation should be amended which are necessary to allow Parliament to fulfil its new role .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise that I also believe a general redrafting of the GSP and GSP + schemes is needed .
During the intensive meetings with the Council and the Commission on the legal issues resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon which affect the transitional regulation , Parliament finally decided to take a big leap of faith .
At this point , I would like once again to express my sincere thanks to the chair of the Committee on International Trade , Professor Moreira , for his untiring efforts as mediator and also to you , Mr De Gucht , for the Commission 's assurance that key amendments , in particular with regard to informing and involving Parliament , would be addressed in practice .
Therefore , we decided to drop all our amendments , in order to enable the transitional regulation to come into force as quickly as possible .
We did this primarily in the interests of our partners and of the companies which are affected .
The Commission 's assurance includes a promise in future to inform the European Parliament in full , immediately and at the same time as the Council about work relating to essential aspects of the GSP and about all developments and to share all documents relating to the GSP .
The Commission also guarantees that the European Parliament will be notified about any suspension of preferences , in accordance with Article 16 ( 3 ) , about withdrawals , including the corresponding investigation reports from the Commission , in accordance with Article 17 , and about safeguard decisions , in accordance with Articles 20 and 21 , before they come into force .
We welcome the tabling of Omnibus 1 and the Commission 's readiness to enter into an in-depth discussion of the proposals which it has made in Omnibus 1 .
At the same time , we would like to remind the Commission that Omnibus 2 must be tabled urgently .
Finally , I would like to emphasise once again that Parliament has made a concession on the transitional regulation .
We must not forget that we need to fight for the ongoing and fundamental implementation of Parliament 's parliamentary rights .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Scholz , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr President , let me continue in English .
Because of the terminology , I think that it is more appropriate to use English .
Ever since the Commission presented its proposal to extend , for a limited period of time , the application of the current GSP regulation - the so-called roll-over proposal - the Council has been consistently reiterating before this House the importance of adopting this proposal in good time .
This is to ensure that developing and less developed countries will continue to benefit from the EU 's general system of preferences , which is a fundamental element of the EU 's trade policy towards developing countries .
The Council is glad to see that the first step towards the adoption of this proposal at first reading is taking place today here in the European Parliament .
We will take the necessary steps as quickly as possible to confirm the agreement between our institutions on the basis of your position adopted today .
At the same time , the Council is looking forward to the forthcoming presentation by the Commission of its proposal for the comprehensive review of the EU 's GSP .
We should tailor the scheme to better help those developing economies which most need the preferences , and ensure that it becomes an even more efficient development and foreign policy tool by providing incentives for good governance .
With that in mind , the Council expresses its readiness to work together with Parliament in a spirit of good cooperation with a view to putting in place a modern , comprehensive and fully functional legal framework which will be conducive to developing countries ' needs .
Let me conclude by taking this opportunity to fully acknowledge , on behalf of the Presidency , the positive and constructive efforts by both the Chair of the INTA Committee , Mr Moreira , and the rapporteur for this dossier , Mr Scholz , to reach an agreement on this proposal .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I warmly acknowledge the support within the Committee on International Trade for the proposal on the extension of the regulation applying the scheme of generalised tariff preferences .

Our particular thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Scholz and to the Chair of the INTA committee , Mr Moreira , for their willingness to find a pragmatic solution on how to address Parliament 's concerns on the application to the existing GSP regulation of the new rules on delegated and implementing acts .
You will remember that the extension was proposed as a means to bridge the period necessary to adjust to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and to submit a new regulation on the future EU GSP scheme .
The European Parliament 's support as expressed in the INTA Committee 's vote on 3 March paves the way for successful continuity of the current scheme to the benefit of developing countries and the EU .
It also reinforces the EU 's role and commitment to the objectives of EU development policy .
The Commission has heard Parliament 's concerns on the decision-making aspects of the GSP regulation loud and clear .
In this regard , we can reconfirm our full and active support for the European Parliament to play its role in relation to trade policy as foreseen in the Lisbon Treaty .
For this reason , the Commission is committed to discussing in a constructive spirit Parliament 's concern as expressed over the last few weeks .
This discussion will continue in the context of the two Commission proposals for a regulation adjusting decision-making in the field of trade policy in the light of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - Omnibus I and Omnibus II .
In parallel , the Commission will make every effort to act on Parliament 's request to be kept fully informed about work related to essential aspects of GSP .
This is indeed crucial in order for Parliament to be able play its role in trade policy effectively .
For this reason , the Commission , building on existing requirements , will inform Parliament and the Council immediately of all important developments and share all GSP-relevant documents .
Finally we are looking forward to further discussions with you on the future scheme of generalised preferences further to the proposal for a new regulation which will come your way in May .
I stand ready to discuss the main elements of the proposal at the earliest opportunity after it is adopted by the Commission .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , I am very pleased that the rapporteur 's willingness to compromise made the timely extension of the scheme of tariff preferences possible .
The Hungarian Presidency of the European Council played a very important part in this process .
Failure to extend the scheme of tariff preferences now would have an extremely adverse effect on the poorest countries of the world .
It is regrettable , however , that the European Commission submitted this proposal to Parliament late , and we could not have a meaningful debate here , even though the GSP Regulation would deserve an amendment .
That is because the tariff preferences we are granting to the richest oil exporting countries of the world , such as the United Arab Emirates or Saudi Arabia , are unjustifiable .
It is worth considering whether Russia , which is not a member of the WTO because it did not wish to join it , and very often uses commercial policy to exert foreign policy pressure , is worthy of receiving commercial preferences .
It is also worth considering how we could integrate sustainability criteria into the scheme of tariff preferences .
After all , today commercial preferences are also granted to countries which otherwise hinder the adoption of climate protection agreements on the international scene or , for that matter , export to the European Union goods produced in an unsustainable manner , often through the destruction of rainforests or tremendous CO2 emissions .
I believe that the next tariff preference scheme will have to address these issues as well .
Mr President , if we are here debating how long the current scheme of generalised tariff preferences ( GSP ) will be in force , it is because the Commission has failed in its obligation to table the proposed substantive revision of this scheme within the proper timeframe .
Therefore a rollover period for the current regulation is expected in order to maintain the benefits of international trade enjoyed by developing countries , starting with the poorest , when accessing the European market .
It is crucial that this proposal be adopted without further delay , in order for countries benefitting from the GSP to continue to benefit from it , and for the economic players that will , in this way , be able to develop their trade relations with the necessary predictability and legal security .
That is why I , as Chair of the Committee on International Trade and as shadow rapporteur , have advocated that the rollover should be a rollover and nothing more , with even the European Parliament giving up on an ad hoc adaptation of this regulation to the Commission 's implementing acts , and giving us faith that it will be brought into line in the near future , using the so-called ' omnibus ' regulations .
I would like to stress that , based on this understanding , the decision taken by the rapporteur , the shadow rapporteurs and the remaining members of the committee , influenced the European Commission 's commitment - which was today reiterated by Commissioner De Gucht and I sincerely thank him for his care - to henceforth guarantee the European Parliament that there will be timely and complete information about every relevant act relating to the application of the current regulation , in line with the Treaty of Lisbon 's provisions regarding the common commercial policy .
One final word to thank the rapporteur , to thank the Commission and also to thank the Council for this compromise , which will enable Parliament to properly look after the interests of Europe and of those who rely on us .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Generalised System of Preferences is one of the few methods of differentiation that works in favour of developing countries in international trade .
It is a delicate instrument that must be used in the best way .
Tonight we are talking about an extension , which means that the Commission date will be postponed once the new final proposal has been submitted .
In the meantime , however , we are saying that this is a tool to be handled with caution , and that also applies to inter-institutional relations .
Until now , even on the basis of the pre-Lisbon Treaty , the European Parliament has not always been fully involved in decisions , as happened at the time of the discussions on Colombia or Sri Lanka that fired the enthusiasm of this House .
We must also consider the merits of an ex-post evaluation of the decision to implement the regulation .
What is the impact of the effects of a tariff reduction , what about its suspension , what are its mechanisms , what is its procedure ?
Sometimes an on-the-spot examination of these issues may reveal surprises and suggest the most relevant criteria to make the impact of the regulation as effective as possible .
As far as the conditions are concerned , the world is changing and the instrument must show greater compliance with regard to those countries rewarded by the tariff concessions .
The main concept of respect for human rights must be complemented by a broader vision in which , as noted by the rapporteur Mr Scholz - whom I thank for the excellent work he has done in this report - various indicators are taken into consideration : post-conflict rehabilitation , the specific situation of women , trade unions , the situation of recovery after natural disasters , environmental sustainability and compliance with international social agreements .
If we were to adopt a combination of these criteria , I would not be surprised if the list of beneficiary countries we came up with were different from the current list and perhaps more deserving , but we will be able to talk about this again once we have the final proposal for a regulation .
( PT ) Mr President , given that the current scheme of generalised tariff preferences expires at the end of the year , it is important , as has already been said , for the Commission to table its new draft of the comprehensive revision of the system on time .
Now we are only just discussing the extension necessary to ensure legal certainty and guarantee mutual interests .
However , the importance of this subject whether for developing countries or also EU Member States , above all for those with weaker economies whose industrial , agricultural or social interests are not always taken into consideration in the international trade agreements promoted by the Commission , makes a detailed discussion necessary in order to take account of all the potential aspects , consequences and impacts of this system on a future regulation , the draft of which must reach Parliament as quickly as possible .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this measure concerns the Generalised System of Preferences , in other words reductions on import duties for third countries which take on certain commitments to international treaties or agreements on sensitive issues such as employment rights and the environment .
These requirements should be periodically reviewed and updated on the proposal of the European Commission , but unfortunately we are not here to vote for a revision but an extension of the old rules .
At this sensitive time of not only economic but also political international crisis , not to revise and update the conditions for access to or exclusion from the list is a choice that goes against the best interests of the European Union .
Despite the non-linear behaviour of the European Commission , we will still nevertheless vote in favour , because we believe in this tool favouring third countries that particularly distinguish themselves compared with others over issues considered to be strategic .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I listened to the interventions .
I understand that the groups agree that we should extend the existing system , but that they are waiting to have the new system on their desks as soon as possible .
That is what we will do .
We are working on it .
As you know , before you can make a legislative proposal you need a public consultation , which takes time .
You need an impact assessment , which takes time .
Then , of course , you also have the internal decision-making process within the European Commission , on a subject which is far-reaching .
This is about a financial system which will apply for quite a period of time .
We want the system to be much more selective than it was in the past , so that we can help those who really need it .
At this moment in time , more than 150 countries are beneficiaries of the system .
It is not at all selective .
You could even ask yourself what the use of such a system is .
We are thoroughly reviewing it .
We will come forward with our proposals within a couple of months .
Parliament will then have the possibility to discuss them with us thoroughly .
I would also like to repeat our pledge that we will keep Parliament fully informed .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the reform of the GSP will be a focal point for the Council and for the Presidency .
With the review of the current scheme , which is to start under our Presidency , Parliament and the Council will have a unique opportunity to reflect the profound changes in the global economy , particularly the vastly increased competitiveness of emerging partners .
The Presidency took careful note of the valid concerns emphasised by Mr Rinaldi on the effective implementation of the GSP .
The Council is looking forward to considering that issue and many others on the basis of the Commission 's forthcoming proposal for the new GSP .
Let me emphasise once again how grateful I am to the rapporteur and to the Committee Chair , Mr Moreira , for their cooperation .
I think this is a victory for common sense , because they understood that it was an urgent and important issue .
We really did not want to create any legal problems .
For me this is a kind of model and I very much hope that , on other issues on which we have such legal disputes , this will serve as a very good example of smooth relations between the Council and Parliament .

Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr De Gucht , I would first of all like to thank the shadow rapporteurs very much for working together so constructively .
Now that we have finally agreed on the formal aspects of the transitional regulation , I would like to make use of this debate to explain briefly some of the requirements for the future regulation .
The new version of the regulation should have the following basic objectives : 1 .
To increase the efficiency of the system ; 2 .
To develop rules that will provide for a better regulated reform process in which the involvement of the beneficiaries is guaranteed ; 3 .
To ensure that the regulation gives due weight to the task of democratic control which Parliament is required to perform .
This includes proposals from the Committee on Development .
The new Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) should be a clearer and more transparent system .
I would like to make three points in this respect and the first concerns the rules of origin .
The rules of origin and the administrative procedures that accompany them are one of the main reasons why the trade preferences granted by the GSP are being underused , particularly by the least developed countries .
In the current version of the system , the rules of origin often prevent preferences that exist on paper from having a positive impact .
I have just come back from the Parliamentary Conference on the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) in Geneva and this problem was very high up on the list of issues discussed there .
In my opinion , the EU should campaign within the WTO for the preference system to be given priority as part of its work on harmonising the rules of origin .
My second point concerns the partner countries .
Here I feel that it is particularly important for us to develop more straightforward criteria .
The Gini coefficient is a good example of this type of criterion .
As already mentioned , we need to be more flexible in order to be able to respond more effectively .
My third point is about technical assistance .
Preferences alone are not enough .
We need to increase the impact of the system and improve the rate of utilisation of the GSP by providing technical assistance .
This is all about a general improvement of the preference system as a whole .
I would like to thank everyone involved once again for their constructive approach .
I will be happy to continue working with the Commission on the basis of today 's assurances .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I wish to stress that the proposal tabled by the European Commission is not the reform of the ' Generalised System of Preferences ' requested by the European Parliament in its resolution of 5 June 2008 , but merely an extension of the current set of rules .
This is why I share the rapporteur 's view about the need to review this regulation devised in 2008 immediately , and to adapt it to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , which subsequently came into force .
Thanks to this treaty , the European Parliament enjoys new powers in the area of trade and must have its say on the eligibility criteria , the list of beneficiary countries and the temporary withdrawal of GSP arrangements .
A general review of the regulation will need to be carried out in the future , aimed at increasing the involvement of beneficiary countries in the reform processes which affect them , granting technical assistance to help develop their institutional capacity , as well as reviewing and harmonising the rules of origin .
The Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) gives 176 developing countries preferential access to the EU market .
Tariff reductions or duty-free access to the internal market enable trade to make a contribution to reducing poverty in these countries .
Therefore , I support the transitional regulation which ensures the legal continuity of the GSP , so that this opportunity remains available to developing countries .
Trade is also an important and efficient tool which gives the countries affected the chance to move closer towards the rule of law and democracy and to develop a well-functioning economy .
Given the importance and the urgency of this issue , I am in favour of an extension and of making rapid progress with the regulation .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( RO ) Mr President , there has been much discussion in this Parliament recently about the inadequate operation of the food supply chain in Europe and a report has even been approved on this subject .
I will give you some examples published today in Romania of the customs prices for intra-Community imports , compared with their prices on the store shelf .
Potatoes are imported at an average price of 15 eurocents per kilogram and reach the store shelf at 80 cents per kilogram .
Sugar is purchased for 50 eurocents and reaches the store shelf at EUR 1.15 .
Poultry meat is purchased at EUR 1.25 and sold in stores at an average price of EUR 2.10 per kilogram .
The same newspaper which published these statistics showed that the price of potatoes rose by 45 % last year , whereas the price of gold increased only by 40 % .
This absurd situation must be stopped and I believe that the European Commission and European Parliament need to seek solutions to this .
( RO ) Mr President , the number of areas in the world affected by climate change or natural disasters is steadily increasing .
The most recent example is the tragic situation in Japan .
The European Union 's common agricultural policy must respond to these challenges , not to mention guarantee food security , as a global strategic problem .
The growth in population size creates the need for a larger volume of food , but we have an ever-growing shortage , based on the available supply .
Since the right to food is a basic right , food security is and must remain one of the European Union 's priorities .
The strategies implemented as part of the common agricultural policy must be backed up by an appropriate budget which will meet these challenges .
I think that the budget allocated to the common agricultural policy must remain at least at its current level or even be adapted to accommodate the new increased needs resulting from these natural disasters , which have no respect for borders or nationality , but only perhaps for geographical area .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to stress the importance of the prevention of cardiovascular diseases , since they cause almost 2 million deaths per year in all 27 Member States .
In some countries , like my country , Romania , this amounts to 50 % of all deaths .
The treatment of such chronic diseases also represents a significant financial burden for healthcare systems , estimated at some EUR 92 billion a year for the whole EU .
We need to make further efforts to promote healthy lifestyles and raise awareness of cardiovascular diseases .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , should communicate better with citizens on the dangers of alcohol abuse , unhealthy diets and lack of physical activity .
This is the only way can manage to lower the incidence of cardiovascular diseases amongst EU citizens , and hence the negative impact on national health budgets .
( ES ) Mr President , the serious accident at the Fukushima nuclear plant has called into question the supposed renaissance of nuclear energy .
For years , a large-scale media campaign has been trying to push the belief that nuclear energy was the only solution to the energy supply and climate change problems threatening our future .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
To date , the four fundamental problems of nuclear energy - high costs , safety , waste and the risk of proliferation - that already led to its failure in the 1980s have yet to be satisfactorily solved .
For all the above reasons , it is necessary to enter a phase of progressive closure and dismantling of nuclear plants , starting with those that have already had serious accidents , such as the Vandellós II plant in Catalonia and those that are nearing the end of their useful life .
At the same time , we must increase energy efficiency , responsible energy consumption and investment in renewal energy sources .
( PT ) Mr President , the European Union 's policies are threatening social and labour rights , leading to protests and conflicts .
That is what happened last weekend in Portugal .
Around 300 000 workers took part in the demonstration , organised by the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers ( CGTP ) .
It was a sea of people , indignation and revolt that flooded the streets of Lisbon , coming from all corners of Portugal .
It was a national response of organised struggle , demonstrating that workers , women , young people and retired people are tired of being the victims of policies dictated by the interests of large , national and European economic and financial groups .
They are determined to fight for another policy , in which the crisis is not a pretext for more unemployment , less job security , more frozen salaries and pensions , further cuts to low salaries and benefits , and for increased prices and taxes for those who live off the fruits of their labour .
It was a ' no ' to the Stability and Growth Pact and the capitalist policies that the European Union and the governments have been promoting without ever taking anything from capital , whilst facilitating increases to its income and profits .
It is a struggle for which we feel combative and committed solidarity .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that none of us has any doubt , we have had enough : as far as Turkey is concerned , the European Union must stop talking and take action .
The arrest of the orthodox Christian patriarch that took place on Christmas Day because he was celebrating Mass in a church in the occupied part of Cyprus was not enough , and neither was the arrest of nine journalists on 3 March enough to persuade Baroness Ashton to take action over Turkey in agreement with President Van Rompuy .
Now , however , I do not think that even they are in any more doubt following the arrest of four members of the European Parliament and a bishop representing orthodox Christians in the European Union by Turkish security forces in the occupied part of Cyprus .
We clearly cannot continue to take slaps in the face from Turkey ; simply stopping the procedures for EU membership is not enough as a counter-measure .
We must have the courage and strength to make it clear to that government once and for all that either it must comply with the observance of treaties , human and civil rights and freedoms , or the European Union must have the courage to break off all diplomatic and trade ties .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , less than two weeks ago , on 11 and 12 March , the presidium of the Jobbik Movement for a Better Hungary held transferred meetings in Transylvania , Székely Land and Târgu Mureş .
Besides stating our belief in the importance of Székely territorial autonomy , we announced the Central European , European Platform , which would represent a great step towards Romanian-Hungarian reconciliation .
As for me , after the presidium meeting I visited the Érmellék area of Partium .
I gave a lecture in Valea lui Mihai , where the desire of the approximately 3 to 400 000 Hungarians living in Partium to preserve their identity as Hungarians and have their children educated in the Hungarian language showed itself with elemental force .
They want autonomy .
This concerns so many people that I would like to ask Parliament to find an occasion where we could schedule a sitting , an agenda item , where we could discuss the matter of the autonomy of both Székely Land and Érmellék .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in commemoration of the revolution and war of independence of 1848-49 , Hungarians all over the world celebrated their national holiday on 15 March .
Our poet of world renown , Sándor Petőfi , gave his life for freedom in 1849 .
On 20 March , the anniversary of his death , we commemorated another great figure of the war of independence , Governor Lajos Kossuth , father of Hungarian parliamentary democracy , who spent half of his life in foreign exile .
It is a symbolic testimony to our people 's love of freedom that our two national radio stations bear the very names of Lajos Kossuth and Sándor Petőfi .
In one of his outstanding poems , our freedom-fighter and poet honours the memory of those heroes " Who died for you , sacred world freedom ! ”
It was this revolutionary spirit of world freedom that infused young Hungarians back in that day , and it is this spirit in which a freedom-loving Europe is standing up for revolutionary Arab youths and for all peoples of the world who are fighting for freedom .
( RO ) Mr President , the Romanian Government has adopted , by establishing liability , a new Labour Code which infringes Romanians ' right to social protection .
The reason given for this new code is the need to make the market flexible and create new jobs .
However , no one , neither trade unions nor employers , has asked for this amendment to be made to the old code .
They even disagree with the new measures .
The reality is that the Labour Code promoted by the government is not aimed at introducing flexibility , but at strongly politicising the public sector and striking a hard blow against employees through provisions such as getting rid of collective labour agreements and trade unions ' rights , as well as making collective redundancies without any compensation payments .
This means that the government is victimising the very people who are working and supporting , through their work , the desperate efforts to overcome the crisis .
( BG ) Mr President , a good idea was discussed a few days ago in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs about improving the mechanism for assessing the countries in the Schengen area in terms of how they apply the Schengen acquis , as well as the progress made by the countries applying to join the Schengen area .
However , the criteria must be clear and apply to all , and not get confused with abstract , moralistic criteria or become politicised .
For instance , the levels of corruption must be monitored for candidate countries .
It is very important for corruption to be sought out and exposed , but it may be difficult for this process to be carried out objectively in each country separately .
In other words , we should not allow any subjectivity when we are trying to improve the assessment mechanism .
This is why sanctions are also provided for .
Some of them may be of a financial nature .
A great deal of precision is required .
Therefore , candidate countries must prepare themselves thoroughly , otherwise , they face the threat of delay .
Those countries which are in the Schengen area but have failed the assessment need to be aware that their membership may be frozen in keeping with the sanctions .
- ( SK ) Mr President , much time has passed since the Second World War , but surely not enough for us to forget all the horrors of that period .
I therefore cannot understand how there can be people in Europe today constructing memorials to fascist criminals .
On 14 March , a community club of some kind in Košice unveiled a bust of János Esterházy - a war criminal condemned to death in 1947 for collaborating with fascism .
They unveiled a bust of a criminal who welcomed the fascist troops invading Košice .
He openly proclaimed collaboration with the Nazis , declaring , and I quote : ' I have had anti-Jewish beliefs from a very young age , and I will have them to my dying day . '
Ladies and gentlemen , this blatant provocation is , in my view , all the more unfortunate for the fact that this celebration of a military war criminal included a speech from the Hungarian consul - a diplomat of the country now holding the Presidency and speaking in many forums on behalf of all of us , and also on behalf of the entire EU .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am taking the floor so that I can draw your attention to a complex problem which unfortunately affects every single Bulgarian citizen , namely , the daily racketeering which the banks engage in against consumers .
It is ridiculous that some banks in Bulgaria make charges when money is both deposited and withdrawn .
I recently fell victim to the insane pressure exerted by banks and had funds illegally frozen in my account .
It transpired with this incident that I did not have any legal grounds for making a protest .
Legislation is not strictly regulated .
Due to strong lobbying from the banking sector or the weak show of political will , it turns out that the government does not get involved in the bilateral contract between the customer and bank .
Everyone can also clearly see the lack of equality between the partners in this contract .
The problem , as far as I see it , is that competition has not created acceptable market conditions and I think that the government needs to get involved .
I call for the quicker introduction of SEPA and for creating a clear framework for controlling the banks .
I hope that the banks will then pay more attention to their customers and look after them better because , at the moment , they are simply a daily target for racketeering .
Mr President , we were discussing consumer rights earlier on .
One right which EU consumers are entitled to is that of food security and safety .
They expect food coming into the European Union to be produced according to the same high standards as food produced internally .
Unfortunately , that cannot be guaranteed .
No lesser authority than the European Court of Auditors said recently that ' certain standards , mainly on animal welfare , imposed on EU farmers cannot be imposed on producers of imported meat ' .
That is a damning indictment , especially as it also points out that as little as 2 % of food coming in can actually be tested , in marked contrast to the situation within Europe where every animal is traceable from farm to fork .
In view of that , it seems foolhardy to be pursuing a Mercosur agreement , especially as the Swedish Institute for Food and Technology pointed out that the carbon footprint of Brazilian beef can be 35 times higher than that of Irish beef .
( ES ) Mr President , many experts are saying that the next crisis could be an energy crisis and that , moreover , we are not doing what is necessary to prevent it or that we are not doing it fast enough to prevent it .
The World Wide Fund for Nature is calling for all of us to make a small gesture toward sustainability this Saturday .
Many Europeans will turn out their lights for an hour and many public administrations too .
That is not enough .
Europe cannot remain dependent on energy sources that do not belong to it and are far away , or on unsecure energy sources .
We must help the Member States to build an energy model in which renewable energy sources are the heart of the new mix .
We must also help to raise awareness of new patterns of consumption because , without any doubt , renewable energy and efficiency are the keys to future sustainability .
Finally , I should like to call on all the Member States of the Union to join the call , the desire of five Member States - including Spain - to reduce CO2 emissions by a further 30 % .
That way we would demonstrate that Europe , as well as being a leader in terms of freedom and rights , is also a leader in terms of its commitment to the planet 's sustainability .
Mr President , I am sorry to inform you at this late hour that this afternoon a group of Estonian cyclists were kidnapped by armed men in Lebanon 's eastern Bekaa Valley .
The Estonians had crossed into Lebanon from Syria earlier in the day and were intercepted at about 17.30 by armed men in three vehicles with no licence plates .
There is no information at the moment as to who kidnapped the cyclists or whether the incident was politically motivated .
However , the Bekaa Valley is a stronghold of the Islamist Hezbollah movement .
I would like to plead with Baroness Ashton , despite her constant and necessary involvement in Libya , to help resolve the situation .
It is a challenge for the established European External Action Service to provide for smaller Member States to help the citizens of the EU in distressing situations such as this .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are currently 30 million blind and visually impaired people living in Europe .
Have you ever thought about how they must face unresolved situations even while on a common shopping errand ?
In many cases they are unable to determine the nature of a product by holding a simple box or bottle in their hands .
If they take it off the shelf , they do not know what they are holding in their hands , even though without a doubt they , too , have the right to lead independent and safe lives .
Therefore together with five of my fellow Members from four groups I would like to encourage you to urge manufacturers of industrial products to affix Braille labels to their containers on a voluntary basis .
I would also like to ask my fellow Members to support with their signatures Declaration 14 / 2011 , which deals with this issue .
( HU ) Mr President , in rivalries , the parties involved have always found people to blame , whom they declared responsible for the injuries suffered .
I would like to draw your attention to one such case .
Count János Esterházy was interned at the end of World War II , first by the Nazis and then , during the communist occupation , by the Soviets as well .
In the Czech Republic and Slovakia he is still regarded as a war criminal , while , Mr Paška , the Russian Supreme Court already annulled his sentence in 1993 , and the Polish head of state awarded him the prestigious Polonia Restituta Order two years ago on this very day .
Esterházy assisted in the escape of hundreds of Jews , Czechs , Slovaks and Poles , and he was the only member of the Slovak parliament , Mr Paška , who voted and raised his voice against the anti-Jewish laws in 1942 .
The joint building of a united Europe could begin after the ruins of World War II had been cleaned up , which included the rehabilitation of personages such as Esterházy .
It is up to us to clean up the remaining ruins .
( PL ) Mr President , in order to say that a given country meets the requirements for a mature democracy , it is not enough to say that elections to representative bodies , including and in particular the parliament , are held there in line with the principles of universality , secrecy , equality and fairness .
It is also essential to be able to say that the rights of minorities are respected in the country .
I think that the Chamber in which we are holding our debates today is the most appropriate place to remind Members of the fact that on 17 March the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania amended its Education Act .
In its amended form , the Act unfortunately appears to use administrative methods to violate the rights of minorities , including the Polish minority in this instance , by endeavouring to assimilate people who belong to the Polish minority under duress which is , as it were , imposed by the state .
Suffice it to say that the Education Act means an identical teaching programme will be imposed on all schools , including those where the only pupils are those from national minorities .
It increases the number of compulsory subjects taught in Lithuanian .
Under the pretext of ' optimisation of the school network ' , national minority schools , including Polish schools , are to be closed in small towns , and only Lithuanian schools are to remain there .
The Act violates international conventions ratified by Lithuania .
It is worth noting that various individuals have spoken about this matter many times .
I think that the European Parliament is the appropriate forum to speak out about such matters , and to call for the fundamental rights of national minorities to be respected .
That concludes this item .
EU relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Baudis , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on European Union relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , first of all I should like to stress that this report is the outcome of very constructive work with the political groups and I wish personally to thank Mr Howitt , Mrs Brepoels and Mrs Brantner , as well as Mrs Jäätteenmäki , for their collaboration .
As you know , this report relates to the overall strategy in relations between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council .
Our work started several months ago , so before the events that are now taking place in the Arab world .
Since then , we have observed everywhere - including in the Gulf - powerful demonstrations , which are taking place to ask for greater respect of human rights , fundamental freedoms and democracy .
However , right at the beginning of our work , even before the events began , the report - and the amendments adopted in committee - raised all the issues that are behind the uprising .
We condemn all forms of discrimination - including those founded on gender or religion - we highlight the issues relating to labour law , social and trade union rights , freedom of conscience , freedom of expression and of opinion , women 's rights , the need to reform the justice system , the abolition of the death penalty and of mutilating sentences , and political rights .
As the events in Bahrain have unfolded , and faced with the repression of demonstrations , as well as the military intervention of neighbouring countries , members of the GCC , we have prepared , with the shadow rapporteurs , a series of oral amendments that offer support to the demonstrators fighting for freedom .
We have highlighted the legitimacy of their demands and condemned the violent reaction by the Bahraini authorities as well as the military intervention of GCC countries that came to take part in the repression , and we express our grave concern in respect of the violent response of those in power .
Finally we offer our full support to the process of democratic transition .
Obviously , this report also outlines long-term strategic prospects .
It touches on the potential of a partnership in many areas ( geopolitics , energy , education and science and in the area of regional integration ) .
From a geopolitical point of view , Iran clearly represents a genuine threat .
Between Iran and Israel , the Gulf States would inevitably be the collateral victims of a conflict .
These countries expect a lot from us in trying to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons .
The GCC countries , which make up a quarter of Arab League member states , play a very important role in the peace process .
Let us remember that they are behind the Arab peace initiative .
With regard to energy , the GCC is the European Union 's leading oil supplier , so the EU is highly dependent on these countries , but their oil reserves are dwindling and they are preparing their transition thanks to the development of renewable energy .
We can offer our experience in this area .
On an educational and scientific level , these countries are making education one of their priorities .
Because of the limited number of universities and lecturers , we are seeing units of prestigious American universities being set up .
Unfortunately , the European Union , although committed , is very much lagging behind the United States .
For example , only eight students from GCC countries came to Europe last year as part of the Erasmus Mundus programme .
Finally , in the area of regional integration , the GCC is slow to make progress .
Wiser for its experience , the European Union can offer its help , advice and know-how ; finally , we call for the signing of a free trade agreement which has been in negotiation for over 20 years .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the states of the Persian Gulf have significant economic potential , offering broad possibilities for greater cooperation with the EU .
The Gulf Cooperation Council , just like the European Union , has a serious interest in improving commercial cooperation , which therefore depends on our ability to communicate cooperation priorities to Gulf state representatives .
Our views are close on many issues regarding the economic management of international security or the fight against terrorism , and it would therefore be a pity to limit potential cooperation only to the commercial and economic sphere .
It is surely clear to us all that our current cooperation with the Gulf states has considerable potential for growth , and the drafting of a new , more ambitious plan for EU policy in the Gulf Cooperation Council and its member states might , along with trade improvements from economic cooperation , also bring a closer partnership with representatives of the moderate Islamic world , which , in difficult times , might be a worthwhile interesting political bonus from this activity .
( HU ) Mr President , personally , I too am in favour of a free trade agreement coming into effect between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council .
The region could become an important strategic partner for the European Union with regard to commerce , including an increased oil supply .
I believe it is essential that we strengthen economic relations .
In order to ensure the competitiveness of the European Union , we must find additional new markets and new partners , whereas in areas where the European Union already plays a substantial part , our priority is the official reinforcement of relations .
The successful conclusion of the negotiation process which has been going on for twenty years requires a constructive yet flexible approach from both parties , so that the current , rather rigid positions can be approximated .
If we seriously believe that the European Union must be able to compete with the United States , China and India , it is essential that we also penetrate various economic areas and market segments where other major powers may already have seized predominance , and that we focus on our existing market priorities and increase their importance .
( RO ) Mr President , first of all , I too would like to congratulate Mr Baudis for this report .
Parliament therefore supports the resumption of negotiations between the EU and Gulf Cooperation Council at a critical time .
The events in Bahrain indicate that political dialogue between both international organisations needs to be stepped up .
Indeed , I think that the six Arab states can initiate peaceful change in society by improving the human rights situation .
On the other hand , the EU 's oil supply is affected by the events in the Mediterranean region .
In this situation , cooperation between the Union and Council is vital for guaranteeing energy requirements and avoiding a rise in the oil price on the global market .
I also think that it is time to conclude the 20 years of negotiations by signing the Free Trade Agreement , which would be so beneficial to both sides .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we are here this evening to discuss this Parliament 's reports on the Gulf Cooperation Council .
I understand that some political groups would have preferred to have postponed the discussion so as to better reflect the strategic times the Arab world is going through .
Indeed , at the time you started drafting no-one could have guessed what the world would be like today , nor what challenges the countries and people of the entire Arab region would be facing .
In line with our conviction that each country is different from the others , the European Union is responding to different situations with different adapted responses .
You heard Cathy Ashton yesterday on all these : whether Tunisia , Egypt , Libya , Yemen or Bahrain , the European Union is faced with many critical choices and decisions .
The report we are discussing this evening is focused on the Gulf Cooperation Council and its countries , some of which are also experiencing calls from their populations to take better account of their political , social and economic aspirations .
Gulf governments are responding in different ways : substantial financial packages to alleviate the most pressing and social needs , announcements for political reforms , ceding some legislative powers to elected bodies , or openness to comprehensive and inclusive national dialogues .
But we have also seen violence .
Within the limits of our discussion tonight this is especially true of Bahrain .
We have been following this closely ; Cathy Ashton has repeatedly stated her concern at reports of serious violence on the streets and at the signs of increasing sectarian tensions .
She has also called on the security forces present in the country to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms .
She has raised her voice many times in calling for dialogue as the only way forward .
All of this has been done using a mix of public statements , which you have seen , and direct contacts with the authorities concerned .
The question for us is : where does all this lead to ?
What should the EU do ?
How should we read your report against the backdrop of these events ?
Yesterday Cathy Ashton noted she preferred engagement to isolation and I share that view .
Your report calls for more contacts and not less and I agree .
As trade Commissioner I would welcome better opportunities for exchanges between businesspeople .
This is a time for us Europeans to stand ready to foster more contacts with the populations of the Gulf countries .
It is also time for us Europeans to stand ready to respond positively to any request we may get for Europe to facilitate unprecedented dialogue leading to reforms .
We should not shy away from defending human rights and fundamental freedoms , but we should not dictate or impose our models of democracy on others either .
Europe firmly believes that reforms must come from within .
I believe this is right also with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council .
It is not for me to tell this Parliament how to go about dealing with the report before it .
What I believe is that we need to think in strategic terms , and for that dialogues and engagements are essential .
The EU should stand ready to lend all its support to dialogue and reform processes in the region .
We are ready to provide political support to reform , and also know-how and expertise to address more specific issues .
We welcome any such opportunity but this can only happen if and when the countries in the region ask for our assistance .
One final word on the free trade area with the Gulf for which I am directly responsible .
I trust that when the right circumstances on the ground materialise we will be able to proceed on the basis of a common EU determination to further trade relationship objectives in relation to the Gulf Cooperation Council .
Needless to say stability is a necessary condition both for the political contacts between governments and citizens to be enforced , and for trade flows and business to operate effectively .
Thank you for your attention and I would more specifically thank the rapporteur , Mr Baudis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I believe that it is absolutely vital for the EU to formulate a more ambitious policy in respect of the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) and its member states , particularly at a time when the European Union is exiting an economic crisis and in view of the disasters - an earthquake together with a tsunami - which have hit Japan .
I am pleased that the report covers issues such as energy in its broadest sense , industry , scientific research and the development of education .
The European External Action Service should therefore allocate more employees and increase the number of diplomatic missions open in GCC countries , in order to bring about closer cooperation .
I also believe that we should welcome all efforts undertaken as part of free trade negotiations to guarantee safe and secure supplies of raw materials .
Cooperation between the EU and the GCC should encompass further support for exchange programmes involving students , scientists and professionals .
In its report , the European Parliament stresses that the conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) between the EU and the GCC is a priority for further cooperation with our Mediterranean partners .
The European Union should therefore develop an appropriate strategy to support the process of regional integration .
in writing . - ( DE ) It seems that the people of the six states in the Gulf Cooperation Council , which incidentally are the EU 's most important trading partners in the Arab world , do not believe that the reforms that have been taking place there over recent years are adequate .
It is not yet clear to what extent the plans to inject huge sums of money to support the economies and improve social conditions in the two poorest of the six member states could help to bring an end to the ongoing demonstrations .
Although the Gulf Cooperation Council disputes the legitimacy of Colonel Gaddafi and supports the idea of a no-fly zone , demonstrators have been fired on in Saudi Arabia , which is also a member state , and in Bahrain demonstrators have also been subjected to violent treatment .
Even the sending of special units by the Gulf Cooperation Council to protect important infrastructure facilities in Bahrain is controversial , because the Shiite opposition is calling on the international community to protect the people from military intervention .
It seems as if the introduction of a no-fly zone has opened up a Pandora 's box .
The EU must not allow itself to be dragged into the internal affairs of states in the Middle East and that is what is threatening to happen , because the balance in Bahrain could change very rapidly .
We have seen what agreements are worth after a coup in the case of the readmission agreements .
Therefore , we should wait to see how the situation develops instead of pressing ahead now .
I welcome the adoption of the Baudis report as , now more than ever , the European Union needs to have a coherent strategy in its relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) .
Firstly , the member states of this organisation have a growing influence on the Arab-Muslim world and can play an important role in intercultural dialogue .
Furthermore , I believe that specific measures need to be taken to raise the Union 's profile in this region and promote mutual understanding .
Ways for doing this include establishing cooperation in the press and audiovisual sector , so as to remedy the lack of information about Europe .
Finally , I believe that the recent events in Bahrain force us to base the Union 's relations with the GCC more firmly on respect for human rights and basic freedoms .
At the moment , we need to ensure that the demonstrators ' calls for democratic reforms are heard as part of a genuine political dialogue .
The way to resolve the recent conflicts in Bahrain , for example , is by engaging civil society and not by using violent repression .
A free trade agreement means fewer barriers to mutual cooperation and trade .
I therefore support such an agreement , in principle .
The states belonging to the Gulf Cooperation Council are undoubtedly important trading partners , particularly because they possess the basic raw material of our age - oil .
I also welcomed the fact that the report , in addition to trade , also mentions the shortcomings of our trading partners in the area of human rights .
Despite this , however , I hesitated for a long time over whether to vote for the report .
Some of the states represented in the Gulf Cooperation Council have two faces .
One face smiles at us in a friendly way and says it is our ally in the fight against Islamic terrorism .
The other , however , is less visible and devotes billions of dollars every year to the spreading of religious ' education ' which calls for violence against Christians , Jews and all non-Muslims .
Eventually , however , I voted in favour of the report , because I also expect the Commission to tell us who is providing financial support for this hatred , when it begins detailed monitoring of manifestations of violence against Christians in Islamic states .
Corrigendum ( Rule 216 ) : see Minutes
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 24.00 )
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
EU-US air transport agreement - EU-Canada air transport agreement - EU-Vietnam air services agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation by Mr Zasada , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the draft decision by Council and the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting within the Council on the conclusion of the Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement between the United States of America , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part ( 15381 / 2010 - C7-0385 / 2010 - 2010 / 0112 ( NLE ) ) ,
the recommendation by Mrs Ticău , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the draft decision of the Council and of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting within the Council on the conclusion of the Agreement on Air Transport between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Canada , of the other part ( 15380 / 2010 - C7-0386 / 2010 - 2009 / 0018 ( NLE ) ) , and
the recommendation by Mr Riquet , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on certain aspects of air services ( 14876 / 2010 - C7-0366 / 2010 - 2007 / 0082 ( NLE ) ) .
Madam President , the Protocol which will be put to the vote is a particularly important document .
The aviation markets of the European Union and the United States , taken together , account for around 60 % of world air traffic .
Opening the market to airlines from the European Union and the United States on a non-discriminatory basis will offer passengers and freight operators improved services , provide substantial economic benefits and create jobs .
My dream is for passengers to benefit from competition between airlines on the basis of market principles , for passengers flying in transit to the United States to pass through one security point , for passengers in the European Union and the United States to enjoy the same rights , and , of course , for them to be aware of these rights .
Will this Protocol guarantee these things ?
No .
Yet I am convinced that it is a step in the right direction , and that it will make it significantly easier in the future to achieve these goals .
During the successive rounds of negotiations between the EU and the United States , it was touch and go several times whether the Protocol would be signed .
Finally , however , we succeeded in adopting it .
As a result , a number of risks were avoided , including the greatest risk of all , namely that the suspension clause would be triggered , which would have resulted in the suspension of the agreement and the annulment of the results of both stages of negotiations .
This would have meant a return to the legal situation as it stood seven years ago , which would be unacceptable .
Six of the EU Member States have no bilateral air transport agreements with the United States , and rejection of the document would have meant preventing these Member States from being able to operate flight connections between their airports and US territory .
The second stage of the agreement does not achieve the ultimate objective of a complete opening of the market without any restrictions on either side , but it does contain a number of incentives to encourage reform .
In particular , when the US changes its legislation to allow EU investors majority ownership of US airlines , the EU will allow the same for US investors .
I am particularly pleased by the fact that the significance of the agreement 's social dimension is emphasised .
In this context , the Commission should utilise the agreement to promote compliance with the appropriate international regulations on social rights , in particular with the employment standards set out in the conventions of the International Labour Organisation and the OECD , and with the Rome Convention .
This will ensure better observance of existing employee rights by airlines .
The agreement will also strengthen cooperation on environmental matters by requiring compatibility and interaction in the field of green technologies and fuel and air traffic management .
In my capacity as rapporteur , I endeavoured to place the issue in a broader context and present both the positive and the negative features of the Protocol , without succumbing to the temptation to concentrate exclusively on its weak or strong points .
I did not start work with the a priori assumption that we must support or reject this Protocol .
Following a great many meetings and discussions , I came to the conclusion that the EU will benefit much more from adopting this document than from rejecting it .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) Madam President , the Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of international agreements .
Air transport agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field which the ordinary legislative procedure applies to .
Prior to the current agreement , aviation was the subject of bilateral agreements with 19 of the EU Member States .
I am referring by this to the agreements between the European Union and Canada .
Many of these agreements contained numerous restrictions and did not offer full access to the respective markets .
In November 2002 , the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled that certain provisions in these bilateral agreements were incompatible with Community law .
The negotiating mandate sets the objective of establishing an open aviation area between the European Union and Canada .
This would create a single market for air transport between the European Union and Canada where investment could flow freely and where European and Canadian airlines would be able to provide air services without any restriction , including in the domestic markets of both parties .
The EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement was initialled on 30 November 2008 , endorsed by the EU-Canada summit on 6 May 2009 and signed on 17-18 December 2009 .
What is the content of the agreement ?
The agreement includes a gradual phasing-in of traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as far-reaching cooperation on a number of issues including safety , security , social matters , consumer interests , the environment , air traffic management , state aid and competition .
All European Union airlines will be able to operate direct flights to Canada from anywhere in Europe .
The agreement removes all restrictions on routes , prices or the number of weekly flights between Canada and the European Union .
Airlines are free to enter into commercial arrangements such as code-share agreements , which are important for airlines serving a large number of destinations , and to set their fares in line with competition law .
The agreement contains provisions for opening the market in phases .
Phase one applies where the foreign ownership of airlines is limited to 25 % , as was the case when the negotiations on the agreement were completed .
Phase two starts as soon as Canada has taken the necessary steps to enable European investors to own up to 49 % of Canadian carriers ' voting equity .
Phase three begins once both sides introduce the possibility for investors to set up and control new airlines in each others ' markets .
Phase four is the final step with full rights to operate between , within and beyond both markets , including between places in the territory of the other party .
I am referring here to cabotage .
I would like to mention a few points about this report .
Although this agreement is more ambitious than that with the US regarding market access , it is less explicit when it comes to recognising the importance of the social dimension .
It is important that the Commission uses the agreement and , in particular , the possibility of reference to the Joint Committee , to promote compliance with relevant international legislation on social rights , especially the labour standards embodied in the fundamental conventions of the International Labour Organisation .
Given the important role played by the Joint Committee , including in politically sensitive matters such as environmental and labour standards , it is important that the Commission ensures that Parliament is kept fully informed and consulted about the Committee 's work and also about future amendments to the Treaty .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I shall be very brief , not because the Agreement with Vietnam is any less important , but because Mrs Ticău has reiterated , in the previous report on Canada , the legislative and regulatory framework within which these air agreements between the European Union and a third country will apply .
The context is therefore exactly the same as this one except that our agreement , which is simpler and less ambitious , seeks to regularise horizontally , in the area of air services , the 17 bilateral agreements that previously existed between Vietnam and the countries of Europe , and naturally to extend them to all EU countries .
This agreement does not relate to the opening-up of the market because Vietnam 's economy is a regulated State economy and there is obviously no question of opening up the market .
The aim is therefore - as the previous rapporteur has already said - to bring into line with European legislation the existing bilateral agreements on air services that have been concluded up to now between the European Union and Vietnam .
One of the main characteristics of this Agreement is a designation clause relating to all EU air carriers .
This will give all EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam .
This Agreement also includes safety provisions designed to standardise and equalise these kinds of provision , in addition to a clause against anticompetitive practices .
We have come up against several difficulties , which explains why it has taken some time to reach this Agreement - several years in fact .
As for the inclusion of a fuel taxation clause , this was eventually rejected by Vietnam .
This clause , which generally features in air agreements negotiated by the Commission , allows for the taxation of a third-country carrier when it operates a flight within the EU .
It should be stated , of course , that Vietnam does not operate nor will operate for the time being any flights within the European Union .
Furthermore , the Vietnamese Government has promised to enter into bilateral negotiations with Member States if this proves necessary or if , indeed , a Vietnamese national airline were to schedule a flight within the European Union .
To conclude , the ratification of the Agreement evidently offers more advantages than does the absence of such an Agreement even though it lacks a fuel taxation clause .
It will , however , ensure that the principles of EU law are respected bilaterally and in the case of all EU Member States .
We therefore obviously call on the European Parliament to ratify this Agreement .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank Parliament and the rapporteurs in particular for supporting the Commission on these important agreements .
All three have been strongly supported by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
On the US agreement , let me start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Zasada , for his very positive recommendation in relation to the outcome of the negotiations with the United States on a second stage air services agreement .
You will remember that the aim of the second stage discussions was to facilitate the normalisation of the transatlantic market and extend the scope and depth of the excellent aviation relationship established through the implementation of the first stage agreement , in place since March 2008 .
I now want to mention the key elements of the second stage aviation agreement .
The second stage agreement creates the prospects for additional investment and market access opportunities .
It also further strengthens the framework of cooperation on the environment , social protection , competition and security .
On the environment , the agreement establishes a clear framework for tackling local and global challenges .
The agreement seeks to reduce the security burden on passengers , airlines and airports across Europe .
For the first time in such an aviation agreement , the need to balance market access opportunities with strong social protection has been recognised through a commitment to implementing the provisions of the agreement in a way which does not undermine labour rights .
On the commercial front , Europe has gained further rights , including immediate access to the ' Fly America ' programme with the exception of defence .
The second stage agreement is not perfect .
Like you , I would have liked to have seen an immediate and irrevocable change to the US laws governing ownership and control of its airlines .
This has not been possible , but we were able to secure a commitment from the United States to work towards reforming these rules in the future .
As part of the agreement , the EU and the United States have committed to the goal of removing the remaining market barriers in industry , including those that limit airlines ' access to global capital .
Let me now turn to the agreement with Canada .
My thanks go to the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and in particular to Ms Ţicău .
This ambitious agreement is designed to achieve complete opening of the markets for traffic rights and investment , at the same time reaching an unprecedented level of regulatory convergence and cooperation between the authorities .
With respect to market access , the agreement comprises the full range of traffic rights and investment opportunities : this means 100 % ownership and control .
It is done through a phased market opening in four phases .
Among its multiple benefits for both sides , it is also worth noting the establishment of a level playing field for the industry , as well as common or compatible standards for safety , security and air traffic management .
Last but not least , I am convinced that by removing existing regulatory restrictions this agreement will lead to a substantial increase in passengers and generate various consumer benefits and the creation of new jobs .
On Vietnam , let me also start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Riquet , for his support for this horizontal agreement .
Currently , we have negotiated 45 such horizontal agreements with partner countries worldwide .
On 4 October 2010 , during a visit to the European Union , the Vietnamese Prime Minister signed the agreement , which represents an important step towards strengthening aviation relations between the EU and Vietnam .
The horizontal agreement will restore legal certainty to our aviation relations with Vietnam by bringing the bilateral air services agreements between 17 Member States and Vietnam into line with EU law .
Most importantly , it will remove nationality restrictions in bilateral air services agreements between EU Member States and Vietnam .
It will thereby allow any EU airline to benefit from the existing bilateral agreements between Vietnam and the Member State .
Thank you very much for your attention . I am looking forward to the debate .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their reports .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) welcome these agreements .
In this case , 27 agreements which could have been concluded in these areas are being replaced by just one .
For us , technical harmonisation is also an important point .
It increases levels of safety not just for the airlines themselves , but also for the passengers .
The opening up of the market and the cooperation at a European level should be treated in the same way by both sides .
It is important to highlight the fact that the agreement with Canada is a very good example of this , while the agreement with the USA leaves something to be desired .
Another area which leaves something to be desired is the lack of regular checks on the social and environmental aspects of these agreements , which should be a part of all future agreements , because the simplification of the economic aspects should also enable us to use these agreements to influence not only the European market but also the global market .
Importantly , these agreements also bring benefits for passengers , because they can result in the controls being simplified without them being neglected .
Finally , I would like to say that we welcome this agreement , because , as I have already said , 27 agreements are ultimately being replaced by one .
This is a clear indication that we will hopefully soon be dealing with only seven or perhaps even three airspaces , instead of with the current 27 , as part of measures to improve air safety and implement the single European sky .
This will make negotiations on these agreements much simpler .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the three rapporteurs for the work they have done and for the helpful cooperation on their part .
When we launch , shortly , a more general debate in response to Mr Brian Simpson 's report on aviation agreements , we will get an opportunity to address more thoroughly the general approach and strategy with regard to this sort of agreement .
We , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , emphatically support the replacement of old bilateral agreements between our Member States and third countries with comprehensive global agreements at European level .
This is the best guarantee of a level playing field for all our airlines .
It will also strengthen the integration of our own aviation sector as it will , of course , our negotiating position in relation to third countries .
It is important , in that regard , that we pay attention not only to the opening up of the market for additional flying rights and suchlike , but also to a strengthening of the regulatory framework in the environmental and social fields and the fields of safety and security .
We absolutely have to bring these into line with each other , at a very high level .
Another important point to mention here is that , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force , Parliament is not just supposed to give an opinion , but really has to approve these agreements as well .
My message , therefore , to the Commission and the Council is that they should make full use of those powers and that Parliament , therefore , should retain its say in approving or modifying additions or other amendments at a later stage .
With regard to the agreements before us , our group believes that the agreement with Canada comes the closest to the model that we have in mind , that is extensive cooperation in the fields of security , social issues and consumer and environmental protection .
Indeed , the rapporteur has rightly observed that the sections on social issues should have been worded a little more strongly , but that can be resolved in the Joint Committee which will now have to make a few things concrete .
Besides that cooperation , there is also the gradual introduction of additional flying rights and the gradual extension of the opportunity to become a shareholder in each other 's airlines .
The agreement with Vietnam also reminds us of the growing importance of the Asian market , and I think that , on this particular point , we have to point out that the Council has been dragging its heels for years over giving the Commission a mandate to negotiate with countries such as China and India .
That mandate is essential , of course , if we are to make progress on this .
By way of conclusion , I would like to say a few things about the agreement with the United States , particularly regarding the second stage .
This concerns an area which covers 60 % of the world aviation market and is therefore extremely important .
I personally was a rapporteur for this House when , a few years ago , the first stage was approved .
With regard to the United States , we are not completely satisfied because some things still have to happen in terms of market access .
We ask the Commission to give an undertaking that this will not be the end , that it will proceed on the course of opening up the market and that we , as Parliament , will be fully involved in the activities of the Joint Committee .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , firstly I too would like to thank the rapporteur .
We have already discussed the fact that , following the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament now has the opportunity to vote in favour of air service agreements of this kind or to reject them .
We cannot change the contents , but we can accept or oppose them .
This does not always make things simple , but it is at least a new task , which we are taking very seriously .
It makes sense to replace a number of different bilateral agreements with one standardised EU agreement .
It is clear that there are no boundaries in airspace , which is a good way of explaining this .
The European Union is also a strong economic community and so it is sensible to discuss agreements made by the EU with different third countries , which is what we are doing now .
We have a number of very different agreements on the table today .
I will start with Vietnam .
This is the least complex agreement .
It concerns different accesses and services and also safety regulations , but it is a relatively short agreement , which is why I am only mentioning it briefly .
The most comprehensive agreement is the one with Canada .
In this agreement it was not just a case of ensuring free access to air services which can be used in different ways , but also of covering issues such as the environment , safety and also market access and ownership .
In that respect we have long since passed the first stage of 25 % and already reached the second stage of 49 % ownership of each other 's air services market .
Now we are about to enter stages 3 and 4 .
In stage 3 it is possible to establish airlines in another country and another region .
Stage 4 would allow a European airline to fly from A to B within Canada .
We have not come nearly as far as this with the USA , despite the fact that we have been negotiating with the USA for a long time .
I would like to make one more point .
Mr Kallas said that we were all very much in support of this issue , but in the case of the USA our reaction is more restrained , because the agreement does not represent a true partnership .
The USA wants to take more from us than it is prepared to give .
We need to continue negotiating on this .
Apart from this issue , we will vote in favour , because it is clear that progress has been made .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , we also welcome the successful conclusion of the second phase of the EU open skies agreement .
Indeed , after several years it was rather overdue .
Obviously this agreement is a significant breakthrough and it is to be welcomed .
I acknowledge that negotiators have made huge progress in the areas of security , competition , market access and environmental cooperation .
But , like the Commissioner , I am disappointed that this agreement did not achieve its ultimate objective of a complete opening of the market without restrictions on either side .
The failure to resolve fully issues of foreign ownership and control ( cabotage ) must be addressed in future discussions if European carriers are to truly benefit .
Of course agreements mean compromise , but that does not mean getting a deal at any price .
The aviation industry is massively important to Europe .
It facilitates economic growth , trade , investment and tourism .
Air agreements with third countries offer our airlines great opportunities in foreign markets , and I therefore urge the Commission to continue to strive to conclude air agreements which are fair , robust and lead to full liberalisation , which will benefit both European carriers and consumers .
Finally , can we just add our support to the EU-Vietnam agreement .

Madam President , Mr Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years we have concluded a large number of air service agreements , which have always involved summarising the old national agreements under a European umbrella .
Now things are starting to change with regard to the involvement of the European Union and I think this is very important .
The agreement with Vietnam largely follows the old model that we have always used .
However , the agreement with Canada is more ambitious , which I welcome .
The cooperation in the field of the environment and social issues is positive , but in my opinion it could be extended even further .
The situation concerning the agreement with the USA is quite different .
In this case , I believe that we have given in far too early .
Market access is a question of fairness and in this agreement the regulations are not fair .
Nevertheless , we have climbed down .
To a large extent there has been a failure to cover certain aspects of social conditions .
Much too little has been done in this area .
We must ensure that social dumping does not take place here , because this is also a safety issue when it comes to airlines .
We finally need to make this clear .
My second point is that there are major problems with regard to environmental issues .
The USA is starting to exert significant pressure to have night flight restrictions , which are in place to protect local residents , relaxed or lifted .
The pressure in this area is enormous and I am afraid that we will have to give in .
We must make it quite clear that this would be a disaster for everyone who lives near an airport .
On the safety question , the USA is gradually tightening the screw and unfortunately the implementation in the European Union is going unchallenged .
This is a mistake and I want to be very clear on this .
Finally , I would like to mention code-sharing , which is being presented as a major achievement .
I would like to say just one thing .
This will ultimately restrict passengers ' choices .
I will not be able to choose which airline I fly with and I may find myself confronted with a completely different airline when I reach the gate .
The concept of competition in the airline industry is fictitious and it is becoming even more so when it comes to the position of passengers .
on behalf on the EFD Group . - ( LT ) Madam President , the Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
I believe that the implementation of these agreements would provide substantial economic benefits and create jobs .
In addition , regulatory convergence could promote fair competition .
While the second-stage Agreement represents a significant step forward , it is important for it not to be regarded as the end of the process of establishing a transatlantic aviation market .
As for Canada , it is good that all EU airlines will be able to operate direct flights to Canada from anywhere in Europe .
The Agreement removes all restrictions on routes , prices , or the number of weekly flights between Canada and the EU .
The ambitious nature of this Agreement is very much to be welcomed .
It should serve as a target for other negotiations currently underway .
I therefore believe that Parliament should consent to the EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement .
The same can be said for the Agreement between the European Union and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on air services .
All of these air agreements are beneficial and necessary for the European Union , our airlines and our citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all I would like to take this opportunity to thank all three rapporteurs very much for their hard work .
These agreements are very important for air travel and , therefore , for the European Union .
However , I would also like to take the opportunity to refer once again to the framework agreement of 20 November 2010 .
I hope that the European Parliament will be informed in an appropriate way and in good time by the Commission about negotiations on future agreements in the interests of good interinstitutional cooperation and an effective flow of information .
We know that the negotiations on these and on other agreements are of the highest quality , but it is important for us to be aware of the strengths and weak points of the agreements after they come into force , so that we can make a better contribution .
This will make it easier to guarantee Parliament 's support for the agreements .
( ES ) Madam President , tomorrow it will be one year to the day since the second stage of the air transport agreement between the European Union and the United States was finally signed after eight rounds of difficult negotiation .
As such , I believe we should feel satisfied - me in particular , of course - that this was accomplished under the Spanish Presidency and under the leadership of the Minister of Public Works and Transport , José Blanco , who achieved considerable progress in aviation matters , including the single sky and labour relations in the air traffic control sector , where a negotiated settlement was reached .
I also welcome the fact that Parliament is using its new powers for the approval of such international agreements , specifically in relation to the transport industry .
The second stage of the EU-US air transport agreement eliminates the suspension clause , which entails the need to continue making progress and improving a number of issues in relation to the environment , competition and passengers ' rights , with which we are not completely satisfied as yet .
For the first time , the agreement also addresses labour relations .
I believe this is a matter of paramount importance , as it also enables the safeguarding of workers ' rights for the first time , as well as the future applicability of International Labour Organisation and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development conventions .
The agreement also sets out clear guidelines - and I believe this is quite significant - to build mutual trust in the area of security .
The possibility of a one-stop system must remain open .
We therefore believe this is a good agreement , which establishes a new non-discriminatory basis , entails improved service to the public and to companies , is economically and socially beneficial , and encourages fair competition .
Nevertheless , it is once again not perfect , as the extent of European ambitions means we must seek to go beyond this second stage .
We therefore need to examine and exploit all the potential that is available to us , including the Joint Committee and its new powers , as well as the new possibilities opened up at the International Civil Aviation Organisation regarding the Single European Sky ATM Research and others .
We therefore call on Vice-President Kallas to push for this agreement , to follow it closely and , of course , to report to Parliament .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Open Skies Agreement between Europe and the United States is an advance , but it is just one stage and it faces Europe with a dilemma .
The Committee on Transport and the Commission have themselves pointed this out .
Either we accept an agreement that disadvantages European businesses , or we suspend the agreement and risk losing the benefits we have gained since 2008 .
So allow me to draw a parallel with the licences of professional and private pilots - a text which will be debated before the summer - because pilots , of whom I am one , face a dilemma .
The European Aviation Safety Agency , which wants to harmonise licences throughout Europe , will do so to the detriment of the 80 to 90 000 general aviation pilots directly affected - some of whom hold only a US licence - and to the detriment - and this is the important point - of those companies and jobs connected to this activity .
I wish to draw your attention to this project which has nothing to do with safety .
There are 31 times fewer accidents amongst holders of US licences .
The objectives of Basic Regulation ( EC ) No 216 / 2008 provide for the recognition of and equivalent rating of licences for which it is judged unnecessary to wait for hypothetical agreements that have been pushed back to 2014 .
Thus , I propose a very open sky agreement and even invite you to accompany me on those occasions when I come to Parliament flying my own plane , to show you that a US pilot licence is perfectly safe .
Thank you for the invitation , Mr Boulland , I shall see what I can do .
( RO ) Madam President , I want to congratulate Mrs Ţicău on this ambitious agreement with Canada .
The agreement marks an important phase in the process of opening the market .
At the same time , it will help create new air routes and develop new opportunities for investors on both sides of the Atlantic , in terms of both the development of new investments and the introduction of new services for European and Canadian citizens .
I think that the decision to allow airlines to operate without restriction anywhere in Europe and Canada is valuable and will be of benefit to consumers , airlines and the economies of both countries in general .
The implementation of this agreement will lead to more services being operated by airlines and to new cargo transport opportunities .
However , this development must also raise greater concern about consideration of the impact on climate change .
The agreement will also make the European and Canadian markets safer by strengthening cooperation with regard to compliance with certification procedures and inspections aimed at guaranteeing a maximum level of safety for passengers and goods .
Madam President , as Chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Canada , it is with particular pleasure that I speak on this EU-Canada agreement .
I think it is very worthwhile reiterating some of the significant features of the agreement .
As mentioned before , in Phase 1 , airlines have unlimited freedom to operate direct services between any point in the EU and Canada , without limitation on the number of providers or , indeed , services .
We move to Phase 3 ; we will see investors able to set up new airlines in each other 's countries and , in Phase 4 , full cabotage rights and the potential for 100 % ownership of carriers .
The agreement also sets out mutual standards for safety and security .
And that is important because it means that the transfer of passengers , luggage and cargo should benefit from a more streamlined approach .
It is an important agreement for the EU and our aviation sector .
It will allow increased competition , greater choice for the travelling public .
Not only that , I believe that the comprehensive nature of this agreement can serve as a benchmark for future agreements with other countries .
This resolution clearly demonstrates Canada 's position as our most proactive international partner , and I wholeheartedly support it .
( PT ) Madam President , these agreements are part of the liberalisation process that is currently underway in the air transport sector .
They are clearly marked by ideology .
Even in this strategic sector , the aim is to cripple state intervention and regulation , opening the doors to the monopolistic concentration that always results from free competition , which is considered sacrosanct .
Under the pretext of facilitating business opportunities within international air transport , this promotes the interests of multinationals within the sector at the expense of national companies and their respective strategic interests , including those that , as is the case in Portugal with TAP , are publicly owned .
This means that both the workers and the passengers lose out .
Workers lose out because liberalisation facilitates dumping by multinationals , leading to work-related insecurity due to the forced deterioration of working conditions .
Passengers also lose out because , among other things , aeronautical safety will tend to be left to the whim of cost / benefit considerations by companies .
This is nothing new .
The situation in other sectors such as rail transport , which has seen increased liberalisation , amply demonstrates the consequences of putting the tenets of the free market into practice .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable Members very much for their comments .
Of course the most complicated issue is the agreement and negotiation process with the United States .
I can assure you that this is far from being the end .
It is one part of the process and we are definitely continuing to negotiate with the United States but I would like to underline that the United States is a very difficult partner .
As many of you mentioned , 60 % of world aviation is covered by the EU and the United States .
What we decide in cooperation will also define the whole framework and whole environment for aviation in the world , so the cooperation is also extremely important for the whole world .
It also must be made very clear that the Americans have the same parliamentary procedures : they have the US Congress , which is very difficult to deal with precisely because of protectionist feeling , but we are working together and developing our relations .
I will be going to Washington in a few weeks ' time , and we have committed ourselves to work in five directions : first safety , second security , third technological cooperation - we signed an important agreement in Budapest about interoperability of air traffic management systems which is extremely important for Europe so that we do not lose our competitive advantages - , fourth the environment and fifth commerce or business .
On business , as you know and as you mentioned , there are ridiculous restrictions on ownership rights .
But it must also be very clear that we cannot force the United States to surrender ; we must negotiate and this is sometimes not so obvious .
We must negotiate and we have to take into account their concerns .
It looks quite promising , but we definitely cannot win any commerce or especially technological confrontation : this should be avoided , it can be very dangerous .
So , as I say , in October we committed to moving in these five directions and definitely the next agreements will follow and we will try with the new US Congress to facilitate market openings which will be the most difficult part as several of you have already mentioned .
I would also like to say that , yes , the Vietnam agreement is of course by magnitude much smaller than the other agreements but it is very important that we form an aviation area which behaves with the same rules and which follows the same rules and this is exactly the aim of these agreements , especially - which is a difficult element in negotiations with third countries - the recognition of EU carriers .
You know that this has been a very sensitive issue , and with these agreements with third countries we create better possibilities for European airlines as well .
Thank you for your comments .
I promise that we will keep you informed about all future developments .
We have had several discussions in the TRAN Committee about the concepts of these negotiations and further development and , here again , one has to negotiate with difficult partners .
This is the eternal truth of all negotiations but the picture has not been so bad .
We have achieved a lot including with the United States , with the recognition of EU carriers and several other things .
There I can assure you that I will again meet the leaders of the US transport policy ; there is a certain willingness to cooperate and to find ways to solve our conflicting problems .
Madam President , I am very grateful for all the opinions voiced on the air transport agreement between the European Union and the United States .
I accept that the agreement is not perfect ; it is another step in the right direction , but we have certainly not reached the end of the road .
We were not able to amend this document for procedural reasons .
Rejection of the agreement would however have meant sacrificing the gains made during both stages of negotiations .
In my report , I have included a call for certain changes which should be the focus of the Joint Committee 's work , or which should form the basis of a third stage of negotiations .
In particular , I call for the further liberalisation of traffic rights , additional foreign investment opportunities , the adoption of a much more ambitious position on environmental protection and better coordination of political strategies on passenger rights in order to ensure passengers the highest possible level of protection .
Ladies and gentlemen , my work on this document is not yet complete .
I intend to monitor the actions of the Joint Committee , which was appointed in order to ensure that the agreement 's provisions would be implemented appropriately or even extended .
I will strive to ensure that a permanent observer sits on the Joint Committee on behalf of the European Parliament .
If the committee does not live up to the hopes invested in it , Parliament should call on the Commission to open a third stage of negotiations .
Finally , I would of course like to express my heartfelt thanks to all the shadow rapporteurs for their comments and assistance when drafting this report .
rapporteur . - ( RO ) Madam President , the air transport agreement between the European Union and Canada can be described as the most ambitious air transport agreement between the European Union and a major world partner .
It will significantly improve the connections between the markets of both countries and the links between people , while also creating new opportunities for the airline sector through a gradual liberalisation of foreign ownership rules .
In particular , the agreement is more ambitious and specific than the agreement between the European Union and United States on traffic rights , ownership and control , even following the provisional application of the amending protocol , which is therefore phase two .
According to a study undertaken by the Commission , an open agreement with Canada would generate an additional half million passengers in its first year and , within a few years , 3.5 million new passengers might be expected to take advantage of the opportunities such an agreement could offer .
The agreement could generate consumer benefits of at least EUR 72 million through lower fares and would also create new jobs .
Madam President , we welcome the ambitious nature of this agreement .
It should provide an objective and model for other negotiations currently in progress .
In conclusion , I recommend Parliament to approve the EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement .
Madam President , I shall be extremely brief for , as Commissioner Kallas has pointed out , the Agreement with Vietnam is a simple one , approved by all .
It has not caused any difficulties for our own report and has the great merit of opening up the Vietnamese market to all European stakeholders through reciprocity with a country which operates according to a different economic model .
I think that this Agreement should also be regarded as an important step geographically , as it opens up the East and the countries of South East Asia to us .
I do not think therefore that there is anything left to be said other I am delighted that we have been able to reach a satisfactory conclusion with this Agreement , which will open up travel between Vietnam and Europe a little more .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11 : 30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) In recent years the European Union has negotiated and concluded several agreements with other states in the field of air transport .
According to the Court of Justice , the traditional designation clauses in the existing bilateral agreements infringe EU law , as they constitute discrimination against EU carriers established in a Member State but owned and controlled by nationals of other Member States .
As such agreements violate the principle of freedom of establishment , as set out in Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the EU has initiated and is developing a practice for the negotiation and conclusion of agreements between the EU , of the one part , and third countries , of the other part , with regard to air transport .
We can identify the main elements of these agreements as the concerns relating to security , passenger rights , the mutual recognition of certification and cooperation on regulation .
In this context , I would like to call attention to Parliament 's limited role with regard to these dossiers .
Following the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force , its opinion is binding , but only in terms of the final text which has already been signed ; it cannot make suggestions or changes to its content .
in writing . - ( NL ) The delegation of the Dutch Labour Party to the European Parliament certainly does not consider this second stage agreement to be perfect , but it takes the view that it will lead to progress in important areas .
In addition , it will prevent the United States from activating the suspension clause in the absence of such an agreement .
Suspension could lead to European passengers and airlines no longer being able to profit from the significant benefits which they have enjoyed since March 2008 thanks to this protocol .
The benefits and positive aspects include , in particular , agreements on working standards for airline staff , sharing good practice with regard to noise abatement , strengthening cooperation in the field of environmental protection and so on .
The delegation of the Dutch Labour Party to the European Parliament recognises the ongoing need to pursue a proper debate on safety requirements ( such as the use of scanners ) and the impact on privacy and health of passengers of such requirements .
In addition , it would highlight the need for the privacy of European and US citizens to be put centre stage and respected when passengers ' personal data is exchanged between the EU and the US .
It is essential that Parliament is and remains involved in these negotiations and that European regulations are not eroded .
in writing . - ( HU ) It is important to take the concerns of European citizens about respect for their data protection rights seriously .
We consider it important that there be an agreement between the European Union and the United States on data protection in the field of cooperation in criminal and judicial matters .
We welcome the fact that the Hungarian Presidency is actively engaged in the issue of data protection .
We must specifically take note in this regard of the Council conclusions on data protection that were adopted at the February meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
We are looking forward to the Commission 's proposals to ensure that both our liberties and the security of our data are protected and respected .
Preparation of 2012 budget ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Balzani , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on general guidelines for the preparation of the 2012 budget [ 2011 / 2042 BUD ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the document we are examining today is not merely a report on the priorities of the next European budget , but also and above all a strategic document looking at the new role that the European budget must play in the context of greater economic governance .
This is the first year of the European Semester , which has been designed precisely to establish the greatest possible coordination between the Union 's budget and those of the Member States , the greatest possible synergy and the utmost complementarity .
All of which essentially means one thing : convergence , and making the budgets of the Member States converge with the major goals of the European budget .
Today , these objectives - these European objectives - can only be those laid down in the Europe 2020 Strategy : a grand , ambitious strategy with five highly important targets and seven big flagship initiatives .
These are big , important goals , but they are also very specific .
The first target is extremely important and involves building a more fully , better employed Europe by making the right investments .
We therefore have a huge priority for the 2012 budget : we must not waste time in executing the 2020 Strategy , beginning with the first of the targets , that of higher employment in Europe .
Immediately setting out the dimension of the 2020 Strategy in our budget is therefore essential and a matter of urgency .
Two things are fundamental in order to achieve this : we must plan and we must look to the future .
Planning means ruling out mathematical approaches to the budget , which are absolutely senseless .
Mathematical , general and indiscriminate increases are of no use at all .
Instead we must look at what exactly are the programmes and the actions that can contribute to the 2020 Strategy .
Looking to the future has an absolutely crucial significance : taking the utmost care over our commitments and not simply over our payments , because commitments are the tool with which to build the sustainable financial future of our Union .
Flexibility is another important subject .
We are at the end of the planning period and so the budget is particularly rigid .
I therefore think that it is really important that , right from the start , we consider all the available flexibility instruments as fundamental and indispensable for the budget we are going to draw up if we want it to be not only possible or essential to take the first step towards the 2020 Strategy - which absolutely must not be a failure , as we have seen in the past - but also if we want it to be a useful and effective budget .
I am convinced that it will only be possible to reach all these major objectives if we work together patiently , right from the very start , to build a renewed climate of institutional cooperation .
Institutional cooperation is one of the major challenges of the Treaty of Lisbon , which we always talk about rather carelessly .
Institutional collaboration means really finding a renewed feeling of equality so as to work together on this sensitive issue , the budget , which is not only one of the most strategically important instruments to build our future , but also one of the most tangible and practical .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome Parliament 's position on the priorities of the 2012 budget as reflected in the proposed guidelines .
The Commission , in line with its right of initiative , will of course take into account Parliament 's guidelines and also assess the guidelines of the Council .
On the other hand , we have to take into account the most recent data coming from the 27 Member States , and we will have our services carefully scrutinise and evaluate those elements in order to shape the draft budget on 20 April .
This is now the second test of the annual procedure under the Treaty of Lisbon .
The context of financial consolidation is obvious to everybody .
I think , in such a context , that it would be responsible to take into account and respond to all the fiscal financial obligations of the European Union , but also to bear in mind the context of austerity which is the reality in the Member States .
At this time , more than ever , no-one could argue against the need to base the budget on the principles of rigorous and sound budgeting .
It has never been so important to look for savings , but we should also use the tool of the European budget in order to help Europe in this post-crisis situation .
With that in mind , I would point out two differences between national budgeting and Europe 's budget .
National budgeting is mainly about social transfers , about consumption .
The European budget is about investment with multiplier effects .
Therefore it could be conducive to growth and jobs .
It is not good or sound budgeting to fail to pay out on the outstanding commitments agreed on in previous years , so both must be taken into account when shaping the final draft proposal for 2012 .
As mentioned in the letter from the President of the Commission , and as the rapporteur , Ms Balzani clearly stated , we must ensure sufficient funding for expenditure under the 2020 Strategy .
Yes , we have to coordinate the efforts of national and European budgeting , but on the other hand , we must be especially rigorous when it comes to administrative expenditure - hence the Commission 's commitment of less than 1 % for administration .
That means savings as regards contractual obligations and savings in areas such as conferences , mission costs , meetings and information technology .
Taking into account what happened last year , we hope that this time it will be a smoother procedure , building on the experience of 2011 .
Therefore I am looking forward to our first trialogue meeting on 30 March .
Then we will be ready to present our draft budget for 2012 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the guidelines we are shortly to vote on are the first step towards the European budget for 2012 .
Since the beginning , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has shown its support for a preliminary report containing an indication of Parliament 's priorities for the forthcoming budget , which would then be presented to the Commission , as is done by the Council .
Our contribution has helped broaden the scope of the priority policies and supported the balanced foundations laid by the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani , by inserting a number of strong and distinctive priorities that express the traditions of the PPE Group , namely development and growth for Europe together with research and innovation .
Indeed , I think these are the policies that we should invest in for the future of the Union and that Parliament really ought to stress before the preliminary draft budget is tabled by the Commission .
As Mr Lewandowski correctly pointed out a short time ago , we also insisted that the concept of responsibility should be at the heart of the 2012 budget .
This is not to say that until now we have not exercised budgetary responsibility , but it highlights the fact that now more than before , as a result of the crisis , we must act responsibly .
Lastly , I think something needs to be said about what has happened and what is happening in many countries in North Africa , simply to show that we reject medium-term approaches that are incapable of properly dealing with unexpected events or new policies .
In terms of the technical aspect of the vote , I think it would be worth leaving the report produced by the Committee on Budgets substantially unchanged .
I am really puzzled by the insistence of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on including the tax on financial transactions .
Quite apart from the substance of the issue , to me it seems to be of no relevance to the 2012 budget procedure .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Balzani .
She has chosen a very wise starting point for her report .
It is short , specific and constructive and has a clear focus on the most important issues .
What then are the most important issues ?
They involve demonstrating that the Europe 2020 Strategy is not just hot air , but a serious attempt to enable the EU to play a tangible role in promoting growth and jobs .
The EU 's budget is controversial , despite the fact that it is actually very small - around 1 % of GDP or a little over 2 % of overall public expenditure .
However , it can play a strategic role when it comes to investments in projects that the Member States cannot manage by themselves or that require solidarity within Europe .
These relate to research and development , infrastructure for transport and energy and being able to realise the true potential of the internal market - a well-functioning labour market in the EU and a real basis for growth and competitiveness .
However , these joint projects cost money .
Evidence is therefore required , particularly on the part of the Member States and the Council .
Will the Europe 2020 Strategy be put into practice , or will it go the way of the Lisbon Strategy - good ideas that are buried in an office drawer ?
I believe that the 2012 budget will be crucial in answering that question .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work .
In times like these it is no easy task to set budgetary priorities .
I am also pleased that we are choosing to be guided by Europe 2020 for next year 's budget .
As was pointed out earlier , we cannot afford to wait until 2014 when the next budgetary framework enters into force to implement the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The Commission has an important responsibility to put forward proposals in its draft budget this summer .
We have so far been unable to direct resources to the Europe 2020 Strategy to the extent that would be needed .
There is a risk that it could turn out exactly as Mr Färm warned : that the strategy does not get implemented but gets stuck in an office drawer , which we do not want , of course .
My group tabled a number of amendments to the report and we are very pleased with the way in which they have been incorporated into the proposals .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for that .
I have to say to the Council that we in the European Parliament most certainly have reason to examine ourselves and the way that we are approaching the 2011 budget .
We have succeeded in creating a conflict that has surely given both ourselves and the politicians in the Council cause for reflection .
We must consider how we can make the best possible use of the resources we have .
We may perhaps have to consider making cuts in the EU budget , too .
At the same time , we must not forget that the Union has been given a large number of tasks that have to be fulfilled .
These tasks will not do themselves .
Sometimes I have the feeling that the Council believes that things can just happen by themselves without us having to reprioritise or earmark resources , but that is unfortunately not the case .
I look forward to a constructive proposal from the Commission that can help us to find a more constructive tone in the negotiations on the 2012 budget .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
I think that , unlike the other guidelines which we have discussed over many others years in this House , it is focused and it does not get into a whole lot of different details , which are obviously to come later in the budget procedure .
Firstly I would like to say that we in my group would like to take very much into account what is happening elsewhere in the European Union and not just keep it within the Brussels ' Beltway ' .
Therefore the paragraph you have put in paragraph 21 - where you are saying that we should be looking for negative priorities and savings by the institutions , asking our specialised committees to be able to look for priorities - is very important , but very little work has been done on this so far .
Tied in to the desire , which I can fully understand , to have more monies available for the Europe 2020 Strategy and the flagships , we should be looking not just for actions which involve money , but strengthening of the single market .
It is not just about monies .
Where we are looking for monies we should be thinking about where we can be generating savings from elsewhere in the budget , as we are looking to do in Parliament and in the other institutions .
We take the line that if you want more money then you can take it from savings elsewhere .
This should also be an important part of our approach to the 2012 budget .
Lastly , therefore , in looking at the kind of responsibility we should take in an era of austerity , if we are going to be able to cope with the savings of financing where we need new expenditure my group believes we should be heading for a freeze in our expenditure for 2012 .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are also of the opinion that when budgets are tight and there is a need for austerity policies we must respond , because we have to reduce levels of debt in the Member States . This is not the case on a European level , because fortunately we are not allowed to get into debt .
However , the politically clever solution involves not only reducing debt but also achieving a balance , so that it is possible to invest in projects for the future in order not to put the national economy further at risk .
Reaching this balance must be one of the guidelines for the European budget in 2012 . In addition , we have made commitments in recent years in the European budget which come out of the structural funds and which will have to be financed next year and in the years that follow .
I think we should take Mrs Balzani 's approach very seriously .
It involves focusing on the most important areas of the EU 2020 Strategy , which determines where Europe is going .
We are calling for more funding at a European level to allow us to combat climate change , to switch more quickly to renewable energy sources and to support education and research .
We must continue to focus on these issues and we must not put this at risk .
I also think that the European Semester mechanism is being used correctly to ensure that the Member States and the European budget , in other words a total of 28 budgets , commit to the targets in the EU 2020 Strategy .
Where do we need to spend more money ?
On the basis of what we hope will be democratic change in the Arab countries , we Europeans have an interest in supporting civil society , democratic structures and the move to parliamentary democracy in these states and , therefore , we need flexible funding to promote democracy throughout the world in our own well-understood interests .
As a Member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to ask specifically where we can make savings , in particular in the light of recent events in Japan .
In my group we are of the opinion that we can save money on the ITER nuclear fusion reactor .
We do not know what to do with the nuclear waste from this project .
Why are we spending so much money on launching this project , when we should be redirecting the Euratom funding to enable us to move away from nuclear power and introduce renewable energy sources much more quickly ?
When we look at the United Nations and at climate policy , we all know that we need to change the way we generate energy .
The 2012 European budget must also make a contribution in this area .
I hope that we will have the power to make qualitative changes of this kind in the next multiannual financial framework .

Madam President , while we are here discussing the guidelines for the next budget , out there are tens of thousands of workers sending us a very clear message . They are telling us that the EU 's austerity policies are killing the economy and destroying the benefits and the conditions of life for the European public .
They are telling us that the model of economic coordination that is being imposed is based on fines and penalties that provide no guarantee of sustainable growth and job creation - quite the contrary , in fact .
They are telling us that the Pact for the euro , which the governments are adopting today , is a pact that is against wages and pensions .
It is a pact that is continuing to make the workers pay for the cost of the crisis , although it was not caused by them .
I believe that we should listen to this protest , because it poses a key question from the point of view of the European budget about the place of public investment in discussions about economic policies .
We have heard the conservatives say that what we need is a ' zero budget ' , with a ' zero increase ' .
We have heard various governments saying that , in the name of austerity policies , we need a European budget with a ' zero increase ' .
The discussion that we are having today is crucial , but this is the wrong answer .
It is the wrong answer for one simple reason : it is impossible to have ever stronger austerity policies at a national level yet at the same time say that due to these austerity policies we need ever weaker European budgets .
This reasoning inevitably leads to only one outcome : lower public investment at both national and European level .
It also means more unemployment and more social regression .
This is the crucial discussion to be held in talks on the 2012 budget .
It argues against those who think that the crisis can be resolved by heightening inequality and transforming the recession itself into a policy .
This is what my group is opposing .
We are going to abstain from this report because it is full of good intentions , but it does not respond in a clear way to this challenge , and the world of work requires a response from us on this matter .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , this report 's fundamental weakness is that it completely ignores the observations made by the Court of Auditors in its annual reports .
We should remember that the only information available is on the integrity and efficiency with which European Union funds have been spent .
The attempt to justify an increase in the budget on the basis that the Europe 2020 Strategy will take us out of the crisis lacks all credibility when we look back at the complete failure of the Lisbon Strategy .
The threat - and it is a threat - that limiting the level of the European Union budget will have a detrimental effect on European solidarity and the pace of economic development in the Member States is both facile and displays an overwhelming ignorance of the impact of the crisis upon European citizens .
On behalf of British taxpayers , I call on David Cameron to demand not a freeze , but a significant reduction of the budget for 2012 .
Given his track record today , I will not be holding my breath .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my opinion on three areas of Mrs Balzani 's report .
The first is that the report on the 2012 budget is based on the assumption of enhanced economic governance involving the EU , the European Semester mechanism and the Europe 2020 objectives to boost growth and employment .
In next year 's budget there will be support in particular for two headline targets in the strategy : improving education and promoting social inclusion , which for me are two key aspects with regard to Europe 's future viability .
Secondly , the report emphasises the need to improve synergies between European and national public investments in order to achieve the EU 's political objectives more effectively .
We need to encourage more coordination , greater consistency and a focus on sensible , shared objectives in order to make it more likely that the headline targets can be achieved successfully .
My third point concerns climate change and energy targets .
In the light of the disaster in Japan , we need to do everything possible to speed up the introduction of renewable energy sources .
An active climate policy and the creation of green jobs will not only help us to achieve our climate targets , but will also make a positive contribution to social policy .
Last but not least I would like to remind the House that the EU budget is not permitted to show a public deficit , which is why it is essential that it is implemented properly , and that it makes up only 2 % of total public spending .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur Mrs Balzani for the flexibility she has shown .
I say this because the original idea was not to hold this debate on budget guidelines .
I believe , however , that it is a good idea , because it will help to define the priorities that will shape the budget negotiations over the coming months .
I should like to touch on two fundamental matters .
First of all , austerity .
Austerity is not a principle , it is an instrument .
It is an instrument for achieving a truly credible budget that will not lead us to the consequences that are now materialising in many countries : that is , spending beyond our means and later encountering serious political difficulties when it comes to closing the gaps in the budget .
I also believe we should not bring matters into the annual budgetary procedure which actually have a multiannual financial scope .
I am referring , for instance , to the issue of the tax or levy on financial transactions .
This belongs in a far wider financial framework , so any attempt to artificially bring this debate into the annual budget will only lead to a misguided strategy of negotiation with the Council right from the start .
Only last year we saw what happens when we bring into a single-reading annual budget procedure , policies or ideas that actually have a wider scope : failure , stalemate and , ultimately , a situation - as we are now experiencing in 2011 - in which the level of credit appropriations is , as the Commissioner is perfectly well aware , insufficient to cover the immediate short-term needs of the European Union over the coming months .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , this morning we are debating the need to make savings in view of the debt crisis that we are experiencing in the Member States .
Mrs Trüpel and others have quite rightly pointed out that this debt crisis affects us only indirectly , as it is not permitted for debts to be incurred at European level .
Yet how can we pursue an austerity policy in the European Union if the volume of European expenditure is only 2 % of the total public expenditure of all 27 Member States ?
I believe that this is not an austerity policy at all .
Instead , it is a question of symbols - symbols that are in some way passed to us by the Member States as if money that is transferred to Brussels for the European budget in effect disappears into a deep black hole .
This completely ignores the fact that the funds that go into the European budget actually go back to the Member States again .
Of course , they do not go back at a ratio of 1 : 1 , as Europe is not a savings bank , and we naturally pursue a policy of solidarity where we support those in the European Union that are less well developed .
For example , in my state of North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany , all of the labour market instruments that are now implemented there are cofinanced by the European Social Fund .
If we remove this funding , there will be correspondingly less labour market policy .
That cannot be what Social Democrats are aiming for .
Let us consider for a moment how the Member States spend European funds .
The Court of Auditors ' annual report states that there are deficiencies in the way the management and control systems for spending European funds operate .
It states that the recovery of wrongly invested funds in the Member States runs into billions of euro .
It also states that the Commission is now , thankfully , going to suspend payments in cases where European programmes are being mismanaged .
That is also happening for example in Germany and the United Kingdom .
The Council , which is not here , represents the Member States , which I urgently call on to improve their management of EU budgetary resources .
The increase in efficiency that this would make possible would allow us to considerably improve the way we spend EU funds - not by spending more money but by improving the way we spend it .
The Member States can play a part in this in order to underline their willingness to make savings .
( DA ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Balzani .
I think she has a very exciting , but also very difficult task in negotiating this budget , and that is because the framework is tight .
The seven-year framework for the EU 's budget is devised in such a way that the framework becomes steadily tighter during the course of the seven-year period , particularly in the area of agriculture .
We have actually been able to utilise unused agricultural funds almost as a means of financing new initiatives such as energy investments for the recovery package and the satellite navigation system Galileo .
It is therefore becoming more and more difficult to ensure consistency .
I do not agree with the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that we should not finance the ITER fusion energy system .
This is important research , particularly in the light of what has happened in Japan and against the background of the need to ensure that we are not dependent on fossil fuels . Thus , this is also a difficult task .
We must find funding for the fusion energy project in 2012 .
I am pleased that the Commissioner emphasised the fact that the EU 's budget is not the same as national budgets .
It is a project budget , and the EU must be able to settle its accounts .
We must pay out the money that we have promised .
In this regard , I hope that the Commissioner is right that our budget negotiations will be smoother this time around .
That will require the Council to behave in a more intelligent and less stupid way - for it to give us a very definite figure for the payments , but to be more specific and look at what the real needs are .
Last but not least , I would like to thank the Commissioner for stating that we must cut our administrative expenditure , because this is one of the few areas where we actually can save money in the short term .
I think it is good that he started by saying that the Commission is reducing its administrative expenditure to next to nothing .
That is something we should also do in other institutions , and I believe that it is something that we really should take seriously - also in Parliament .
- ( CS ) Madam President , the 2012 budget of the European Union should continue the tradition of balanced budgets .
On the other hand , we must not continue with the disputes we saw when approving the 2011 budget .
We must not allow the creation of a temporary budget .
That would have a very negative effect on the running of the EU .
In order to avoid disputes and approve the budget quickly , we need to propose a sensible budget , which , in the current period of lingering economic crisis , means a tight budget .
The public in the Member States expect that , in a time of spending cuts , the EU too will run its affairs well and frugally .
If we lose sight of this , we will lose credibility .
( PT ) Madam President , we are having our say in this debate in order to show that there is an alternative to the consensus between law and democratic socialism , which has brought this crisis upon us .
This consensus does not , in itself , allow for any possibility of ending the crisis .
The alternative , which is both possible and necessary , is also undergoing profound changes due to EU budgetary policies , reconsidering the resources and objectives which these serve .
At a time when inequalities between the different Member States are growing , the EU budget should be at the service of real convergence , promoting the full exploitation of the actual potential of each country , the creation of employment with rights , the eradication of poverty and social exclusion , and the preservation of the environment .
It should be a tool at the service of genuine economic and social cohesion .
We reject a budget which is at the service of the commercialisation of more and more aspects of social life , liberalisation in numerous areas of economic activity , and lack of job security , as advocated by the Europe 2020 Strategy .
This path will accentuate the existing economic , social , regional and national divisions and disparities , and foment structural unemployment .
We therefore propose a new European strategy for solidarity and sustainable development , underpinned by a new set of economic , social and environmental policies , supported by the EU budget , as we explained in our set of proposed amendments to this report .
The Union budget should also be at the service of a genuine policy of development aid , cooperation and peace , not at the service of external interventionism , interference , militarism and war , areas that have taken an increasing toll on the Community budget .
We would therefore like to point out the urgency of steering Europe along a different course , and this should also be reflected in budgetary decisions .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report - which ought to map out Parliament 's guidelines for the 2012 budget - seems to me to be pretty much devoid of meaning .
It only includes a series of vague statements and therefore it does not seem clear to me what Parliament 's real priorities are for drafting the new budget .
For example , the Europe 2020 Strategy is mentioned a number of times .
It is an ambitious , wasteful and perhaps overly broad strategy .
What in any case are supposed to be its priorities ?
It is the Member States themselves that have to come to terms with restricted budgets and the consequences of the crisis ; we cannot be so naïve as to the think that we can do much at a European level .
Therefore I would have preferred to see fewer statements of intent and fewer words and instead an indication of a few limited and precise areas in which to act .
I am aware that this report is dealing with general guidelines , but in its current state it seems to me to be all but useless and merely self-serving .
( NL ) Madam President , Mrs Balzani from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has proved with her report the following fact : the EU does not look after its citizens well , but it does look after itself .
The ruling Socialist and Christian Democrat clique is making sure there is a continuing majority in Parliament who are in favour of wasting even more money .
A nice sum of EUR 3 000 per member for a staff allowance , a good job on the side in the House of European History ( for those fortunate enough to have the right connections ) , a totally unnecessary and terribly expensive European TV channel , a prestigious satellite project called Galileo , all of which is leading increasingly to financial disaster .
Oh well , things are clear ... and , on top of that , having the nerve to speak about sustainability and responsibility .
There is no responsibility to speak of and sustainability is only possible if things are expensive .
Madam President , I will keep it short and clear : throw out this nonsensical report .
This is absolutely not what the citizens of Europe are waiting for .
The EU is giving no sign of wanting to economise and , on top of that , this will only lead to more money being wasted .
I thought that wisdom comes with age , but that unfortunately does not seem to be the case with this Parliament .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after the last few speeches , I recommend that we try to return to the grounds of reason .
The rapporteur was in no easy situation when she was preparing her material .
After all , we can not yet talk about figures in any meaningful way until the Commission presents to us the boundaries within which it foresees the budget for the next year .
We can , however , talk about principles .
And in this regard , the rapporteur partially approached the matter very aptly , in that she attempted to integrate the 2020 policy within the bounds of the budget .
On the other hand , her decision to not yet get involved in policies at this stage , and to not talk about their outlines and objectives either , indeed justifies certain critical comments that the material seems somewhat hollow .
I believe that we can still all agree that , similar to previous years , we continue to consider cohesion policy extremely important .
This policy will only really swing into motion now , at the end of the cycle , and it is here that the greatest payment requests will appear .
I would very much like to stress , contrary to others , that these payments are not for their own sake , and that this is not about spending the money , but rather about using it in ways which actually further the European cause , and bring us forward in assisting less developed regions in catching up .
If they are not doing this , they are doing wrong .
Then Parliament must indeed step up against any kind of inappropriate spending and spending in the nature of prestige investments .
I believe that the Committee on Budgets , in cooperation with the committees , is handling this twofold fight quite well . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Balzani , for the consistency of her draft resolution on the general guidelines for the 2012 budget .
This resolution sends a clear political message .
It is because it is fully aware of the budgetary constraints affecting the European Union that Parliament is today calling for the adoption of a 2012 budget that can respond to the political , economic and social challenges we currently face .
At a time when the sole topic of discussion among the Member States is the implementation of additional austerity measures , Parliament , at least on this side of the House , intends to demonstrate its commitment to the thousands of workers who , today , are marching through the streets of Brussels to show their rejection of these economically questionable and socially unjust measures , the result of which will be a further increase in structural unemployment in Europe .
The fact that the European budget is being aligned with the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy , in a clear way for the first time in 2012 , means that employment and growth can be put back at the heart of European policies , which I would point out are our priorities , since the EU 2020 Strategy has set the objective of an employment rate of 75 % of the working population .
However , let us not delude ourselves .
This budgetary procedure will be a long and difficult one , contrary to what Mr Lewandowski indicated in the French press when he anticipated the position of the MEPs .
The Member States have already expressed their short-term view of the budget , which advocates discipline , and have called for a limit on their contribution to financing Community action .
They see the European Union and its action not as a means to achieve added value or as a means to help it achieve ambitious policies , but rather as an additional cost .
Let us not be mistaken .
The 2012 budgetary procedure will provide another insight into the tactics being used to define the future multiannual financial framework .
The fact is , with a budget which accounts for a mere 2 % of the EU 's public expenditure , it will be difficult to pursue ambitious policies in all sectors .
We are already seeing stormy debates on whether it will be the CAP or cohesion policy that will be plundered .
This pits citizens against each other when it would be to our credit to help them work in synergy .
That is why , Commissioner , I would reiterate the importance of your communication on the implementation of own resources .
( NL ) Madam President , if you are having a house built , the biggest bills come at the end .
You know this in advance and that is what you agree to from the very start .
The same thing is happening in Europe .
The biggest bills come at the end of multi-annual budgets and you know that , too , ahead of time .
Refusals by various Member States , such as my home country , the Netherlands , to pay these bills are therefore nothing more than a reaction by unreliable governments .
This is the same as if somebody who is having their house built accepted the offer and then refused to pay the final bill .
Obviously , in the final stage , you can look at where you can make savings and we in Europe have to do that as well .
In recital 21 , in particular , Mrs Balzani has rightly pointed to that fact .
However , that final bill will still have to be paid .
Refusing to pay it does not only make you unreliable , it is also stoking the anti-European sentiments in Europe .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the 2012 budget is the sixth among the seven budgets of the current multiannual financial framework .
The two arms of the budgetary authority have therefore gained a clear picture of the deficiencies and positive developments with regard to the existing multiannual programmes .
The 2012 appropriations must enable the accomplishment of EU goals and priorities in relation to the 2020 Strategy . That is because it is this that facilitates Europe emerging from the crisis strengthened .
The promotion of employment , innovation , research and development , the facilitation of goals related to energy strategy and of social inclusion , in particular through the reduction of poverty .
The 2020 Strategy can of course only be credible if it receives appropriate funding .
We would like to remind everyone that Parliament has raised this serious political concern on several occasions .
Now we must call on the Member States and the Council to take responsible and decisive steps .
We must not be content with a lesser Europe in a world where natural disasters and economic crises can ruin the lives of millions without warning , where the impact of such tragedies not only affects one country , people or religious community , but has an effect on entire regions and across oceans .
We need a greater Europe , and a more effective use of Community means . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the 2012 budget is set against the background of a difficult economic and financial situation in the 27 Member States .
For this reason , we will certainly not be able to afford to do everything that we would like to do .
I believe that the report tabled by Mrs Balzani is a workable compromise .
However , I also have a few critical remarks to make .
In my opinion , more money does not necessarily mean more solidarity and more Europe .
What is important is to improve the quality of what we get in return for the money spent and above all to ensure that the objectives we set ourselves are actually achieved rather than the money merely being paid out regardless .
We must always examine the question of our potential new own resources with a critical eye , too .
These own resources must not lead to the additional burdening of citizens or of businesses that need to be , and should be , able to compete with the rest of the world .
I also think it is important for us not always to emphasise the fact that the EU budget amounts to only 2 % because , at the end of the day , many States cofinance the corresponding European funds , thus , of course , making a considerably larger volume of funds available on the basis of EU programmes .
I think it is particularly important for us to make progress in terms of research , education , sustainability and strengthening economic growth .
In light of this , I think it is also important for large-scale projects such as ITER - and in this regard I would like to thank Mrs Jensen for her comment - to be fully and clearly financed and clearly managed , because otherwise the Americans , who are currently implementing the same project , will be appreciably ahead of us , and we Europeans should not always take second place .
( PT ) Madam President , I would like to begin by saying that I welcome the work of Mrs Balzani , but that I would nevertheless like to make a few observations here .
I believe that the general approach that is being adopted is actually too general .
I think that this is more of a resolution for an EU 2020 Strategy than proper guidelines for 2012 .
In 2011 the priority has been on young people , and this will no longer be the case in 2012 with these guidelines .
However , there is still time .
The phrase ' young people ' does not appear a single time in these general guidelines .
Moreover , the focus on the Europe 2020 Strategy , which I support , does lead to cohesion policy , for example , being forgotten .
Neither is there a single mention of cohesion policy .
Cohesion policy is extremely important , and it cannot be a measure for adapting , or a measure or policy which suffers , for example , if money is taken from it in order to be given to the Europe 2020 Strategy .
There is not a single mention of the cohesion policy , which we believe to be extremely important .
I believe that there is time to remedy this omission , as I see it .
I believe that there is still time to resolve these two issues .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani , for the work she has done .
The 2012 and 2013 budgets will be consolidation budgets aimed at reflecting the Member States ' spending cutbacks and setting a benchmark for amounts that will be established in the next financial framework .
The contribution of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to the guidelines for the 2012 budget was based on the concept of responsibility , which means pursuing the aims of economy , efficiency and effectiveness using as little as possible of the available resources .
The EU 2020 Strategy is based on important priorities - namely research , innovation , development and growth - that were not initially present in the report by Mrs Balzani , but which have been strongly emphasised by the PPE Group .
The Union 's priorities need a suitable level of funding .
It is therefore important to ensure flexibility between the expenditure headings in order to more effectively counter the problems linked to the economic crisis and also to propose a budgetary framework that includes own resources .
However , I am not in favour of these resources being raised via the introduction of a tax on financial transactions , as proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
Instead , I am in favour of an investigation by the Commission into how to deal with this highly important issue in technical terms , so as to affirm and establish Europe 's added value .
. - ( SK ) Madam President , the European Union has set five measurable objectives for the period up to 2020 .
The objectives have also been agreed by Member States themselves .
The objectives show us the direction we ought to choose .
The success of Europe depends on how we fulfil them .
It depends on the responsible conduct of individual states as to whether we will have higher employment , whether we will manage to reduce the proportion of people leaving school early , whether we will achieve the planned parameters in the number of young people obtaining a university education , whether we will reduce the number of people at risk of poverty and whether we will protect our climate .
Despite the prevailing consensus in the EU over the common procedures , the government of my country has decided to restrict the priority operational programmes .
It wants to use them for funding high-speed communications , and is discussing this with the Commission .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether you personally and the Commission as a whole support states taking a path which goes against the common objectives in this first introductory stage of fulfilling the Europe 2020 Strategy ?
- ( SK ) Madam President , the budget is a key instrument for European integration , and how it is set therefore matters .
It is precisely in a time of crisis that the EU budget can contribute to mitigating the restrictive budgetary policies of national governments and direct funding towards desirable long-term investment projects .
In this context , I welcome the fact that the report supports the plan to introduce project bonds , for example , in the area of infrastructure .
I would like to point out , however , that they should not be regarded as an alternative to Eurobonds .
In my opinion , Eurobonds are a special topic and I support their introduction , as they are a logical continuation of the integration process and they mark a deepening of the process .
An opposite tendency - towards disintegration - would result from , for example , attempts to slash EU budget levels .
In addition to the unfavourable economic impacts , these attempts also undermine solidarity between Member States .
The selfish and short-sighted division into net contributors and net beneficiaries ignores the deeper and more important context of European integration .
All Member States can profit from this equally .
In my opinion , this is the angle to take in discussions on the EU budget .
- ( SK ) Madam President , we are addressing the 2012 budget priorities with an eye to the future as well , and in my opinion we should therefore also look at the possibilities for making savings in the future .
In my view , it is very important to think about the regular journeys made by MEPs and the entire European Parliament to Strasbourg , which is repeated 12 times a year .
I believe that we irritate our citizens with these activities , because taxpayers have to finance our trips , and it costs them a great deal of money .
We should therefore , if not in 2012 , at least in the long-term perspective , look at the possibility of scaling back or modifying this mechanism in the future .
Another potential saving which should be discussed , I think , is the cost of setting up the museum of the European Union or of Europe , which , from a time perspective , could be postponed until a future date , I believe , when the EU is faring better .
At present we could transfer this funding to other activities , especially in 2012 , in order to fulfil the 2012 programme , and thereby also improve the efficiency of our operations , of course .

- ( SK ) Madam President , I would first like to applaud the work of the rapporteur , who has correctly identified numerous problems in her report .
The EU budget for 2012 , but also for the following years , should be ambitious , if we want to fulfil the tasks and objectives of the 2020 Strategy , emerge victorious from the crisis and compete globally .
I support the budget committee proposal for meetings to be organised with national parliaments with the aim of discussing the outlines of EU and Member State budgets for 2012 .
It should be emphasised at these meetings that the EU budget must not be in deficit , that it represents only 2 % of overall public spending in the EU and that there are fundamental differences between Member State budgets and the EU budget .
The EU budget largely covers investment in the future of Europe .
The Council , above all , should be aware of this , since we have already heard the representatives of Germany , France and Great Britain talk about trying to freeze the EU budget , through which we would surely slow down European growth .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will address three points only .
On the 2020 Strategy adjustment , a clear point in Ms Balzani 's guidelines : in the current 2011 budget , 41 % of expenditure could be attributed to the goals of the 2020 Strategy .
The same effort is being made for the 2012 Strategy , but we must make the readjustment effort within the framework which was agreed several years ago , the 2007-2013 framework .
It is , of course , limiting our room for manoeuvre that the adjustment must be done within the framework of the multiannual agreement dated 2006 .
Secondly , my reaction to Mr Elles - but not only to him : the same remark about negative priorities was also made by Mr Geier and Ms Hohlmeier .
I am afraid that this is a true story about 2012 's budget .
It should be like that .
This time more than ever , in addition to positive priorities , we should examine what is not performing .
We are looking at what is not performing , what is not properly administered in order to find savings .
We are thinking as much about positive priorities this time as about negative priorities .
For the administration , austerity is a must .
My response to Mr Herczog about the waste of money : administration accounts for only 5.7 % of the total budget of the European Union .
This is a lower proportion than in the municipalities of Rotterdam and many other Dutch cities famous for a frugal approach to budgeting .
In response to Ms Andreasen : she was not only talking about freezing the budget .
She was talking about cutting it .
Our budget , the European budget , which is without deficit , cannot be blamed for the mismanagement of public finances in many Member States .
It has its logic , as so clearly explained by Mr Gerbrandy .
The logic is all about the maturity of programmes with time .
This is not surprising .
This is our credibility .
The European budget has its own credibility which is all about commitments and accomplished projects paying out .
Even in times of austerity , you have to pay your electricity bills .
This is really about our credibility .
This is about cohesion .
This is really an investment , and its nature therefore probably also responds to some of the calls by those who are now demonstrating outside Parliament and the Berlaymont building .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the word ' responsibility ' has been mentioned a number of times during the speeches .
There is , however , one responsibility that I really think takes priority for the institutions : above all we are responsible for implementing our programmes and ensuring that EU citizens are not left with just our words .
We have the responsibility to be consistent in what we say and what we promise .
Today 's major projects are those set out in the 2020 Strategy .
The first target of ' more work ' is not only very ambitious but also very precise , since it can even be measured using unemployment reduction parameters .
This seems to me to be a very specific and very ambitious goal and I think it is essential to start working to achieve it .
As long as we continue to consider the 2020 Strategy as too big and too ambitious to be squeezed into a practical document like the budget , I think we will achieve nothing more than increasing the risk of another failure , which is exactly what nobody wants , starting with the Commission , if I remember the first communication on the 2020 Strategy correctly .
There is , however , another important issue : austerity is not a policy , it is not an instrument , it is a condition against which we must take action , and not only by consolidating our expenditure , but also by using the European budget , an extraordinary instrument that is radically different from the national budgets and gives us the chance to do something different this year .
This is precisely what the European Semester is for .
Clogging up the first six months of the year is not its only use .
It enables us to come up with a global strategy and to create synergies ; and creating synergies between the budgets of the Member States and our budget is an extraordinarily European system to give more value to public resources and to create a real method to turn the 2020 Strategy - long and ambitious as it is - into a European reality .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 : 30 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
Unfortunately this report advocates ' a 2012 budget under the auspices of enhanced European economic governance , the European Semester mechanism and Europe 2020 objectives ' .
In other words , this is a budget which supports the deepening of neoliberalism , militarism and federalism in the EU through the adoption of profoundly anti-social and anti-democratic measures , the firm establishment of the Stability Pact , the enforcing of brutal fines on the Member States and permanent monitoring of all national macroeconomic activity .
This is also a proposal which seeks to achieve a budget that facilitates liberalisation , job insecurity , and an attack on rights and public services .
We therefore propose an important set of changes , aimed not only at denouncing this approach , but also at presenting guidelines for an alternative which is both possible and necessary .
These proposals are crucial in order to improve the situation of unemployment , poverty and inequality which exists and is worsening with capitalism , of which the EU is a tool .
The EU budget needs to be based on another vision in order to address the economic and social crisis , rejecting the neoliberal path , so-called economic governance and the strengthening of militarism .
in writing . - ( CS ) In her report on general guidelines for the preparation of the 2012 budget , Mrs Balzani set out the five key budget priorities of the EU .
I fully support her view that it is the Europe 2020 Strategy that should help Europe overcome the global economic crisis and emerge stronger from the crisis through the creation of new jobs based on the five priorities , that is , support for employment , improved conditions for innovation , research and development and the provision of funding for these from the public purse , the fulfilment of objectives on climate change and energy , higher levels of education and support for social inclusion , and , above all , reduction of poverty in Europe .
However , if we want to be successful and to implement this strategy in earnest , we must assign sufficient funding for it , without substantial compromises or cuts .
The current multiannual financial framework now offers very little room for manoeuvre , and I therefore agree with the rapporteur that further attempts to limit or cut budgetary resources related to the fulfilment of key priorities are simply out of place at the moment .
I support the rapporteur 's idea that the fulfilment of key priorities can work as a catalyst for boosting investment , growth and job creation throughout the Union .
In general , I agree with the proposed guidelines and I recommend the approval of this report .
in writing . - Across Europe governments and public authorities are having to find ways to save money and show restraint .
My own country , Scotland , was hit by a double whammy - a global recession exacerbated by misrule by governments in London , always willing to plunder Scotland 's resources but intent on denying the people of Scotland control over their own affairs .
The Scottish government has therefore had to work extra hard to succeed in maintaining Scotland 's vital public services .
In these economic circumstances it is wholly unrealistic for this house to call for a budgetary increase - Europe 's public services must have priority over the operations of the EU 's institutions .
( The sitting was suspended at 10 : 55 and resumed at 11 : 35 )

1 .
Amendment of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 introducing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova (

( FR ) Mr President , I should like to take the floor briefly under Article 15 ( 6 ) ( d ) of the Treaty on European Union , which stipulates that the President of the European Council shall present a report after each of the meetings of the European Council .
An extraordinary meeting of the European Council was held on 11 March .
I regret that no such report has been presented .

Mr Audy , I take your point but if I recall correctly the President of the Council was in Parliament after the 11 March extraordinary session of the Council , in an extraordinary Conference of Presidents that was open to all Members .
Can we now please move on to the votes ?
- After the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have just one comment .
Yesterday , I was denied the opportunity to respond directly to Mr Schulz .
I have sent you all an email - initially in German , but the English and French versions will follow - in which I make a statement in this regard , and I will also duly reject the accusation .
2 .
Generalised tariff preferences (
3 .
EU-US air transport agreement (
4 .
EU-Canada air transport agreement (
5 .
EU-Vietnam air services agreement (
6 .
EU relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council (

Mr President , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , in particular Mr Howitt , Mrs Brepoels , Mrs Brantner and Mrs Jäätteenmäki , with whom we prepared these amendments .
Thanks to the amendments , we have a report that fully accounts for the events taking place in the Gulf , and which states very clearly Parliament 's position on the repression afflicting that region .
The first amendment , 16th new citation , is as follows :
' - having regard to the declarations by the High Representative of 10 , 15 and 17 March , and the Council conclusions of 21 March on Bahrain and underlining in this context its full support for the freedom of expression and the right of citizens to peacefully demonstrate , '
This is the first amendment , and it is of course the English-language version , which has been distributed , that is deemed authentic .
( FR ) The second amendment , recital A , is as follows :
' Whereas current EU-GCC relations require constant reviewing and updating in view of recent important and rapidly unfolding developments on the ground , which are evolving rapidly , at the heart of which needs to be the pursuit of human rights and democracy . '
( FR ) A new recital A bis :
' A bis . Whereas demonstrators have expressed legitimate democratic aspirations in several GCC States ; whereas the violent reaction of the authorities to the protests in Bahrain resulted in deaths , injuries and imprisonments ; whereas Saudi , UAE and Kuwaiti troops have arrived in the country under the banner of the GCC to participate in the repression of demonstrators , '
( FR ) In paragraph 7 , after the first paragraph , the first indent should now read :
' - ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , with special regard to the freedom of speech and of assembly and the right to demonstrate peacefully , and to listen to and take into account the legitimate demands of protesters as well as to ensure their security ; '
( FR ) A new paragraph 7a :
' 7a . Calls on all Member States in the Gulf Cooperation Council to recognise a continuing popular movement for democratic reform within the wider region , and calls for the full engagement with emerging civil society groups to promote a process of genuine peaceful democratic transition , within their own countries , with partners in the region and with the full support of the European Union ; '
( FR ) A new paragraph 7b :
ʻ7b . Expresses its deep concern at the violent response of and the use of force against protesters by Bahraini authorities and at the participation of foreign troops under the GCC banner in the repression of demonstrators ; whereas this stands in stark contrast to the GCC 's support for the protection of the citizens demanding freedom and democracy in Libya ; calls for an immediate end to violence against peaceful protesters and for a political dialogue that can lead to further necessary political reforms in the country ; '
( FR ) A new paragraph 18a :
' 18a . Takes note of the declaration by the GCC of 7 March 2011 in Abu Dhabi , which states that " the Ministerial council demands that the Security Council takes the steps necessary to protect civilians , including a no-fly zone in Libya ” , which declaration has contributed to the decision of the Arab League and then the United Nations Security Council to pronounce themselves in favour of such a zone ; '
7 .
Appointment of a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank : Peter Praet ( BE ) (
8 .
Appointment of the executive director of the European Banking Authority ( EBA ) (
Mr President , I will not keep you long .
Today we are voting on the resolutions to approve the executive directors of the European supervisory authorities .
Issues concerning the overall procedure for the future were dealt with last month in the negotiations surrounding the appointment of the Chairs of the authorities .
For the Banking Authority , the proposed executive director is Adam Farkas ; for the Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority it is Carlos Montalvo , and for the Markets Authority it is Verena Ross .
The nominees all attended confirmation hearings in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs last week .
These were webstreamed , and are therefore available on the ECON website , as are the candidates ' biographies .
The full committee decided by a substantial majority that we should vote in favour of these candidates , so that is the recommendation from the committee .
9 .
Appointment of the executive director of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( EIOPA ) (
10 .
Appointment of the executive director of the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) (
11 .
Preparation of 2012 budget (
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to provide a brief explanation .
We have withdrawn Amendment 25 , which related to the financial transaction tax .
We have agreed with the other groups that we are able , and indeed intend , to negotiate in a more intensive and meaningful way within the Policy Changes Committee .
12 .
Single application procedure for residence and work (

( FR ) Mr President , unless I have misunderstood , I believe that you should have put the original text of Article 12 ( 2 ) ( e ) to the vote , but we have not voted on this item .

13 .
Consumer rights (
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my sincere thanks to all of my fellow Members who voted in favour .
In view of this broad majority , I think it important that the Commission should give a brief comment in this regard .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we take note of the vote here today .
We are looking forward to constructive cooperation with a view to coming to a final agreement .
A few very important issues are still outstanding .
This proposal on the single permit act is very important , and therefore we hope to come to an agreement very soon .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Ms Mathieu , and wish her and the Hungarian Presidency my best .
( DE ) Mr President , I actually expected a different sort of comment .
I expected the Commission to say that it is not able to agree on all of the points .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I was supposed to comment also on the previous vote , and therefore I did so .
I now wish to comment again on the latest vote on the Schwab report .
The fact that we are well into the third year of negotiations indicates very clearly that it is difficult to find an agreement on this important issue .
I believe that the Council 's position was a really good starting point .
Parliament has added its own position .
The Commission is not ready to accept everything that was proposed but we are ready to cooperate as much as possible to reach a final result .
Incidentally I was told I should also comment on the result of the previous vote ; this is why I am making two comments , which have not taken too much of your time .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , with regard to the Commissioner 's last point , I would like to request that we refer the matter back to committee in accordance with Rule 57 ( 2 ) .
I would ask for your support in this regard .
14 .
European Network and Information Security Agency (
15 .
Situation in Japan , including the nuclear power plant alerts (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For outcome of the vote and other details : see Minutes ) .
Explanations of vote
The next item is explanations of vote .
( ET ) Mr President , inherent in the concept of Europe working together is the idea that , in principle , the euro area can only go in two directions : it can either become stronger or disintegrate .
In the current economic situation , a practical and decisive political response is needed .
I support the creation of the stability mechanism , and accordingly I also supported the report , which paves the way for a legal framework enabling the creation of this mechanism .
Mr President , yesterday we voted on the permanent stability mechanism and we flunked it .
Amendment 33 , which would have given the fund the ability to purchase bonds on the secondary markets , was withdrawn .
The Parliament , like the European Council up to now , refused to take the hard decisions .
Yes , they are hard decisions , but these decisions will determine the future or the failure of the euro zone .
Our heads are in the sand , like the proverbial ostrich .
We do not just have a currency crisis ; we have a banking crisis and we have a sovereign debt crisis .
And yet we persist in putting sticking plaster on deep wounds .
My own country , Ireland , is shouldering intolerable debt , all because German , French , Irish , British and other banks - along with lax regulation and non-existent supervision - acted like casinos .
Bad debt has become citizens ' debt .
I will not say sovereign debt , it is citizens ' debt .
All of this happened under the noses of the ECB , with interest rates that were totally inappropriate .
Irish citizens are expected to deal with all of this .
Nobody is prepared to face reality .
The debt is unsustainable .
We have been trying to buy time with bailouts .
What we need is major restructuring .
( FI ) Mr President , the creation of a permanent crisis management mechanism for Europe is justified in case of future economic and financial crises .
No one wants crises , but they are bound to happen and we need to prepare for the worst .
It is unfortunate that the plan is to establish this crisis management mechanism outside the EU institutions .
The mechanism should now be brought as close as possible to EU institutions .
It is also important and a good thing that the United Kingdom and Sweden , countries outside the euro area , can participate in this mechanism .
I support the attempts to step up coordination of economic policy in Europe , and the notion that , if there are to be sanctions , the Commission will decide on them , and they will apply automatically and not become the subject of discussions or ' horsetrading ' .

Mr President , I had thought that after 12 years in this House nothing could faze me any more , but I was shocked by the tone in which Mr Brok introduced his report yesterday .
What shocked me was not the arrogance or the disconnection from reality , or even the disdain for public opinion , but the flagrancy .
He said in so many words that we have had to avoid the usual Treaty revision procedure because otherwise it might have triggered a referendum in some Member States !
There you see unsheathed the contempt for the voters that the elites of Europe now habitually display .
Public opinion is treated not as a reason to change direction , but as an obstacle to be overcome .
I cannot help being reminded of Mr Brok 's countryman 's words following the rising in East Berlin .
Would it not therefore be easier to dissolve the people and elect another in their place ?
Mr President , one of the inherent problems of a single currency which has a number of different Member States , with economic cycles at different rates , is that it is pointless having one set of interest rates if you have different spending decisions .
The result of that has obviously come to bear , because we can see the problems that the euro zone is in .
On top of that , governments have to understand that they cannot spend more money than they get in revenue .
When governments do that and cook the books , or do not fulfil the roles of economic governance and economic discipline , the others get into trouble .
Of course , we want a strong euro zone , especially for those members outside the euro zone .
We want to continue to trade with countries in the euro zone .
We do not benefit from a weaker euro .
However , at the same time , we have to be quite clear that the countries in the euro zone should fight their own problems themselves , and not rely on others .
I wish you luck in the euro zone , but please learn the lessons of not spending more money than you earn .

Mr President , I want to make clear on behalf of the European Conservative and Reformist Group that we are in favour of the European Stability Mechanism which has been set up , but we voted against the Brok / Gualtieri report because that opinion was not in line with the conclusions reached by the Council .
What the Brok / Gualtieri report wanted was for the European Parliament and for the Commission effectively to interfere with an intergovernmental mechanism .
It is entirely appropriate that this mechanism should be intergovernmental because of the enormous sums of money which are being committed to it .
National ministers responsible to their national parliaments : that is the correct line of responsibility .
Underlying the whole euro crisis , of course , is not a problem with the euro , but a problem with governments that are spending too much of their taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , I welcome the conclusion of the second phase of the US-EU open skies agreement .
I think this is a breakthrough , but obviously there are those of us who would want more liberalisation and a move away from the protectionism which still hinders this industry in many ways .
I would like to see the US remove its barriers or its restrictions on foreign ownership , and I think passengers across the world would benefit from more open skies agreements .
I also pay tribute to the ECR shadow rapporteur , Jackie Foster , who is an expert in this area , and who has worked in the area of air transport as well as in the Transport Committee .
However , I think it is very important that we continue to push for further liberalisation not only on the EU-US agreement but also in the emerging markets of Asia , so I welcome the move today with regard to the agreement on the EU-Vietnam agreement .
Long may we continue to have better access to the growing markets of the world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Balzani , for the excellent work she has accomplished .
Getting to the heart of the matter , there are four points in this own-initiative report that I think are crucial .
The first , in general terms , is the explicit reference to the European Union budget and its redistributive nature , which are the cornerstones of European solidarity .
The second , in specific terms , reaffirms the principle that outstanding commitments - which are particularly high in the cohesion sector - ought to be carried out and not , as the Council suggests , simply cut out .
The third sets out some doubts - entirely reasonably in my view - as to the effectiveness of an estimate criterion based on performance in the previous year .
The fourth urges the Commission to formulate proposals for the creation of new resources and , in particular , new resources must be designed to combat the persistent effects of the crisis with a robust and effective commitment to policies for innovation , research and growth in economic , productive and employment terms across Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at such an important time , a document like the one approved today is certainly based on criteria of good sense and reason .
Supporting the 2020 Strategy is without doubt not only a sign of credibility but also of consistency in the actions of Parliament .
However , a number of important criteria and guidelines must be strengthened further by means of a list showing the priorities of the interventions .
Today , at such a delicate time in which the difficulties in the Mediterranean above all , but also in Japan , are directly linked to a rapidly changing situation , an authoritative and credible Parliament is needed , together with responses that provide a boost for growth , competitiveness and intelligent sustainability in the things that need to be done .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that at such a delicate time for the finances of the Member States of Europe , as was said a short time ago , I should like to sound an alarm about an expenditure that is under discussion in the Committee on Budgets : the astonishing case of the vast expenses set aside for the House of European History .
I think it would be a disgrace if it were approved .
We already own the Eastman Building , but between EUR 26 million and EUR 31 million have been allocated merely for renovation costs , plus EUR 3.3 million for the plans alone .


The fixed costs amount to more than EUR 3 million whilst the variable costs come to EUR 3.2 million , plus EUR 3.2 million for a 50-strong staff , EUR 2 million for security and then EUR 13.45 million are required just to manage it .

I think we ought to set an example of prudent spending through our institutions .

This , however , would be a disgrace .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make three comments , if I may , with regard to the general guidelines for the preparation of the 2012 budget .
Firstly , I think it is good that we are debating the 2012 budget at an early stage , because - secondly - we do not want another calamity like we had between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission with regard to the 2011 budget .
Thirdly , I am particularly proud of the fact that the European budget does not need to go into borrowing .
I believe that should also continue to be the case .
( ET ) Mr President , legal immigration undoubtedly has a large role to play in promoting European economic development and improving competitiveness .
There is certainly a recurring problem here , though , and that is the lack of a firm legal status for immigrants and , as a result , the possibility of discrimination against them .
It is not normal to have a situation where , in the 21st century , we still see incidents which essentially involve slavery .
Everyone must be treated equally in the labour market .
This report contained the provisions that are currently lacking in our framework of standards , and I therefore supported the creation of a legal framework in this area , something which I consider to be very important .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , administrative simplification and facilitating access to relevant information are the right instruments to make the European labour market more attractive to third-country workers .
Provisions for a single application procedure leading to one combined title encompassing both residence and work permits within one administrative act will contribute to simplifying and harmonising the rules currently applicable in Member States .
This will make for a clearer and more efficient procedure both for the migrants and for their employers , whilst at the same time allowing for easier controls of the lawfulness of their residence and employment .
The single procedure will also mean that the rights gap between EU citizens and third-country citizens can also be reduced .
That is why I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Mathieu .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I voted against the approved draft of the directive .
I consider it important to apply a single procedure for handling work permits and residency permits .
It is equally vital to try and create a single set of rights for third country nationals legally living and working in any of the EU Member States .
It is without doubt also necessary to have legal certainty and transparency in respect of the decisions taken by the competent national bodies when handling these applications .
Since they have a considerable influence on the lives of these people , they should be assessed as objectively as possible .
Equal treatment should be guaranteed in all areas of social provision , and their rights must be upheld in legislation .
Since these changes were not incorporated into the directive on economic migration , I think it was not correct of the parties on the right to approve it .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all , the fact that this single permit promises the same rights and the same treatment for foreign workers is a good starting point .
We have to ensure that human rights in the European Union are implemented in such a way that workers coming here from third countries also receive the same pay and the same levels of social security , and that the same conditions of employment apply to them as well as the other employees .
This is obviously a basic consideration .
I am rather worried about one matter concerning the report , although I did vote in favour of it .
This is the scope of application of Article 3 , which still does not cover posted or seasonal workers or intracorporate transferees from third countries .
It is to be hoped that progress will be made on this , so that everyone will be considered equally in this single permit package .
The onestopshop principle is a positive thing : the idea that everyone can apply for this permit in one place and that they no longer have to hop from pillar to post because of red tape .
( DE ) Mr President , I absolutely agree with those Members who say that we must ensure equal treatment for workers from third countries who have been employed in the EU for more than a year .
I also agree that workers who have been working in the European Union for less than six months must not receive equal treatment in respect of family allowances and unemployment benefit .
However , I am very much in favour - and I would like to emphasise this once again - of these groups also being insured against accidents and sickness .
Thirdly , I believe that old-age benefits are a component of a person 's wages and , in accordance with Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 , it should be possible to transfer them according to the rules of the Member States , provided that this only happens if the third country is also happy for this to be done and if it actually transfers them .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that we are beginning our preparations for the 2012 budget so early .
It allows for there to be proper consideration of the issues .
One of the matters that we talk a great deal about in the European Union , and in this Chamber , is the issue of solidarity .
We are often very keen to show solidarity for various groups of people .
I would ask this Parliament to show some solidarity with the taxpayers of our constituencies , because we have so far failed to do that .
In this age of austerity we need to show restraint .
We should set an example .
We should do so by freezing the salaries and allowances of all MEPs and officials in this place for 2012 , and we should also abandon plans for the House of European History , which will cost millions of euros to construct and for which there is no long-term plan to fund .
No doubt that will fall on the taxpayer as well .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the fragmentation of the rules on consumer rights creates a very significant obstacle to cross-border purchases and sales and is also a problem for the effective creation of a real internal market .
I believe that the proposal for a directive , which was sent back to committee today with important additions , can contribute to mapping out a clear legal framework on consumer rights .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by revising the four current directives , this report aims to bring an end to a fragmentation of the legal framework that has so far hindered the completion of the internal market .
The objective is to improve the functioning of the market for consumers and undertakings , boosting consumer confidence and reducing the reluctance of undertakings to operate at a cross-border level .
The proposal is complex and contains many specific aspects which have been scrutinised and debated ever since France last held the rotating presidency .
Under the new Commission headed by Mr Barroso , Mrs Reding 's work has led to total harmonisation no longer being thought of as dogmatic and we have rightly started out on the road towards a more targeted harmonisation .
Despite not being completely satisfied by the end result achieved - which I consider to be mediocre and the fruit of a poor compromise - I believe and I hope that this proposal can offer a starting-point for further developments .
I therefore supported this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text voted on today is the result of a long and complicated journey that began in October 2008 with the aim of putting the consumer at the heart of the protection offered for purchases made abroad .
The objective that the Union and the EU institutions must set themselves is to help the internal market to function better , with the aim of increasing consumer confidence whilst at the same time supporting our businesses .
The directive voted on today by this House represents the synthesis of four directives on this issue which were in force until today .
The directive shows our desire to harmonise the regulations currently in force in the different legal systems in a much more incisive way , avoiding the legal fragmentation that unfortunately has very often ended up being a hindrance both to undertakings - whose aim is to be able to be competitive on the cross-border market - and to consumers .
For these reasons , I consented to and voted in favour of this report .
( FI ) Mr President , the reform of the directive on consumer rights has been a long and sporadic process .
The Commission 's original idea for fullscale harmonisation threatened to impair levels of consumer protection , particular that of consumers in the Nordic countries .
This would have been contrary to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , according to which consumer legislation must be based on levels of consumer protection that are as high as possible .
We should therefore always remember that the markets are for consumers , and it is not the case that consumers are for the markets .
Legislation on consumers and small entrepreneurs must always be as clear as possible and easy to understand .
Legislation that is precisely and carefully drafted is in the interests of all parties .
Accordingly , it is good that the directive is being referred back to committee , as Parliament today decided it should .
( FI ) Mr President , up until now the internal market of the European Union has been developed on the terms of mainly large companies .
Now it is time to turn our attention to small and mediumsized enterprises and , above all , consumers , to ensure that their interests in the internal market are more vigorously protected .
This Commission proposal to reform consumer protection has met with a fairly controversial reception .
In Finland , for example , the Consumers ' Association collected signatures on a petition , stating that the proposal , if it had gone ahead , would have harmed consumer protection in Finland irreparably .
This compromise we have now voted on , which will go for further discussion , is very obscure .
A large number of the original proposals have been cut out , with the result that it is in no way ambitious .
The biggest problem , however , is that it is actually hard to understand .
I would like to make it a condition that the directive on consumer rights should be one that consumers also understand , thus offering them protection .

( FI ) Mr President , my Finnish fellow Members who spoke before me , Mr Repo and Mrs Jäätteenmäki , expressed some welcome views regarding this directive on consumer rights .
As Finns and Nordic people , we are worried that consumer protection might be impaired .
Full harmonisation would mean just that , especially as far as the Nordic countries are concerned .
Moreover , it would delay measures in those countries where things at present are hardly perfect .
It is excellent that this proposal is being referred back to committee , because it contains certain slightly problematic points , particularly for small entrepreneurs .
I would like the Committee to focus attention on one small issue .
Amendments 18 and 107 suggest that this would have a very negative impact on travel companies in northern Finland , for example .
Frequently a decision to go to a company , hotel or tourist accommodation is made on the road , and people call and book .
Under this directive , that would not be enough : people would have to send a fax or something similar .
This is not always possible in practice .
This issue should be approached at the level of the public , and the different situations in the various Member States need to be understood .
( DE ) Mr President , I think the approach being taken to harmonise our fragmented European consumer law , which poses a barrier to trade , is a sound one and the right way to go .
It is also important for consumers to be able to develop a sense of European law , in other words for it to be possible for them to be confident when they do business or when they buy or acquire something anywhere in the European Union .
That will bring certainty not only for consumers , but also for producers .
I am particularly pleased about the improvements in the information requirements for door-to-door selling and for distance contracts .
In future debates - and I am therefore very pleased that this report has been referred back to committee once again - we should ensure that , when we talk about producers , we do not just consider the large corporations but also the small family businesses , and we should not overburden them with legal subtleties .
Mr President , when my constituents ask me about the main benefit of being part of the European Union , my reply is always the free trade that exists between nations and the internal market that we are seeking to complete .
I therefore welcome this consumer rights directive . I welcome it because it takes an - albeit small - step towards completing that single market .
It will give some benefits to consumers and small businesses .
It will assist in Internet and cross-border trade .
However , I have to say that this directive has taken a long time to come about , and progress is modest .
The plea that I would make to the Commission is that we need a framework for completing the single market , as opposed to the rather disconnected series of initiatives that we have at the moment .
( ET ) Mr President , the adoption of the harmonised European Consumer Rights Directive is certainly one way of improving the functioning of the internal market .
This harmonised directive , which brings together a number of directives relating to consumer rights , will considerably simplify the legal framework , will undoubtedly help to increase consumer confidence , and of course will also encourage cross-border trade .
This is a step towards reducing fragmentation .
Unfortunately , the full harmonisation of consumer rights in the European Union is still not a reality today .
Nevertheless , this is an important step towards better consumer protection and trade .
I therefore supported the adoption of this document .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , news of the earthquake swarm that has been affecting the Far East and Japan in particular since 11 March has left us all astonished by the scale of the human tragedy that is unfolding .
For these reasons , I think this resolution represents a necessary first step to guarantee the people of Japan all the humanitarian , technical and financial support they will need in the coming months and years .
I believe that the incident at the Fukushima plant should force us all to reflect carefully , scrupulously and calmly on the risks of nuclear power .
Europe must invest and must also direct the Member States to concentrate more closely and more effectively on alternative energy sources .
Our thoughts go out to Japan today and our commitment for the future must be to avoid similar situations being repeated in Europe and elsewhere in the world .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that we can all learn lessons from the situation in Japan .
These lessons relate in particular to nuclear power stations .
I call on the Council urgently to table proposals in this regard .
What the Commission has so far presented provides an incentive for the European Council Atomic Questions Working Group finally to address the demands made by the European Parliament .
We need an intensive debate on this issue , and I believe that the time has now come for this to happen .
Written explanation of vote
I support this report , which once again points out that we should help Moldova to recover economically , taking into account that about 40 % of its economy is dependent on agriculture .
I completely agree with the measures proposed by the rapporteur in order to have an agreement that is more comprehensive and relevant to the economic recovery of this country , which is an EU partner .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this report which increases Moldova 's duty free tariff quotas for wine .
Moldova is experiencing difficulties related to wine exports , which poses a threat to its economic recovery and agriculture , in particular medium-sized and family farms .
The agricultural sector accounts for around 40 % of Moldova 's economy .
The wine sector alone employs approximately 300 000 people , most of whom live in rural areas .
Hitherto Moldova has fully exhausted the quota it was allocated , therefore an increase in duty free tariff quotas will enable Moldova to increase sales of its production in the EU , without damaging the EU 's wine industry .
Russia is an important market outlet for Moldova 's winemakers .
However , recently , the Russian market is no longer a certainty for wine product exports .
In its quest to find an alternative to the Russian market , the European Commission has proposed increasing duty-free quotas from 100 000 hectolitres ( hl ) to 150 000 hl this year , from 120 000 hl to 180 000 hl in 2012 and up to 240 000 hl from 2013 .
I voted for this amendment in trade relations with the Republic of Moldova in order to increase the volume of duty-free wine imports .
This amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 may provide a solution for the Republic of Moldova 's wine producers so that they can benefit from a more reliable market outlet , compared to when Russia imposed an embargo on Moldovan wines in 2006 and 2010 , causing a number of winemakers to go bankrupt .
in writing . - ( PT ) I abstained from voting on the proposal introducing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova as I believe that its current wording does not adequately address the necessary provisions for the protection of EU geographical indications ( GIs ) , particularly the GI that relates to port wines .
I would like to express my support for the economic recovery of Moldova and offer a positive outlook for the people who work in the country 's wine industry .
I agree with the increase in the duty free tariff quota for wine , from 120,000 hl to 180,000 hl for 2011 , and from 2013 onwards to 240,000 hl per year .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , which in no way jeopardises the EU wine industry .
I voted for the report on introducing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova , given that this sends a positive signal from the EU to this country , a member of the Eastern Partnership , which recently stated that it hopes to be able to submit its application to join the European Union in 2011 .
Moldova has undertaken an ambitious set of political , economic and social reforms , which must be encouraged to continue .
At the same time , the Republic of Moldova has been hit hard by the economic and financial crisis .
During the last four years , 40 % of its wine producers have either ceased trading or gone into liquidation , while the companies still operating in this key sector of its economy have accumulated losses .
Increasing the duty-free tariff rate quota for wine and extending the validity of Council Regulation No 55 / 2008 until the end of 2015 would help this country where the number of workers in the wine industry has risen to 300 000 and the agricultural sector accounts for 40 % of GDP , without affecting the Union 's economy at the same time .
These measures would also leave sufficient time to prepare the negotiations on creating an expanded , comprehensive free trade area , which is an objective shared by the EU and the Republic of Moldova .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the Commission 's proposal , which amends the regulation that is currently in force , may serve to support Moldova 's economic recovery and provide a positive outlook for people working in the country 's wine industry , without damaging the interests of EU producers .
The Moldovan wine industry is going through a period of crisis sparked by the reduction in exports , which have set back its economic recovery and reforms that would enable it to aspire to EU integration in a more realistic way .
The increase in the duty free tariff quota , particularly for Moldovan wine , may help to alleviate the pressure on this sector .
I must stress that despite the EU 's willingness to help Moldova , the Union and its Member States should seek to ensure that wine from other states does not have quality standards that are below those required for EU wines .
in writing . - ( PT ) This draft legislative resolution by Parliament is based on a proposal for a regulation by Parliament and the Council which amends Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 introducing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova .
Despite the efforts being made by its people and the reforms implemented by its government , the Republic of Moldova is undergoing a difficult situation due to the crisis which the wine sector , the most productive sector in the country , is facing , as it represents 40 % of Moldova 's economy and employs more than a quarter of its working population .
It is therefore important to support Moldova 's economic recovery and give a positive sign of EU solidarity with a population that lives mostly in rural areas .
I also welcome and am voting in favour of this draft legislative resolution to extend Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 until 31 December 2015 , and I hope that a ' deep and comprehensive free trade area ' will be set up between the EU and the Republic of Moldova by that date .
This report approves a Commission proposal to authorise the increase in the duty free tariff quota for Moldovan wine .
The Commission is proposing an increase in the quota from 100 000 hl to 150 000 hl in 2011 , from 120 000 hl to 180 000 hl in 2012 , and from 2013 onwards to 240 000 hl per year .
According to the Commission , the proposed increases are based on the fact that Moldova has systematically exhausted the existing quote , and take into account ' the potential of the sector to improve its niche markets in the EU ' .
Although it has been stated that the proposed level of increase does not jeopardise the EU wine industry , we believe that there are still some doubts as to whether this is indeed the case , and that is why we have abstained .
This consideration has taken account of the situation of crisis which many producers , particularly small and medium-sized producers , are currently facing in countries such as Portugal , with the dramatic drop in production prices and the incessant increases in input costs .
These difficulties are exacerbated by changes introduced with the reform of the Common Market Organisation ( CMO ) and the planned aim of production rights .
This reform has benefited large wine industry most of all , along with some importers ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr Moreira 's report was adopted today , supporting a Commission proposal to authorise the increase in the duty free tariff quota for Moldovan wine .
Although the Community 's executive states that the level of increase does not jeopardise the EU wine industry , given that there is doubt , and in the interests of Portuguese agriculture , we have abstained from voting .
Moldova has asked the Commission to increase its duty free tariff quota for wine under the autonomous trade preferences granted to the country in a 2008 regulation .
In order to support Moldova 's economic recovery and provide a positive outlook for people working in the wine industry in the country ( one quarter of the workforce ) , there is a proposed increase in the duty free tariff quota for wine , from 100 000 hl to 150 000 hl for 2011 , from 120 000 hl to 180 000 hl for 2012 , and from 2013 onwards to 240 000 hl per year .
The Commission states that ' as the general level of imports from Moldova is merely 0.04 % of all EU imports , further market opening is not expected to create negative effects for the EU .
Currently around 90 % of all imports from Moldova ... '
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The Commission 's proposal provides for a change to the regulations for relations with the Republic of Moldova .
Given the period of crisis that the country in question is facing , the plan aims to increase the amount of wine imported from Moldova .
According to the Commission , these imports would have a minimal impact on our markets and yet I do not feel that I can support the proposal in this current period of major economic crisis , which is already putting our farmers and wineries under serious pressure .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because in order to support Moldova 's economic recovery and provide the people working in the wine industry in Moldova with a positive outlook , it is proposed to increase the duty free tariff quota for wine for 2011 from 100,000 hectolitres ( hl ) to 150,000 hl , for 2012 from 120,000 hl to 180,000 hl , and from 2013 onwards to 240,000 hl per year .
The level of the proposed increase is based on the fact that Moldova has systematically exhausted the existing quota and the potential of the sector to improve its niche markets in the EU .
Moreover , the level of the increase does not destabilise the EU wine industry .
It is expected that Moldova 's wine sector will continue to improve the quality of its wines .
As Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 expires on 31 December 2012 , and as it is important to ensure legal certainty for producers , exporters and importers , it is proposed to extend the validity of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 for another three years to 31 December 2015 .
in writing . - I will always declare that the Republic of Moldova has to be encouraged in its pro-European path .
Moldova is experiencing difficulties with its wine exports to some of its traditional markets , which threaten its economic recovery and the reform process that it is vigorously pursuing .
The arguments given in Vital Moreira 's report are convincing , Moldova needs Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 to be extended for a further three years , until 31 of December 2015 .
The request made by the Republic of Moldova in July 2010 is justified .
Moldova needs the European Union to be a trustworthy partner .
For these reasons , I endorse the report drafted by Vital Moreira on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament
in writing . - ( DE ) The trade preferences granted to the Republic of Moldova by the EU have proven to be appropriate .
Furthermore , no damaging effects on the EU wine industry have been recorded .
As the poorest country in Europe , the Republic of Moldova needs the support of the EU .
This is our moral duty in the interests of European unity and harmony .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal to extend the period of validity .
in writing . - I voted for this report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 introducing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova .
This brings our trade relations with Moldova into line with other neighbouring countries .
in writing . - ( IT ) In the context of the Union 's neighbourhood policy , Moldova has always adopted an ambitious programme of political association and increasing economic integration with the EU , thereby making decisive progress towards convergence of its own laws with EU legislation and regulations ahead of the preparation for future , more extensive negotiations .
Moldova has shown that it is ready to promote and bear the effects of such an ambitious undertaking , continuing along the lines of the progress already made in terms of the free EU market .
We do however agree with the rapporteur , Mr Moreira , when he says that the Republic of Moldova is currently in a difficult situation over the export of some products , with consequent problems for its economic recovery .
We therefore believe it is necessary to extend the validity of the regulation on some autonomous trade preferences by three years so as to give Moldova enough time to adequately prepare for the negotiations on the free trade area .
Beginning with these considerations , the report that we have adopted aims to encourage Moldova 's economic recovery , in particular by increasing the tariff quota exempt from duties of some products subject to current autonomous trade preferences .
in writing . - ( PT ) Moldova has been making efforts in recent years to move ever closer towards European standards of freedom , democracy and good governance .
The efforts highlighted here have been consistent and have demonstrated Moldova 's concern with continuing on the route towards possible enlargement .
Thus , in order to support Moldova 's economic recovery and provide a positive perspective for people working in the wine industry in the country ( one quarter of the workforce ) , there is a proposed increase in the duty free tariff quota for wine , from 100 000 hl to 150 000 hl for 2011 , from 120 000 hl to 180 000 hl for 2012 , and from 2013 onwards to 240 000 hl per year .
This is the direction which the amendments to this regulation are taking , and this will help the Moldovan economy and its development .
in writing . - Given that Moldova is experiencing difficulties with its wine exports to some of its traditional markets , which threaten its economic recovery and the reform process that it is vigorously pursuing , and in order to take measures to increase Moldova 's wine exports to support its economic development , it is necessary to : 1. increase the duty-free tariff quota for wine under the autonomous trade preferences ; 2. extend the validity of the relevant regulation ( which is due to expire on 31 December 2012 ) for another three years , until 31 December 2015 ; 3. increase the duty-free tariff quota for wheat , barley and maize .
I therefore voted ' for ' .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the vote in favour of this report .
The Republic of Moldova needs the European Union 's support at this juncture when it is facing economic problems , like most countries in the world , but also problems intrinsic to political transition .
At a time when Moldova is virtually facing a boycott of its wine exports in the Russian Federation 's market , increasing the duty-free tariff rate quota for wine is a timely measure and one which , I hope , will benefit this country 's economy .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agree with this resolution which proposes increasing autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova in the wine sector , which is vitally important for this country .
It is noted that this would be an even greater incentive to enhance mutual relations between the European Union and Moldova , and to develop the European neighbourhood policy .
As hitherto Moldova has fully exhausted the quota set , I agree with the proposal to increase the duty free tariff quota for wine .
Attention is drawn to the fact that such regulation will not have a negative impact on the EU 's wine industry .
Moldova is one of Europe 's poorest countries , facing major economic and political problems .
The EU should create favourable conditions for Moldova to choose an appropriate geopolitical direction that would help address the country 's difficulties .
Furthermore , the provisions of this resolution will create favourable conditions for the Moldovan wine sector to improve the quality of its product .
I believe that it is reasonable to extent the validity of the entire regulation for another three years , to ensure legal clarity and certainty for producers , exporters and importers .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Moreira on autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova because it is consistent with the Union 's neighbourhood policy and the economic agreements already in place with other bordering countries .
Indeed , I think it is a good idea for the countries bordering the EU to receive reciprocal trade concessions , both for economic development and socio-political issues .
The free movement of goods or a reduced customs duty allow a greater flow of capital and facilitate cooperation agreements .
This will benefit bordering countries as well as the internal market .
Clearly , its commercial purpose is important , however in doing this it is important not to forget other aspects that must be kept under consideration .
As I had the chance to say earlier , it is vital that the EU has a coherent and effective European neighbourhood policy .
Within the scope of this neighbourhood policy , Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 introduces a specific system of autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova , which provides free access to the EU market for all products from Moldova , with the exception of certain agricultural products listed in its annex , for which limited concessions have been given either in the form of exemption from customs duties within the limit of tariff quotas , or in the form of lower customs duties .
One of the exceptions to free movement is focused on the wine industry , with the implementation of a tariff quota that , according to the available data , has been fully used up months before the end of the year .
Given the fact that the economy of Moldova is being heavily hit by the negative effects of the global financial and economic crisis , and that its wine sector employs about 300 000 workers , this report , which I voted for , proposes the increase of the current tariff quota for wine in order to support Moldova 's efforts and to provide an attractive and viable market for its wine exports , which , moreover , do not compete with Portuguese products .
In order to support Moldova 's efforts at economic recovery and encourage the movement that has been seen towards convergence with EU legislation and standards , the Commission has put forward a proposal to increase the tariff quota for Moldovan wine .
According to the Commission , this measure will not have any negative effects on the European wine industry , so I felt that it was worth supporting the granting of this aid to Moldova .
in writing . - The text of the report is short .
It says : ' The European Parliament , - having regard to the Commission proposal to Parliament and the Council , - having regard to Article 294 ( 2 ) and Article 207 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , pursuant to which the Commission submitted the proposal to Parliament ( C7-0364 / 2010 ) , - having regard to Article 294 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , - having regard to Rule 55 and 46 ( 1 ) of its Rules of Procedure , - having regard to the report of the Committee on International Trade , 1 .
Adopts its position at first reading , taking over the Commission proposal ; 2 .
Calls on the Commission to refer the matter to Parliament again if it intends to amend its proposal substantially or replace it with another text ; 3 . Instructs its President to forward its position to the Council , the Commission and the national parliaments ' .
The Republic of Moldova is going through a difficult period in terms of its wine exports , which is having a negative effect on the process of reform and economic recovery being undertaken by its government .
The wine sector provides work for around 300 000 people ( a quarter of the active population of the country ) who mostly live in rural areas , cultivating small or medium-sized family plots .
With these changes , I think that Regulation ( EC ) No 55 / 2008 can contribute to supporting Moldova 's economic recovery , providing workers in the country 's wine sector with better prospects for the period 2011-2013 .
In order to achieve the best possible neighbourhood policy it will now be important to pursue tariff preferences , with the aim of halting the decline of Moldova 's economy whilst at the same time reducing fiscal losses for the EU as much as possible .
I am in favour of this report , given the amendments that were introduced in order to extend the validity of the current system - the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) - until December 2013 , taking into account the uncertainty as to the time required to complete the current legislative process .
The adoption of this report thus avoids a break in the legal coverage of the GSP and prevents disparities in treatment between different countries .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report since the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is a highly important trade and development mechanism that the EU has at hand .
However , I would like to urge the Commission to come up with a more substantial review of the GSP scheme as soon as possible .
I also think it is time for us to engage in a more substantial review of the GSP and GSP + beneficiaries ' lists .
The European Parliament should be consulted on this issue from the earliest stage .
I also expect that Parliament will be involved in the process of monitoring whether the GSP + beneficiaries uphold the 27 ILO and UN conventions , something that must be scrutinised thoroughly in order to maintain the reliability of the GSP + mechanism .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
In 1968 , the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) recommended the creation of a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) under which industrialised countries would grant trade preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal basis , not just to former colonies .
The European Community was the first to implement a GSP scheme in 1971 and it has been one of the key EU trade and development policy instruments to help developing countries reduce poverty by generating revenue through international trade .
The GSP scheme applied by the EU offers the most favourable treatment , granting the least-developed countries duty-free and quota-free access to the EU 's market .
This system also helps promote sustainable development and good governance for developing countries ratifying and implementing international conventions and protocols on human and labour rights , environmental protection , drugs and the fight against corruption .
In 1968 , the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development recommended the creation of a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) under which industrialised countries would grant trade preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal basis .
The European Community was the first to implement a GSP scheme and since its creation the GSP has been one of the key EU trade and development policy instruments to assist developing countries reduce poverty by generating revenue through international trade .
Although the system is the most used of the industrialised countries ' systems , I agree that we need to review the regulation in question so as to simplify the application of the scheme .
Additionally , I think that the general review should be dealt with in the proposal for a new regulation , which I hope will be tabled without delay .
The new proposal must aim at making the GSP a clearer and more transparent system .
I should also like to call on the Commission to look at the possibility of checking that the commitments have been fulfilled by periodically carrying out investigations that would also involve Parliament and representatives of civil society in the country in question .
in writing . - ( BG ) I voted for this report because I think that the impact of the present system needs to be increased and the use of the Generalised System of Preferences improved by providing technical assistance specifically designed to create the institutional and regulatory capacity required to allow the countries most in need to take maximum advantage of the benefits of international trade and the system of preferences .
Assistance must also be provided with the effective implementation of the international conventions required by this scheme and with the fulfilment of their commitments .
I think that developing countries must offer assistance in the battle against poverty by generating revenue through international trade .
This is the system most widely used among such systems available to the developed countries .
I think that it must be extended in order to achieve legal certainty and guarantee the interests of both the EU and the beneficiary countries .
However , during that time , the current unsatisfactory situation should be resolved without delay , accompanied by constant efforts to find a way of assisting the weaker countries which are in need .
I decided to vote for the report on generalised tariff preferences as it proposed the immediate adaptation of the ' Generalised System of Preferences ' to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , as well as a general review of the scheme in the future .
This general review would be aimed at increasing the involvement of beneficiary countries in the reform processes which affect them , granting technical assistance to help develop their institutional capacity , as well as at reviewing and harmonising the rules of origin .
in writing . - ( FR ) Parliament has just agreed to extend the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) for developing countries to run from 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2013 .
The GSP scheme is due to be reviewed this year , a process that should take into account the concerns expressed in the Committee on International Trade .
We are calling for greater transparency and genuine cooperation during the GSP negotiations with each country .
Commissioner De Gucht has undertaken to ensure that the European Parliament is closely involved in the decision-making process .
He must now keep that promise .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current regulation which establishes the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) will expire by the end of this year .
However , since the Commission is still awaiting the conclusion of a study on the matter , so as to present a new proposal for the GSP , in order to avoid a legal vacuum it was decided to extend the existing regulation and its current arrangements for another two years .
However , the Commission needs to present a legislative initiative on this subject very soon , because the current system needs to be reviewed and made more effective as a matter of urgency .
I therefore endorse the main points highlighted by the rapporteur , to be reviewed in this legislative proposal by the Commission .
These propose an effective system that will respond better to the interests of the recipient countries and economic operators , and rules that provide for a reform process which ensures the participation of the recipients and which will also ensure that Parliament can carry out its task of democratic oversight .
in writing . - ( PT ) In 1968 the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) recommended the creation of a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) under which countries that were considered to be more developed would support developing countries by granting trade preferences .
The European Community was the first to implement a GSP scheme in 1971 .
This has proved to be one of the key methods for cooperation at the level of international trade with developing countries , by reducing poverty .
The current regulation needs to be updated as it is due to lapse and as it is not covered in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It also requires substantial reform .
Although this proposal does not yet constitute a new regulation , the drafting of which is necessary , I would like to express my agreement with the report under discussion , and I hope that the Commission will submit a new proposal as soon as possible , so that the EU can continue to support developing countries .
The Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is a trade mechanism which allows the EU to grant developing countries preferential , non-reciprocal access to its market through tariff reductions .
While it is defined as a tool for development aid , this mechanism is not free of contradictions , especially between some of its stated purposes and the results that are actually obtained .
In effect , many developing countries have become increasingly economically dependent and have been shaping their economies according to a model of reduced diversification , based on a limited set of products for export , instead of developing their internal markets .
An international division of labour has become ingrained .
This is unfavourable to these countries ; it is often the large multinationals , some of them European , that reap the greatest benefits from this system .
There needs to be a comprehensive review of this mechanism , along with a thorough discussion of its various aspects and complexities and their impact not only on developing countries , but also on the EU Member States , particularly the weakest .
Given the Commission 's delay in submitting a new proposal for regulation , which means that it cannot enter into force immediately after the term of the existing regulation , there needs to be an extension of the existing ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The current scheme of generalised tariff preferences expires at the end of this year , so this is simply about voting for the necessary extension in order to ensure legal certainty and the mutual interests of the approximately 150 countries involved .
However , the importance of this subject for both developing countries and EU Member States with weaker economies , whose industrial , agricultural or social interests are not always respected in the international trade agreements promoted by the Commission , makes it necessary to conduct a thorough discussion on the new regulation .
The Commission should submit the proposal for this as soon as possible so as to allow all the different aspects and complexities of the Generalised System of Preferences to be properly analysed , along with its impact on different areas and countries .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) has been one of the key EU trade and development policy instruments to assist developing countries to reduce poverty .
This measure prolongs the current situation since a new regulation has not been tabled , which is somewhat regrettable .
Despite this , considering the importance of the instrument under discussion , I will vote in favour .
in writing . - ( DE ) Trade is an important and efficient instrument for combating poverty in developing countries .
The transitional regulation on a scheme of generalised tariff preferences legally enshrines preferential access to the EU market for 176 developing countries .
I supported the regulation , which ensures legal continuity , so that opportunities for trade remain available to developing countries .
Moreover , it is the EU 's moral duty to support these countries in the development of democracy and the rule of law by enabling fair trade .
The resolution on the proposal to amend Council Regulation ( EC ) No 732 / 2008 applying a system of generalised tariff preferences for the period from 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2011 was adopted by a wide majority in this House .
If the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) were not extended , many developing countries could actually find themselves in hugely difficult situations .
Ever since 1971 , Europe has tried to support and assist developing countries in order to reduce poverty by generating revenue through international trade .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the procedure to change the GSP requires the intervention of the Council and of Parliament , which must pursue the creation of an effective system that is sensitive to the interests of the beneficiary countries whilst also requiring them to ratify and implement 27 international conventions on the protection of human rights , sustainable development , fundamental labour standards and good governance .
Despite my support for this proposal for an extension valid until 2011 , I feel I must emphasise the regret - which was also expressed by my group - over the Commission 's tardiness in dealing with this bill .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which is a technical rollover to the GSP regulation .
It extends the duration of the regulation until 31 December 2013 in order to allow sufficient time for the new regulation to be drafted by the Commission and for Parliament to exercise its new powers in international trade policy .
This report is therefore not intended to tackle the substance of the regulation and it does not comment on whether GSP + beneficiaries do in fact continue to qualify for these trade preferences on the basis of good governance , sustainable development and ratification and implementation of UN conventions in the field of social , environmental and human rights .
We are all convinced that since its creation the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) has been one of the key European Union trade and development policy instruments .
It has represented a major incentive for developing countries , long embroiled in the fight against poverty , to favour free access to their market and imports of their goods via tariff reductions .
However , we agree with the rapporteur , Mr Scholz , who has expressed hope that the current Regulation on the subject will need to be extended , since this would ensure legal certainty and guarantee the interests of both the EU and the beneficiary countries and also avoid the current situation ( which is still unsatisfactory ) being extended .
So far we have seen a certain underuse of the trade preferences guaranteed by the GSP , above all those related to the rules of origin , caused by a problem in the administrative procedures that characterise them .
It would therefore be advisable to provide targeted technical assistance , for instance by operating twinning programmes , with the principal aim of promoting the development of regulatory capacities and guaranteeing the proper transposition of the international conventions .
Finally , we are of the opinion that the Commission should carry out constant monitoring , with greater involvement from Parliament and the relevant social partners .
in writing . - ( PT ) The existing regulation on generalised tariff preferences expires at the end of this year .
Given the impossibility of a new regulation coming into force in due time because of the delay in the submission of the study requested by the committee , we are obliged to extend the existing regulation for two more years .
However , given the importance of this regulation for governing trade between developing countries and the EU , the Commission needs to submit a new , updated version very soon .
There can be no development without economic growth .
Yet as I have said before , in the absence of an impartial state , economic growth is no guarantee of development .
EU trade policy has an essential part to play in combating poverty and achieving the Millenium Development Goals .
The EU 's Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is one of the tools that enables developing countries to compete on the international markets by offering either reduced customs duties or zero-rate access to the EU market for their exports .
The GSP also releases countries from dependency on aid .
We have approved the extension of the current regulation while we await the new draft regulation that has been requested in order to guarantee legal certainty .
However , the European Parliament 's new powers in the field of trade following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon must be taken into account .
Under the Treaty , measures in the GSP Regulation are considered to be delegated acts , which means that the European Parliament will have greater supervisory powers in future .
in writing . - ( DE ) As long ago as 1964 , some developing countries were already calling loudly for trade preferences in order to improve their economic situation . In 1968 , after an agreement was reached , a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) was introduced .
The European Economic Community introduced the GSP in 1971 and other nations like the United States followed suit .
The temporary granting of trade preferences sought to achieve the following goals : an increase in developing countries ' export proceeds by diversification of the exported products , promotion of industrialisation and an acceleration of economic growth in the developing countries .
Furthermore , the GSP was intended to ensure that the products supported originated in developing countries .
To date , the GSP represents one of the most important EU instruments in the area of trade and it is monitored by the European Commission .
As the current scheme expires on 31 December of this year , the Commission already presented a new proposal back in May 2010 .
No amendments are proposed for the new regulation , although the rapporteur definitely believes that a redrafting of the schemes is necessary .
I am abstaining from the vote because there do not seem to be any new , tangible proposals for the new regulation .
The regulation currently in force for generalised tariff preferences that enable free trade or lower duties in the trade of products between Member States and third countries , a regulation which is generally used to encourage trade with poor and / or developing countries , needs to be changed and put back into place , given its forthcoming expiry .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a new regulation on this subject because I agree with the objectives of the changes it aims to bring in .
The amendment aims to create an effective system that is more sensitive to the interests of the beneficiary countries and economic operators , to develop more comprehensive rules and to guarantee Parliament 's role as the body of democratic control .
I hope that this is the first step towards a solution to be identified at a global level for a general agreement on trade .
After the failure of the Doha negotiations , these measures can only really be provisional , ahead of a more long-term solution .
Regulation ( EC ) No 732 / 2008 established a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) that is valid until 31 December 2011 .
The GSP has been one of the EU 's main trade and development policy instruments for helping developing countries to reduce poverty , by generating income through international trade .
Parliament 's consultation process with regard to the latest GSP was insufficient , and did not allow for wide-ranging negotiation .
Parliament emphasised that in future more time will be needed for it to carry out its functions .
On 26 May 2010 , the Commission proposed simply extending the period of application of the current regulation , claiming that there was not enough time to table a new regulation .
This proposed extension did not take into account the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament raised this failure and proposed amendments to the Commission 's draft , with a view to ensuring that the rights and powers that Parliament had acquired through the Treaty of Lisbon would be respected .
I therefore voted in favour of this report , which approves the extension of the regulation in question and amends the elements required for respecting the new powers acquired by Parliament in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , in particular guaranteeing new powers with regard to delegated acts .
Under the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) industrialised countries guarantee trade preferences to all developing countries on a non-reciprocal basis .
It is one of the key EU trade and development policy instruments to assist developing countries to reduce poverty by generating revenue through international trade .
The regulation currently in force and valid until 31 December 2012 does not respect the new powers granted to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The new proposal for a regulation aims to create a system that is more sensitive to the interests of the beneficiary countries and economic operators , to develop more rules that allow for a better regulated reform process and to ensure that the regulation gives due importance to the task of democratic control asked of Parliament .
For these reasons I voted in favour of the proposal for a new regulation that aims for greater clarity and transparency in the GSP system .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since 1971 , the European Union has been awarding preferential trade arrangements to developing countries within the framework of its Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) .
The GSP is applied through successive regulations implementing a system of generalised tariff-related preferences , generally for three years at a time .
The current system was instituted by Regulation ( EC ) No 732 / 2008 and applies until 31 December 2011 , when it will be replaced by a new regulation , yet to be drawn up .
However , the remaining period of application of Regulation ( EC ) No 732 / 2008 is not sufficient to allow a Commission proposal to be drawn up and a new regulation to be adopted by means of the Ordinary legislative procedure , so it would appear necessary to extend this regulation 's period of application until 31 December 2013 , in order to ensure continuity in the functioning of the system .
I voted in favour , in the expectation that the Commission will table a new proposal quickly , which would contribute to making the GSP a clearer , more transparent and more effective system .
in writing . - The idea of a Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) goes back to 1968 , when tariffs were much higher in general and when they were still seen as the main barrier to trade from developing to industrialised countries .
The concept was initially proposed by the UNCTAD as a development tool : industrialised countries should grant non-reciprocal trade preferences to developing countries , allowing them to generate revenue not via aid , but via international preferential trade .
The European Community started to apply this scheme in 1971 .
The first three-year scheme was implemented from 2006 to 2008 .
The second scheme is due to expire on 31 December 2011 .
The current scheme was adopted in 2008 under the consultation procedure .
However , at that time , the referral arrived in Parliament at very short notice . Meaningful Parliament involvement in the regulation was impossible .
This should not happen again for the forthcoming regulation , in particular given Parliament 's new competencies under the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted in favour of the text of this resolution because I think that the European Union 's Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is one of the key instruments to make it easier for developing countries to achieve growth .
For this very reason it must be put into practice without delay .
As far back as 1971 , the European Union stood out from the other economic powers as it was the first to establish a preferential tariff system for developing countries .
The main aim is to eradicate endemic poverty everywhere , enabling countries in difficulty to draw the greatest benefits from international trade .
Now the tariff agreement is close to expiry and the Commission has decided that the new proposal will be tabled in the coming months , though its entry into force will be delayed until at least the second half of 2012 .
This delay will result in a legal vacuum of more than six months , causing a discontinuity in the programme that even risks putting the many results already achieved under threat .
I hope that this lamented delay will not cause the use of the generalised tariff system to decline and that the new agreement will provide a stimulus for the implementation of a global trade system based on ethics and democracy .
in writing . - ( LT ) It is very important for the EU 's Generalised System of Preferences to become more transparent .
It is important for the EU 's tariff preferences for imports from third countries to be based on democracy and ethics , and not simply the pursuit of profit .
Tariff preferences should be beneficial to the whole of society and not just a certain number of companies .
The rapporteur accurately observed that the proposal to extend the current regulation is not ideal , but it would allow us to avoid a legal vacuum lasting more than six months .
Under the current regulation , the European Parliament has no say on the criteria for eligibility , or on the list of the beneficiary countries .
This should change : The time has come for Parliament to make use of its new post-Lisbon powers in the trade arena .
The EU should pay more attention to the development of cooperation with neighbouring countries in the area of trade policy .
This would help establish a stable and liberal business environment and would facilitate the gradual enlargement of the European single market .
It is in the EU 's interests to sign a free trade agreement with Ukraine and begin negotiations with other Eastern Partnership countries which are members of the World Trade Organisation - Georgia , Moldova and Armenia .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted against this report .
As the rapporteur himself states , the system in its current form has more than a few shortcomings .
Although the Commission was called on to table a proposal for a new regulation which would , on the one hand , address the inadequacies of the legal framework and , on the other , take account of the institutional changes since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , ensuring among other things that Parliament is given greater powers of scrutiny than it has under the procedure that is currently applied , the draft that has been tabled contains an unnecessary extension of the current unsatisfactory situation .
In the parliamentary report , the rapporteur also discusses some of his proposals for improvements which could or should be included in the future proposal for a new regulation .
The Commission should take these proposals on board and table a new , improved regulation without delay .
I am voting for this report , given that the combined air space of the US and the EU represents 60 % of global air traffic , and current bilateral agreements between Member States and the US do not reflect reality .
The opening up of air space between the US and EU on a non-discriminatory basis should provide improved services for the transportation of passengers and cargo , economic benefits , and above all jobs .
I would therefore say that this is beneficial , as a convergence regulation could promote free competition , particularly with regard to state subsidies , and social and environmental criteria .
The US and European aviation markets represent over half of the world 's air traffic .
Consequently , in view of global warming , the European Union and the United States need to work together to reduce the environmental impact of international aviation .
I have therefore voted in favour of the Agreement in which both parties undertake to adopt environmental and social standards that will considerably reduce noise pollution and mitigate the effects of air traffic emissions on air quality , whilst also committing to developing sustainable alternative fuels .
For the first time , both parties have also agreed to guarantee the social rights of airline staff .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this Protocol to amend the EU-US air transport agreement .
The Protocol contains important elements of progress in EU-US cooperation on air transport issues .
It also avoids the risk that , in the absence of such an agreement , someone might trigger the suspension clause , contained in the first-stage Agreement .
Suspension could lead to European passengers and airlines losing the significant gains that have been enjoyed since March 2008 .
Attention should also be drawn to the fact that this new Agreement has opened the way to opportunities in terms of additional investment and market access as well as strengthening cooperation in regulatory areas such as safety , security and the environment , where both sides agreed a dedicated Joint Statement on the Environment .
The EU Member States and the US account for a share of 60 % of global aviation markets .
We should therefore strive to ensure a steady increase in the quality of services in this area .
By agreeing to the conclusion of an air transport Agreement between the EU and the United States , we are contributing to the growth of the aviation sector by making it possible to attract greater investment on both sides of the Atlantic .
Furthermore , the Agreement will help to strengthen the protection of employee rights within the sector , step up cooperation on air travel safety and also , thanks to the compatibility requirement , strengthen cooperation on environmental matters .
It is also significant that the role of the EU-US Joint Committee is strengthened , by enabling it to promote new initiatives when putting the Agreement into effect .
I believe that the new Agreement will help further to open up access to the market , which will mean higher-quality services and more stringent safety requirements , and I therefore endorse the resolution .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of this initiative because air transport markets represent 60 % of world traffic .
This Agreement will bring about the changes in United States legislation that are necessary for increasing convergence on regulations preventing unfair competition .
New routes will be opened , and operators and passengers will be offered improved services and prices , which will , in turn , contribute to economic growth , leading to job creation on both sides of the Atlantic .
Although far from perfect , the EU-US Air Transport Agreement marks a step forward , paving the way not only for future opportunities in terms of additional investment and market access , but also for measures providing increased safety and security .
The air transport market has not been completely opened up by both sides as a result of the version of the Agreement reached through negotiation .
However , it contains sufficient incentives to encourage reform .
The US needs to change its domestic legislation to allow EU investors majority ownership of US airlines , generating reciprocal measures from the EU .
The EU-US Joint Committee has received increased powers , which means that it will be able to enhance cooperation by promoting new initiatives .
The new rules will reduce red tape , including through mutual recognition of each other 's regulatory decisions , and avoid the wasteful duplication of resources .
The recognition of the importance of the social dimension and the responsibility given to the Joint Committee to monitor the social effects of the Agreement and develop appropriate responses as necessary are an innovation introduced in the second stage of the Agreement .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the fact that the European Union and the United States have declared their intention of working together to reduce the impact of international aviation on the environment .
I applaud the initiatives for reducing noise , for reducing the impact of aviation on air quality and the global climate , for encouraging the development of environmentally friendly aviation technology , and for innovation with regard to air traffic management , and for the sustainable development of alternative aviation fuels .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this recommendation , as I believe that the Agreement under consideration may be an important step towards opening up the market to EU and US airlines on a non-discriminatory basis .
This opening up of the market may contribute to the improvement of services provided to passengers , in terms of both variety and cost , and provide substantial economic benefits .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although it has not yet achieved a single transatlantic market for air transport , the amendment to the Air Transport Agreement between the United States and the European Union contains significant improvements compared to the previous version , particularly in terms of the environment and security .
I hope that the progress made will enable continued efforts towards reducing the obstacles to creating this market , particularly with regard to the inter-operability and compatibility of systems , and the imbalance in competition laws , which favour US firms in terms of the ownership and control of airlines , not least the Fly America Act .
in writing . - ( PT ) This draft legislative resolution is based on the draft decision of the Council and the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting within the Council on the conclusion of the Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement between the United States of America , of the one part , and the European Community and its Member States , of the other part .
The ideal agreement would be one that proposed a complete opening up of the aviation market , without any restrictions on either side .
However , this objective has not been achieved .
Therefore , taking into account the regulatory changes due to the Treaty of Lisbon , the size of the aviation markets within the EU and the US , which account for 60 % of global air traffic , the need to respect the privacy of European and US citizens , and the existence of rules ensuring respect for the rights of passengers , I welcome this Agreement .
It represents significant progress compared with the status quo .
However , it is important to emphasise the need for the European Parliament and the United States Congress to maintain dialogue on issues not covered by this Agreement .
in writing . - ( PT ) The objectives of this Agreement are set out clearly by the rapporteur : the ' opening of the market ' : in other words , the deepening of the liberalisation under way within this sector , ' creating a single market for air transport ' .
It should be stressed , as pointed out by the rapporteur , that the aviation markets of the EU and the US together represent around 60 % of global air traffic .
The promises of benefits for workers and passengers that always accompany these liberalisation processes are as old and trite as they are false , as demonstrated by the reality in cases where liberalisation has gone ahead , whether in this sector or in other sectors .
Propaganda relating to ' environmental cooperation ' has now been added to these promises ; a question that can and must be tackled without doubt , but not within this context .
Even here , it is clear what the intention is : promoting the compatibility and interaction of emission licence-trading regimes .
In the name of free competition , which justifies everything and to which everything is subject , severe limitations are being placed on state intervention in defence of the interests of national airlines , and therefore in defence of national strategic interests in a number of areas , such as links with migrant communities .
These agreements are another part of the process of liberalisation under way within the air transport sector , which obstructs state intervention in and regulation of this strategic sector , opening the door to the monopolistic concentration that always results from free competition , which is sacrosanct and defended at all cost .
In the name of facilitating business opportunities within international air transport , which promotes the interests of multinationals within the sector at the expense of national companies and their respective strategic interests , including those that are publicly owned , as is the case in Portugal with TAP Portugal .
As a result , aviation company workers lose out , passengers lose out , and other workers lose out , as liberalisation facilitates dumping by multinationals , imposing unsecure jobs through the levelling down of working conditions .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because the Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
The EU-US aviation markets account for about 60 % of world air traffic .
Opening the market to EU and US airlines on a non-discriminatory basis would offer passengers and freight operators improved services , in terms of both variety and cost , provide substantial economic benefits and create jobs .
Regulatory convergence could do much to promote fair competition , particularly with regard to state subsidies , social and environmental standards .
While the second-stage Agreement represents a significant step forward , it is important for it not to be regarded as the end of the process of establishing a transatlantic aviation market .
I believe that the Commission needs to look forward towards negotiating another stage of this Agreement covering issues including : further liberalisation of traffic rights ; additional foreign investment opportunities ; the effect of environmental measures and infrastructure constraints on the exercise of traffic rights ; and better coordination of passenger rights policies in order to ensure the highest possible level of protection for passengers .
Consistent standards of passenger rights , including those for people of reduced mobility , are of particular importance so as to avoid travellers facing inconsistent treatment while travelling .
All of these air agreements are beneficial and necessary for the European Union , our airlines and our citizens .
in writing . - I voted for this Agreement , which is correct in so far as it goes .
However , while the incentives to further market opening are welcome , the absence of substantive progress in removing outdated regulatory constraints in the area of foreign investment is disappointing , as this will maintain the current unbalanced restrictions on foreign ownership and control in the United States .
In addition , EU carriers will only gain limited access to US Government-financed traffic .
This again represents the continuation of an unbalanced situation , given that EU national governments do not impose similar restrictions .
This amendment to the Agreement on air transport between the European Union and the United States represents an excellent opportunity to develop the potential of a market that accounts for 60 % of world air traffic .
The European Commission has by now made significant progress in the attempt to establish an Open Aviation Area between the EU and the US , in which investments could flow freely and both EU and US airlines would be able to provide air services without any restriction .
We now recognise the need for more intense cooperation in order to face up to ever-changing challenges in the fields of security and the environment , as well as to promote further investment in order to guarantee free access to the market .
The provision of an EU-US Joint Committee is crucial : it will monitor the social impact of the regulatory cooperation programme , which will help reduce existing red tape .
We would mention the problematic issue of exchanging personal passenger data between the EU and the US , and therefore the relationship between international security and the privacy of citizens .
We consider it essential that Parliament be kept fully informed about the work of the Joint Committee , foreign investments , infrastructure constraints on the exercise of traffic rights and the coordination of passenger rights policies .
The EU-US Agreement is very important for the future of relations between both sides .
As such , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament needs to be fully informed and consulted with regard to the work carried out by the Joint Committee , as well as all of the entities involved .
Any agreement that is to be concluded will need to be adopted by Parliament , which will therefore need to be kept up-to-date with all negotiations , and it will be important in the future for regular meetings to be held between Members of this House and members of the US Congress , in order to debate all questions relating to aviation policy between the EU and the US .
This Agreement is therefore an important step towards opening up the market to airlines from the EU and the US without any discrimination .
This opening up of the market may contribute to the improvement of services provided to passengers .
in writing . - ( NL ) The delegation of the Dutch Labour Party to the European Parliament certainly does not consider this second stage Agreement to be perfect , but it takes the view that it will lead to progress in important areas .
In addition , it will prevent the United States from activating the suspension clause in the absence of such an Agreement .
Suspension could lead to European passengers and airlines no longer being able to profit from the significant benefits which they have enjoyed since March 2008 thanks to this protocol .
The benefits and positive aspects include , in particular , agreements on working standards for airline staff , sharing good practice with regard to noise abatement , strengthening cooperation in the field of environmental protection etc .
The delegation of the Dutch Labour Party to the European Parliament recognises the ongoing need to pursue a proper debate on safety requirements ( such as the use of scanners ) and the impact on privacy and health of passengers of such requirements .
In addition , it would highlight the need for the privacy of European and US citizens to be put centre stage and respected when passengers ' personal data is exchanged between the EU and the US .
It is essential that Parliament is and remains involved in these negotiations and that European regulations are not eroded .
in writing . - The Agreement is not perfect but does herald some serious progress .
If there is no such Agreement , someone might trigger the suspension clause , which would deprive the EU 's passengers and airlines of the significant gains that have been enjoyed since March 2008 .
Given the fact that US is a difficult partner in negotiations we should aspire for progress in further negotiations in this direction .
I therefore voted ' for ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) Air transport has increased in general and therefore the aviation markets of the EU and the United States have also grown .
For a long time , the Member States have negotiated with the United States on an individual basis and concluded bilateral agreements .
The shift to EU level enables European airlines to fly to any destination in the United States from any point in the EU .
As a precondition for this , some reforms had to be carried out both in the United States and in the European Union .
The new Agreement is intended to open the way to future opportunities in terms of additional investment and market access and improve cooperation between the regulatory authorities .
However , the agreement is one-sided if existing restrictions on foreign ownership and control in the United States continue to remain .
Thus , with this new agreement , the EU is allowing itself once again to be deceived by the United States , and that is something that I cannot support .
in writing . - ( DE ) It makes perfect sense for air transport agreements with the United States to now be concluded at European level instead of separately with individual Member States as they were previously .
This will allow European airlines to fly to all destinations within the United States .
What I am not happy about , however , is the one-sided nature of this Agreement , in which the EU , on the one hand , is making numerous concessions , while the United States , on the other , is insisting on restrictions on foreign ownership , for example .
The EU must put itself in a stronger position in relation the United States in this regard .
in writing . - ( LT ) The open-skies agreement reached between the United States and the European Union is a guarantor of progress and a mirror of economic development for both regions .
Fully opening the transatlantic market would represent an important step towards improving the situation in the global aviation sector .
There would be an economic benefit for both parties worth millions , and many new jobs would be created , along with business development opportunities .
While striving for economic benefits , we must not forget security requirements .
Standards of flight safety and security are vitally important to passengers , crew and the whole aviation sector .
Security standards must be harmonised in ascending order .
EU and US institutions responsible for flight security must cooperate at all levels .
EU security standards must meet the requirements set by the International Civil Aviation Organisation .
We must make every effort to ensure that our own lives , as well as those of our children and the loved ones , are taken seriously .
We cannot allow the flying , working and rest time of flight crew members in the European Union to be subject to lower security requirements , which could endanger people 's lives .
I voted in favour of the Agreement on Air Transport between the European Union and the United States .
I did so precisely in order to make our political weight felt since , although they are not considered the best even by Mr Zasada himself , the agreements reached do offer a way to manage air transport that will in any case benefit the citizens of the two continents , both in terms of travel and trade .
Thanks to further liberalisation of traffic rights , additional foreign investment opportunities and better coordination of passenger rights policies , the EU and USA have both been guaranteed important benefits .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this amendment to the EU-US Air Transport Agreement .
Any suspension would lead to passengers and airlines from the Union experiencing significant losses to the benefits that they have enjoyed since March 2008 .
I agree with the rapporteur 's analysis that this Agreement is not perfect .
However , it has the merit of tabling important elements that enable this process to move forward , and avoid the risk of the activation of the suspension clause in the absence of an agreement of this nature .
In fact , this Agreement - a second-stage Agreement - does not achieve the end objective of a complete opening up of the market , with no restrictions on either side , although it does contain a series of incentives promoting reform .
In concrete terms , when the US amends its legislation to allow EU investors to become majority shareholders in US airlines , the EU will reciprocate .
In any case , this process will not be straightforward , and any decision relating to it will depend on monitoring and the final proposal arrived at , under circumstances that are instrumental to ensuring improved air transport and the success of European companies .
The European Union and United States aviation markets , taken together , account for about 60 % of world air traffic .
The Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement provides for the market to be opened up to EU and US airlines on a non-discriminatory basis and offers passengers and freight operators improved services , in terms of both variety and cost , provides substantial economic benefits and creates jobs .
In addition , further progress on cooperation and regulatory convergence in this area could do much to promote fair competition , particularly with regard to State subsidies and social and environmental standards .
For the reasons outlined above , I am therefore voting in favour of the adoption of the Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement between the EU and the US .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite not having achieved the end objective of the complete opening up of the transatlantic air market , this second-stage Agreement between the EU and the US represents significant progress in this direction , providing new commercial opportunities for European airlines and substantial benefits to passengers and cargo operators , in terms both of strengthening the provision of services and of reducing costs .
I therefore voted in favour of the conclusion of this signing of this Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement between the EU and the US , as I would like to see a continuation of negotiating efforts towards greater liberalisation of traffic rights , the strengthening of cooperation in different areas , and the abolition of regulatory restrictions in place in the US with regard to the ownership and control of US airlines by non-nationals .
in writing . - The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent is required for the conclusion of international agreements .
Air transport agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
Previously , Parliament was only consulted on such agreements .
As a result , this Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement is subject to Parliament 's consent , whereas the initial Agreement was concluded after consultation of Parliament .
The EU-US aviation markets , taken together , account for about 60 % of world air traffic .
Opening the market to EU and US airlines on a non-discriminatory basis would offer passengers and freight operators improved services , in terms of both variety and cost , provide substantial economic benefits and create jobs .
In addition , regulatory convergence could do much to promote fair competition , particularly with regard to state subsidies and social and environmental standards .
European and United States airlines , taken together , account for around 60 % of world air traffic , thereby representing an unrivalled economic force in the sector .
Opening up the EU and US aviation market would , de facto , enable more services to be offered at lower costs , with positive repercussions for both the economy and employment .
Indeed , common standards would favour a more uniform integrated development , above all from the social and environmental point of view .
I am therefore pleased to see that the agreement reached contains numerous incentives designed to encourage these changes .
The ability to make equity investments in the respective airlines , as well as increased consultation and cooperation on security , are just some examples of this .
I now hope that Parliament adopts the Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement between the EU and the US , avoiding triggering the suspension clause , which would cause the benefits achieved so far to be lost .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament today adopted an Protocol to Amend the Air Transport Agreement in place between the European Union and the United States , and I voted in favour of it .
The proposal is a significant step toward improving transatlantic relations in the area of aviation .
The aviation markets in the EU and the US together represent around 60 % of global air traffic .
The opening up of markets to airlines will provide improved services for passengers and cargo operators , and will bring great benefits in terms of the economy and of job creation .
However , the Agreement should not be seen as the end of the process .
The Agreement in question , described as second-stage , does not achieve the end objective of the complete opening up of the market , with no restrictions on either side .
It is also extremely important to have consistent rules with regard to the rights of passengers , and better coordination of policies relating to this .
Finally , it should also be emphasised that issues such as greater liberalisation of traffic rights , increased opportunities for foreign investment , and the effect of environmental measures on traffic rights will need to be taken into account during any future phase of negotiation .
I am in favour of adopting the motion for a resolution on the above matter .
The Treaty of Lisbon extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category , because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
Previously Parliament had only been consulted on such agreements .
The EU-US aviation markets , taken together , account for around 60 % of world air traffic .
Opening the market to EU and US airlines on a non-discriminatory basis would offer passengers and freight operators improved services in terms of both variety and cost , provide substantial economic benefits and create jobs .
In addition , regulatory convergence could do much to promote fair competition , particularly with regard to state subsidies and social and environmental standards .
At the same time , we should recognise that a number of issues remain outside the scope of the Agreement as amended by the new Protocol .
For this reason , the Commission needs to look forward towards negotiating another stage of this Agreement , covering issues including : further liberalisation of traffic rights , additional foreign investment opportunities and the effect of environmental measures and infrastructure constraints on the exercise of traffic rights .
I am voting for this report , firstly because it is a substantial improvement on the current bilateral agreements between Member States and Canada , which are quite restricted , and secondly because of the significant improvement that it offers in terms of services and air connections between the two markets , with the resulting economic , environmental , security , passenger transport , competition and legal benefits , amongst other things .
The European Union and Canada have agreed to cooperate on air transport with the aim of mitigating the impact of aviation on climate change .
In terms of security and passenger safety , the Agreement envisages mutual recognition of standards and ' one-stop ' security .
All European Union airlines will be able to operate weekly flights between Canada and the EU .
This Agreement will significantly improve the connections between the markets of both countries and the links between people , while creating new opportunities for the airline sector through a gradual liberalisation of foreign ownership rules .
I voted for this report as it contains specific provisions for improving consumer interests .
Until now , air transport between EU Member States and Canada has been regulated solely by bilateral agreements .
As the European Union and Canada have long maintained economic and political links , it has become necessary for the two parties to reach an agreement on air transport .
I have therefore voted in favour of this Agreement , which provides for the phased implementation of traffic rights , investment opportunities and cooperation in a number of areas ( not least air safety through the creation of a shared security system , but also social matters , consumer interests and environmental issues ) .
Under the Agreement , all existing restrictions on routes , pricing and the number of services flying between the European Union and Canada will also be removed .
This Agreement is both ambitious and essential .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with the EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement .
The Agreement includes a gradual phasing-in of traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as far reaching cooperation on a number of issues including safety , security , social matters , consumer interests , environment , air traffic management , state aids and competition .
All EU airlines will be able to operate direct flights to Canada from anywhere in Europe .
It is also to be welcomed that this Agreement removes all restrictions on routes , prices , or the number of weekly flights between Canada and the EU .
Airlines will be free to enter into commercial arrangements such as code-share agreements , which are important for airlines serving a large number of destinations , and to establish their tariffs in line with the countries ' competition law .
In 2007 , the Council granted the Commission a mandate to negotiate a global aviation agreement .
That year 9 million people travelled between the United States and Canada .
The purpose of the Agreement was to create a single market for air transport .
This entailed the need to modify Canadian legislation .
Progress in totally opening up the market and implementing the necessary legislative changes has been gradual .
Nonetheless , the fact that restrictions on routes have been eliminated , weekly flights have been introduced and commercial agreements are now open to airlines , all constitute advances .
Despite the difficulties , I believe we must continue to work until the single market becomes a reality .
That is why I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( BG ) It is well known that prior to this Agreement , aviation was the subject of bilateral agreements with 19 of the EU Member States .
I supported this proposal because it will facilitate air transport , but mainly because it includes a gradual phasing-in of air traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as far-reaching cooperation on a number of issues including safety , security , social matters , consumer interests , the environment , air traffic management , state aids and competition .
Such an Agreement was a necessity .
in writing . - ( CS ) An aviation agreement between the EU and Canada would , under normal circumstances , have my full support , as I am wholly in favour in removing barriers to free movement , both within the EU and between the EU and third countries .
In a situation where Canada continues to impose a unilateral visa requirement on citizens of the Czech Republic , however , I regard this Agreement as the misguided accommodation on the part of the EU of a country which does not deserve such accommodation .
The EU should have the courage to link both of these issues - the visa requirement and the signing of the international agreement - as this may provide a rare opportunity to put effective pressure on Canada over the visa affair .
It is astonishing that Canada , on the one hand , allows EU airlines to operate direct flights to Canada from anywhere in the EU , and , on the other hand , prevents the citizens of one Member State from travelling freely to Canada .
It is widely felt that the relationship between the EU and Canada has gradually developed into a strategic partnership , and the concluded Agreement will confirm and strengthen the nature of the partnership .
However , if Canada continues to impose a unilateral visa requirement against Czech citizens , this partnership will have a very bitter taste to it .
This Agreement , which will enable European airlines to establish direct flights to Canada from any point in Europe , as well as to explore code sharing for these routes , can be described as the most ambitious air transport agreement concluded by the European Union .
It seeks to eliminate provisions included in previous bilateral agreements that violated Union Law , and which threatened equality of treatment between companies owned by nationals of different Member States .
I would like to see European Union-Canada relations strengthened , and for us to be able to move more and better toward air space with fewer barriers between states .
in writing . - ( PT ) This recommendation deals with the draft decision of the Council and of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Union , meeting within the Council on the conclusion of the Agreement on Air Transport between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Canada , of the other part .
Economic and political relations between the European Union and Canada date back a long time , and have given rise to bilateral agreements in this area .
However , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December 2009 , which requires European Parliament approval for agreements relating to air services , the Commission began a process of negotiation that has now come to an end , through which a set of traffic rights and investment possibilities have been established , together with cooperation in several areas : security , defence of consumer rights , the environment , management of air traffic , social rights and fair competition .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this proposal , which will facilitate travel for EU and Canadian citizens by removing various restrictions , enabling code sharing and establishing fairer pricing .
The similarities between the objectives in this case and the Agreement with the US are clear : the creation of a single market for air transport between the EU and Canada , a market that , in 2007 , represented a volume of 9 million passengers .
The rapporteur stated that the Agreement is even ' more ambitious and specific than the EU-US Agreement ' , but also acknowledges that ' Although this Agreement is more ambitious than that with the US regarding market access , it is less explicit when it comes to recognising the importance of the social dimension ' .
In other words , even the empty references made to the impact of the Agreement on jobs , workers and working conditions were overlooked in this case .
The truth is that , in this case as well , the absence of restrictions that was demanded with regard to suppliers and services provided - for operations between countries , within each country , and even outside the EU and Canadian markets , as provided for by the Agreement - and to limitations on state intervention in airlines will contribute to the objective of opening the way to monopolistic concentration within the sector ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The objectives of this report are clear : the creation of a single market for air transport between the EU and Canada , a market that , in 2007 , represented a volume of 9 million passengers .
The rapporteur stated that the Agreement is even ' more ambitious and specific than the EU-US Agreement ' , but also acknowledges that ' Although this Agreement is more ambitious than that with the US regarding market access , it is less explicit when it comes to recognising the importance of the social dimension ' .
In other words , even the empty references made to the impact of the Agreement on jobs , workers and working conditions were overlooked in this case .
Even the absence of restrictions that was demanded with regard to suppliers and services provided - for operations between countries , within each country , and even outside the EU and Canadian markets , as provided for by the Agreement - and to limitations on state intervention in airlines will contribute to the objective of opening the way to monopolistic concentration within the sector , with adverse effects for workers and passengers , contrary to what has been said .
That is why we voted against .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because the Agreement includes a gradual phasing-in of traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as far reaching cooperation on a number of issues including safety , security , social matters , consumer interests , environment , air traffic management , state aids and competition .
All EU airlines will be able to operate direct flights to Canada from anywhere in Europe .
The Agreement removes all restrictions on routes , prices , or the number of weekly flights between Canada and the EU .
Airlines will be free to enter into commercial arrangements such as code-share agreements , which are important for airlines serving a large number of destinations , and to establish their tariffs in line with competition law .
The Agreement contains provisions for the phased market opening linked to the granting of greater investment freedoms by both sides .
The ambitious nature of this Agreement is very much to be welcomed .
It should serve as a target for other negotiations currently underway .
I therefore believe that Parliament should consent to the EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement .
All of these air agreements are beneficial and necessary for the European Union , our airlines and our citizens .
in writing . - I welcome this Agreement , which can fairly be described as the most ambitious air transport agreement between the EU and a major world partner .
It will significantly improve both the connections between respective markets and people-to-people links , as well as creating new opportunities for the airline sector through a gradual liberalisation of foreign ownership rules .
In particular , it is more ambitious and specific than the EU-US Agreement with regard to traffic rights , ownership and control , even following the provisional application of the amending Protocol ( ' second stage ' ) .
According to a study launched by the Commission , an open agreement with Canada would generate an additional half a million passengers in its first year and , within a few years , 3.5 million extra passengers might be expected to take advantage of the opportunities such an agreement could offer .
The Agreement could generate consumer benefits of at least EUR 72 million through lower fares and would also create new jobs .
Although the European Union and Canada have long-standing economic and political ties , prior to the current Agreement , aviation was the subject of bilateral agreements with a number of the Member States .
It is therefore necessary to pursue the objective of establishing an Open Aviation Area that clears the way for the creation of a single market for air transport , in which investments would flow freely and both parties ' airlines would be able to provide air services without any restrictions .
We think that existing legal restrictions on ownership of Canadian airlines should be removed and , at the same time , new traffic rights and cooperation on a range of issues - including passenger safety , respect for the environment , air traffic management and security - ought to be introduced .
We can therefore surely say that the Agreement adopted today is truly ambitious .
It will bring about a decisive improvement in connections between the respective markets and will create new opportunities for the sector .
However , we do recommend increased consultation and cooperation on the delicate issue of security and we call on the Commission to keep Parliament informed of all developments and to watch over the work of the new Joint Committee .
The EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement is very important for the future of relations between both sides .
As such , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament needs to be fully informed and consulted with regard to the work carried out by the Joint Committee , as well as all of the entities involved .
Any Agreement that is to be concluded will need to be adopted by Parliament , which will therefore need to be kept up-to-date with all negotiations .
This Agreement is therefore an important step towards opening up the market to airlines from the EU and Canada without any discrimination .
This opening up of the market may contribute to the improvement of services provided to passengers .
This is the most ambitious transport Agreement ever signed between two countries .
in writing . - I fully agree with Silvia-Adriana Ţicău : the Agreement is the most ambitious air transport agreement between the EU and a major world partner .
It will significantly improve both connections between the respective markets and people-to-people links , and will create new opportunities for the airline sector through a gradual liberalisation of foreign ownership rules .
In particular , it is more ambitious and better focused than the EU-US Agreement in terms of traffic rights , ownership and control .
I voted in favour of this agreement on air transport between the European Community and its Member States , of the one part , and Canada , of the other part .
This is a very ambitious Agreement , which provides for the gradual establishment of traffic rights and investment possibilities , together with full cooperation in several areas , including questions of security , social questions , the defence of consumer interests , the environment , the management of air traffic , state aid and competition .
All European Union airlines will be able to operate direct flights to Canada from any European airport .
The Agreement removes all existing restrictions on routes , prices and the number of weekly flights between Canada and the EU .
It is with satisfaction that I am voting vote for this Agreement , given its ambitious nature and the possibilities that it opens up for making the historical ties that exist between the Azores and Canada even closer .
The EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement is one of the most ambitious air transport agreements between the EU and a major world partner .
It includes a gradual phasing-in of traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as far-reaching cooperation on issues such as : safety , security , social matters , consumer interests , the environment , air traffic management , state subsidies and competition .
The Agreement will improve the connections between the respective markets and people-to-people links , as well as creating new opportunities for the airline sector through a gradual liberalisation of foreign ownership rules .
According to recent studies , an open agreement with Canada would generate an additional half million passengers in its first year and , within a few years , 3.5 million extra passengers might be expected to take advantage of the opportunities such an agreement could offer .
The Agreement could generate consumer benefits of at least EUR 72 million through lower fares and would also create new jobs .
For the reasons outlined above , I am voting in favour of the adoption of the Agreement on air transport between the EU and Canada .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of concluding the EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement , which will enable European airlines to establish direct flights to Canada from any point within Europe , generating , firstly , new opportunities for European companies - in particular , thanks to the possibility of reaching code-sharing agreements and the progressive liberalisation of rules in the area of foreign investment - and , secondly , substantial economic benefits , both for consumers and with regard to job creation .
, in writing - ( CS ) In my opinion , the aviation agreement with Canada is a fundamental commercial instrument which will deliver benefits to both sides , but in view of the discrimination against Czech citizens and the position of MPs from the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic , I am abstaining from the vote .
The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic has suspended talks on the ratification of the Agreement until such time as there is clear progress by the Commission in talks with Canada over ending the unilateral visa requirement for Czech citizens .
For almost two years there has been a two-tier citizenship of the EU , as Czech citizens cannot travel freely to Canada like others do , while Canadians can travel freely to the Czech Republic .
The Czech Republic cannot respond reciprocally because of the common visa policy of the EU , but the Commissioner is failing to safeguard this policy .
in writing . - The Treaty of Lisbon , which entered into force on 1 December 2009 , extended the circumstances in which Parliament 's consent was required for the conclusion of an international agreement .
Air agreements now fall within this category because they cover a field to which the ordinary legislative procedure applies .
Previously Parliament had only been consulted on such agreements .
Although the EU and Canada have long-standing economic and political ties , prior to the current Agreement , aviation was the subject of bilateral agreements with 19 of the EU Member States .
Many of these agreements were restrictive and did not offer full access to the respective markets .
In November 2002 , the European Court of Justice ruled that certain provisions in these bilateral agreements were incompatible with Community law .
The Council therefore gave the Commission a mandate , in October 2007 , to negotiate a comprehensive aviation agreement in place of the existing bilateral agreements .
In that year nine million people were travelling between the EU and Canada .
The EU-Canada Air Transport Agreement was initialled on 30 November 2008 , endorsed by the EU-Canada summit on 6 May 2009 and signed on 17-18 December 2009 .
The EU and Canada also negotiated an agreement on air safety .
This is the subject of a separate recommendation .
Although the European Union and Canada have long-standing economic and political ties , until today the only existing Agreement on aviation between the EU and Canada was borne out of a combination of bilateral agreements between countries .
This protocol includes the introduction of traffic rights and investment opportunities , as well as cooperation on a number of issues , particularly increased guarantees on safety and security .
I am in favour of the text of this Agreement because it introduces measures designed to gradually open up the Canadian air market , allowing greater investment freedoms for both parties .
In order to properly fulfil the mandate , Canada needs to change its legislation to remove the existing legal restrictions on ownership and control of Canadian airlines and on the number of services offered by each airline .
This Agreement , which can be described as the most ambitious air transport agreement concluded by the European Union , will enable European airlines to operate direct flights to Canada from any European airport , while also introducing commercial mechanisms such as code sharing .
The Agreement provides for the gradual establishment of traffic rights and investment possibilities , together with full cooperation in several areas , including questions of security , social questions , the defence of consumer interests , the environment , the management of air traffic , state aids and competition .
In the document adopted today in the sitting , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , of which I am a substitute member , calls upon the European Commission to ensure that Parliament be informed and consulted systematically with regard to the activities of the Joint Committee established , so that it can monitor the various stages of the opening up of the market .
I voted in favour of the recommendation , and the Agreement in question should serve as an example for other negotiations currently under way .
in writing . - ( DE ) This Agreement serves as a model for current and future negotiations with other States .
It will remove all restrictions on routes , prices , or the number of weekly flights between the two parties to the agreement .
According to predictions , the potential savings as a result of cheaper flight prices amount to EUR 72 million , which would benefit consumers directly .
The Aagreement will have further indirect benefits for our citizens as a result of the creation of new jobs .
I therefore voted in favour of the Agreement .
I am voting for this report because the continuation of the existing bilateral air agreements with Vietnam would not be in line with European law , and because of the possible opportunities that this greater openness could bring about .
Until now , bilateral agreements on air transport concluded between EU Member States and third countries have created the potential for discrimination against certain European Union carriers .
The new Agreement therefore includes an EU designation clause that encompasses all European Union carriers and will replace the traditional designation clauses which referred to air carriers from individual Member States .
In doing so , the Agreement is designed to prevent discrimination amongst European Union carriers and to eliminate anti-competitive practices .
I have therefore voted in favour of the Agreement , which will allow all European Union air carriers to operate flights between any Member State and Vietnam .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with the conclusion of this Agreement .
The Agreement 's objective is to give all EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam .
This Agreement also ensures that safety provisions in bilateral agreements are applicable to situations when regulatory control over an air carrier is exercised by a Member State other than the Member State that designated that air carrier .
Furthermore , I believe that it is very important that the Agreement prohibits anti-competitive practices .
The Court of Justice has ruled that all bilateral agreements signed before now are in contravention of European Union law .
It has therefore been necessary to amend three articles in order to prevent discrimination between airlines and outlaw potentially anti-competitive activities , as well as to ensure that safety clauses apply where a Member State controls transport designated by another Member State .
in writing . - ( BG ) I wish to explain my vote on the Aair Transport Agreement between the European Union and Vietnam .
I voted in favour of this Agreement because I learnt that the Agreement concluded by the Commission replaces , for the better , certain provisions in the existing 17 bilateral air services agreements concluded between EU Member States and Vietnam .
As we are aware , according to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , no amendments can be tabled , but I think that the Commission has agreed the necessary arrangements and I support this Agreement .
The Commission has been asked by the Council to seek the replacement of certain provisions within the agreements relating to air services , after the Court of Justice found that they did not comply with Union Law .
The amendments in question provide for granting all European airlines access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam , and prohibit anti-competitive practices .
These amendments ensure compliance with the principle of freedom of establishment , and seek to ensure identical treatment within a host Member State to that availed to nationals of that Member State .
I would like to see contacts and exchanges between the European Union and Vietnam benefiting from the mutual advantages offered to airlines , and for these to lead to their peoples to have better knowledge of each other .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the adoption of this draft Council decision seeking the conclusion of an agreement between the European Union on the one hand , and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on the other , relating to certain aspects of air services .
International relationships in the area of aviation between Member States and third countries used to be regulated through the establishment of bilateral agreements .
However , a 2002 judgement by the Court of Justice of the European Union deemed this situation to be illegal , as it contravened Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The Commission therefore initiated a negotiation process seeking to replace the 17 bilateral agreements on air services that are in force between Member States and Vietnam .
This process , which has now come to an end , aimed to provide all EU carriers with non-discriminatory access to routes between the EU and Vietnam , require compliance with safety standards , and prevent anti-competitive practices .
This Agreement , like the others , serves the objectives of liberalisation within the air services sector , with the justification , as in other cases , that the 2002 judgement of the EU Court of Justice deems existing bilateral agreements to contravene Union law .
As in other regrettable situations , the interpretation of Union law once more seems to give priority to freedom of competition over all other social and economic precepts .
We are expressing here the same reservations that we have about other agreements , their scope and the possible consequences that they may have .
Within the current context in which civil aviation activity is taking place , the creation of equal conditions for the various European companies could contribute to facilitating the process of monopolistic concentration within the sector that is already under way , with all the adverse effects that this would have for aviation company workers and for passengers .
In order for the market to be dominant within this sector , the ability of Member States to defend their flag carriers has to be reduced .
We are faced with an agreement that serves the objectives of liberalisation within the air services sector , with the justification , as in other cases , that the 2002 ruling of the EU Court of Justice deems existing bilateral agreements contravene Union law .
Once again , as in other regrettable situations , the interpretation of Union law seems to give priority to freedom of competition over all other social and economic precepts , even where there are bilateral agreements between Member States .
We are therefore expressing the same reservations that we have about other agreements , their scope and their possible consequences .
Within the current context in which civil aviation activity is taking place , the creation of equal conditions for the various European companies could contribute to facilitating the process of monopolistic concentration within the sector that is already under way , with all the adverse effects that this would have for aviation company workers and for passengers .
The ability of Member States to defend their flag carriers should not be reduced .
in writing . - ( IT ) The new competences acquired by the European Union also include air transport agreements .
The Agreement in question with Vietnam sets out procedures to implement a number of regulations , particularly in terms of security .
The recommendation is clear and I support it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this report , because international aviation relations between Member States and third countries have traditionally been governed by bilateral air services agreements .
As for bilateral air services agreements between EU Member States and Vietnam , I am pleased that the objective is to give all EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam ; safety provisions in bilateral agreements are applicable to situations when regulatory control over an air carrier is exercised by a Member State other than the Member State that designated that air carrier ; and anti-competitive practices are prohibited .
All of these air agreements are beneficial and necessary for the European Union , our airlines and our citizens .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
International aviation relations between Member States and third countries have traditionally been governed by bilateral air services agreements .
The EU Court of Justice ruled in 2002 that traditional designation clauses in Member States ' bilateral air services agreements infringe EU law .
They allow a third country to reject , withdraw or suspend the permissions or authorisations of an air carrier that has been designated by a Member State but that is not substantially owned and effectively controlled by that Member State or its nationals .
This has been found to constitute discrimination against EU carriers established in the territory of a Member State but owned and controlled by nationals of other Member States .
This is contrary to Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which guarantees nationals of Member States who have exercised their freedom of establishment the same treatment in the host Member State as that accorded to nationals of that Member State .
There are also further issues , such as competition , where compliance with EU law should be ensured through amending or complementing existing provisions in bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries .
That is why the Commission negotiated this agreement .
The bilateral agreements on international air transport entered into by the European Union with third countries now require a radical overhaul .
The Court of Justice has ruled that traditional designation clauses in such agreements are entirely incompatible with EU law since they violate the freedom of establishment of foreign companies and do not guarantee them the same treatment that the host Member State accords to its own companies .
We therefore welcome the conclusion of this agreement tabled by the Commission , which aims to give all European Union air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes to and from Vietnam , while avoiding any anti-competitive practice .
The clauses on possible fuel tax for air services ought to be removed and it would be desirable for the traditional designation clauses referring to air carriers of third countries to be replaced by a European Union designation clause referring to EU air carriers .
By doing this , an extra balancing factor would be added to the bilateral agreements .
Lastly , it would be worth establishing increasingly stringent safety measures , particularly in situations where regulatory control over an air carrier is exercised by a Member State other than that which designated it .
The EU-Vietnam Agreement is very important for the future of relations between both sides .
As such , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament needs to be fully informed and consulted with regard to the work carried out by the Joint Committee , as well as all of the entities involved .
Any agreement that is to be concluded will need to be adopted by Parliament , which will therefore need to be kept uptodate with all negotiations .
This Agreement is therefore an important step towards opening up the market to airlines from the EU and Vietnam without any discrimination .
This opening up of the market may contribute to the improvement of services provided to passengers .
The bilateral agreements on air services between the European Union and third countries include clauses that have proved to be in breach of EU law as they do not guarantee equal treatment outside the EU for the various air carriers , which is why we need a specific agreement that protects passengers and airlines .
I voted in favour of the agreement precisely in order to guarantee that all European air carriers can use Vietnamese air routes equally , without running the risk of being banned .
Furthermore , the scope of the agreement aims at greater flight and passenger safety .
If , in fact , for various reasons we cannot have the same standards that we have within the Union , then it is appropriate that some core points and rules are established .
Following the 2002 judgement of the Court of Justice of the European Union ruling that the traditional designation clauses included within bilateral Air Services Agreements signed by Member States contravened Union law , it became necessary to negotiate an agreement that sought to replace certain provisions within the current 17 bilateral air services agreements between Member States and Vietnam .
The clause in question contravened Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which guarantees nationals of Member States exercising their freedom of establishment the same treatment within a host Member State as that given to nationals of that Member State .
Thus , in order to avoid discrimination between EU air carriers , the traditional designation clauses relating to air carriers of a Member State that is a party to a bilateral Agreement are being replaced by an EU designation clause , applicable to all EU carriers .
The aim of this is to provide all EU air carriers with non-discriminatory access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam .
In light of all of the above , I voted in favour of this report , which also merited a favourable opinion from the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the conclusion of the Agreement on Air Transport between the EU and Vietnam , which is aimed at replacing certain provisions of the 17 existing bilateral air services agreements signed by that country and the Member States , guaranteeing EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes between the European Union and Vietnam , in accordance with what was established by the Court of Justice in 2002 , along with compliance with Community law on competition .
in writing . - International aviation relations between Member States and third countries have traditionally been governed by bilateral air services agreements .
The EU Court of Justice ruled in 2002 that traditional designation clauses in Member States ' bilateral air services agreements infringe EU law .
They allow a third country to reject , withdraw or suspend the permissions or authorisations of an air carrier that has been designated by a Member State but that is not substantially owned and effectively controlled by that Member State or its nationals .
This was found to constitute discrimination against EU carriers established in the territory of a Member State but owned and controlled by nationals of other Member States , contrary to Article 49 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union which guarantees nationals of Member States who have exercised their freedom of establishment the same treatment in the host Member State as that accorded to nationals of that Member State .
There are also further issues , such as competition , where compliance with EU law should be ensured through amending or complementing existing provisions in bilateral air services agreements between Member States and third countries .
I think the final text voted on today is pleasing because it allows all European Union carriers to have access to routes between the EU and Vietnam , avoiding discrimination between the various air carriers .
In addition , guarantees have been made on security and competition which are crucially important for improving air services on this route , which will benefit operators and passengers alike .
The constant economic growth of this country , which , thanks to the flexibility of its entrepreneurial fabric , has managed to deal with the international crisis better than many , makes it a favoured partner for the EU and today 's vote cannot but support this important line of development .
The Commission has negotiated an agreement between the EU and the Republic of Vietnam which replaces the 17 existing bilateral air services agreements between that country and the Member States .
The Agreement in question does not contain the usual provision on the taxation of fuel in the EU on flights conducted by third-country operators .
However , the Agreement entails significant benefits for the EU , and my vote goes towards supporting Parliament 's recommendation .
To this end , I would like to highlight the clause on the designation included in the Agreement which is aimed at giving all EU air carriers non-discriminatory access to routes between the EU and Vietnam , but also the provisions relating to security and compliance with competition rules .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Agreement brought the designation clauses of the previous bilateral air services agreements into line with EU law in accordance with the ruling of the European Court of Justice in 2002 .
I have voted in favour of the conclusion of the Agreement .
I am voting in favour of this report because it is necessary to conclude negotiations on trade with this region , and I believe that there are positive developments by virtue of the fact that this document includes sectors like energy , industry and raw materials , and , above all , research , innovation and education .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report and would like to urge EU and GCC leaders to intensify cooperation , especially in the area of trade , since negotiations on a free-trade agreement between the EU and the GCC were opened 20 years ago and still have not been concluded .
Apart from being strategically a very important region for the EU and the West in general , the GCC states are also important trade partners .
Our trade with this region has been on a constant rise and in 2009 it amounted to EUR 79.7 billion .
We also have a positive trade balance with GCC countries , as we export goods worth EUR 57.8 billion and our imports amount to EUR 21.8 billion .
The EEAS should pay more attention to this important region and new EU diplomatic missions should be opened in the GCC member states .
In this way we would be able to raise the profile of the EU and have more influence in this part of the world .
EU engagement is needed now more than ever considering the turmoil and unrest this region is experiencing .
The European Union and Gulf Cooperation Council have been negotiating a free trade agreement for some 20 years .
Both parties would benefit from more in-depth relations , especially as there are numerous opportunities for cooperation in the fields of education , scientific research and renewable energies .
On the domestic front , the GCC countries have , for some years now , been going through a new process of political and social modernisation , which must be supported and encouraged .
I think that we need continuous dialogue between the European Union and Gulf Cooperation Council in order to make progress in promoting human rights and freedoms , as well as those of minorities , and in the battle against every form of discrimination , including discrimination based on gender or religion .
This is the reason why I voted for this report .
For some 20 years , the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council have been trying to negotiate a free trade agreement .
The negotiations have still not been concluded .
A great deal has changed over those 20 years .
The Gulf Cooperation Council members have now become the economic powerhouse of the Middle East and North Africa region .
They also constitute the main investors in the European Union 's southern Mediterranean neighbourhood .
Consequently , the potential for cooperation between the European Union and the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council goes beyond trade , extending to fields such as science and education .
This is why I voted in favour of the own-initiative report which calls on the European Parliament to devise a more ambitious policy with regard to the Gulf Cooperation Council .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) have been negotiating a free trade agreement for some 20 years .
These are the longest-running and hitherto non-concluded trade negotiations that the EU has undertaken .
In the course of this period , the situation in this region has changed profoundly .
Over two decades , the GCC member states became the main economic powerhouse for the Middle East and North Africa , while the newly emerging region itself has significant influence on the development of the global economy .
I agree with the proposals made in the report that it is necessary to swiftly conclude a free trade agreement with this region that is important for the EU .
The potential for cooperation between the EU and the Gulf region applies not only to the realm of trade , but to other shared interests in international security , in combating terrorism , in diplomatic mediation in Middle Eastern trouble spots , in regional crisis management and in intercultural dialogue and global economic governance .
in writing . - ( BG ) Through this own-initiative report the European Parliament aims to call for a more ambitious EU policy to be devised in relation to the Gulf Cooperation Council and its member states .
I voted for this report because I think that this is the direction we should choose .
All the more so as the Gulf Cooperation Council recently declared that it no longer recognises Muammar Gaddafi 's regime as legitimate .
We are pleased and encouraged by this policy .
The Council condemned the crimes perpetrated by the Gaddafi regime against the civilian population and called for immediate intervention from the League of Arab States and the UN Security Council .
The integration process initiated 30 years ago by the six member states of this Council is still so far the only experiment of its kind in the Arab world .
We must support them .
It is more important than ever for the European Union to have a free trade agreement with the Gulf states .
The record in terms of negotiations on such an agreement is poor as far as their duration is concerned .
The situation has obviously changed several times in the 20 years since they started .
The Gulf region 's geopolitical climate is different now , entailing global and regional implications .
We have to deal with the liberalisation and diversification of the economies in these states .
At present , the Gulf states are much more than mere trade partners , as they have an ever-increasing influence on the financial sector and diplomacy , not to mention other areas . Indeed , their influence will continue to grow .
This creates a new outlook for the European Union , which understands that cooperation between both regions extends beyond trade .
We have shared interests in the areas of international security , the fight against terrorism , diplomatic mediation in the tension zones in the Middle East , regional crisis management , intercultural dialogue and global economic governance .
The EU has certain advantages to draw on by comparison with the new players in the Gulf region , provided that political will is shown at the highest level .
I voted in favour of this report on trade , economic and financial relations between the EU and the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) , namely Saudi Arabia , Bahrain , United Arab Emirates , Kuwait , Qatar and Oman .
I agree with the provisions in the text as regards relations between the EU and the Arab countries in the Gulf region , especially in relation to strategic agreements in the areas of energy , science and education .
It is also important to achieve a free trade agreement .
I believe that it is in the interests of the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) to forge closer relations at all levels , be they political , cultural , commercial or financial .
On the matter of this report , for which I was the rapporteur for the Committee on International Trade , I would like to highlight three proposals which I have advocated from the beginning and which have been warmly welcomed by the other members : 1 ) an increase in the diplomatic presence in the region by setting up an EU delegation in each of the GCC member states , through the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) ; 2 ) the holding of regular Heads of State or Government summits between the EU and the GCC ; and , finally , 3 ) an invitation for the High Representative / Vice-President and the Commissioner for Trade to consider alternative approaches to future trade relations with the GCC countries , in the form of bilateral agreements between the EU and the Gulf States that already feel prepared to enter into further commitments with the EU .
Although the latter proposal represents a new EU approach to relations with third countries , I believe that neither the EU nor every one of the GCC countries willing to forge closer relations in all areas can remain hostage to other GCC countries that do not yet feel comfortable to do so .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report because it argues that the potential for cooperation between the EU and the Gulf region goes beyond the merely commercial sphere .
Good relations between these regional blocs can make an important contribution towards safeguarding common interests such as international security , the fight against terrorism , and global economic governance .
The recent turmoil and social , political and military unrest in various Muslim-majority countries add to the need for the EU to develop a strategy for the Gulf region and to establish contacts and lasting partnerships with the leading multilateral institution in the region , the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) .
There are obvious security and economic-financial issues that connect both parties , so the EU should increase its efforts and channel resources in order to better raise awareness and seek to complete the draft trade agreement which , I believe , may not only increase trade but also help to bring their respective populations into greater contact .
I hope that the reforms that have been undertaken by some of these countries will be consolidated and the Europe can contribute to this process in a positive way .
in writing . - ( PT ) This motion for a Parliament resolution deals with relations between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) , with a view to establishing a strategic partnership involving their member states .
Despite the turmoil in certain Arab countries that has been reported recently , the Gulf states have great economic potential and present an excellent opportunity for cooperation with the EU .
These countries represent an excellent opportunity for trade not only because they are producers of oil , of which reserves are becoming exhausted , but mainly because they are beginning to invest in alternative energies , and Europe is also known for its expertise in this field .
I am therefore pleased that this report has been adopted and I hope that we will soon be able to adopt an agreement that will strengthen the EU 's partnerships with the Islamic community .
There is no shortage of causes for concern and areas of instability which are making the geopolitical regional context extremely complex : the situation in Palestine , the war in Iraq , the situation in Iran , the recent popular uprisings in several countries , such as Yemen , and the situation in Darfur .
In the face of this situation , the EU has been using double standards in their relations with states in this region , which has hindered the resolution of conflicts , negotiations and peace processes .
Moreover , it often interferes in the uprisings , without respecting the sovereign laws of the peoples of the region .
In this context , this report takes as its background the negotiations that took place 20 years ago to reach a free trade agreement between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) , making these the oldest trade negotiations initiated by the EU , but which have not been concluded to this day .
This alone would be reason enough for us not to support the report .
However , some of the oral amendments tabled during the vote have made it even more inacceptable , particularly the reference to the position of the UN Security Council on the establishment of an air exclusion zone in Libya , which , as we are aware , is masking the war which is being waged against this country .
We are aware that the geopolitical situation of the Gulf region is very complex and includes sensitive and serious issues concerning security and peace .
Notable among these are the peace processes in the Middle East , the war in Iraq , the situation in Iran , the popular uprisings in Yemen and the recent developments in Darfur , besides the latest events in North Africa .
However , the report notes that ' the Gulf states ' sovereign wealth funds account for more than one third of the world total and those funds helped to rescue the global and European financial system ' .
This was the context in which the negotiations took place 20 years ago to reach a free trade agreement between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) , which were the longest-running non-concluded trade negotiations that the EU has undertaken .
The fact is that the EU has been interfering and using double standards in their relations with states in this region , which is hindering the negotiations and even peace processes relating to the sovereign rights of the peoples of the region .
Moreover , the resolution adopted by Parliament includes new proposals that do not help the peace process in the region ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( LT ) By voting in favour of this report , I support the demonstrations for democracy and human rights in Bahrain and condemn the government 's violent response .
The countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) , Iran , Iraq , Yemen , Oman , the United Arab Emirates , Qatar , Saudi Arabia and Kuwait , currently represent the EU 's sixth largest export market and the EU is currently the GCC 's main trading partner .
Notwithstanding this already intensive level of trade , there is still scope for deepening it , as well as room for greater diversification of trade between the two parties , given the size of the EU market and efforts on the part of GCC member states to diversify their exports .
A free trade agreement would also provide new opportunities for technical cooperation and assistance and the conclusion of the EU-GCC FTA would foster closer ties and further diversification .
This document restates the EU 's opposition to the death penalty and calls for a global moratorium on it ; deplores the continuing retention of the death penalty by all GCC member states ; therefore invites them to adopt a moratorium on executions ; and calls in particular on states practising executions and punishments involving methods such as decapitation , stoning , crucifixion , flagellation or amputation to cease these practices .
in writing . - I voted for the report on the EU relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council .
I would like to point out my support for the oral amendments introduced by the rapporteur Mr Baudis to update the report in the light of recent developments .
It is important to call on all member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council to recognize the continuing popular movement for democratic reform within the wider region with the appeal to the emerging civil society groups to promote the process of genuine peaceful democratic transition within their respective countries .
in writing . - ( FR ) For various reasons , the Persian Gulf region is of strategic importance for the European Union , particularly in terms of energy supply .
The European Union wants to enter into closer cooperation with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) - an organisation made up of the six richest nations in the region - with the conclusion of a free trade agreement forming a key component of that process .
I voted in favour of this report , which prepares the ground for future cooperation between the Union and the GCC .
Covering all of the issues relevant to such a partnership , such as the rights of minorities , women 's rights , freedom of conscience and expression , but also support for the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and areas for strategic partnership such as research , education and fossil and renewable fuels , the motion proposed by my colleague , Mr Baudis , has achieved a fairly broad consensus among the political groups .
However , recent events in Bahrain have given rise to concerns as to whether the report is sufficiently up-to-date .
Goodwill on all sides has resulted in some excellent compromise oral amendments being negotiated , thereby bringing the report up to date and ensuring that months of hard work have not been in vain .
I voted in favour of adopting the Baudis report .
Mr Baudis ' comprehensive report covers all the interesting issues concerning human rights , equal rights for women , freedom of the press and democratisation .
The report also takes account of recent changes in the political arena in Bahrain .
I believe that it is absolutely vital to condemn the violence which is being used in this conflict .
A strategic partnership in many areas , which is highlighted at many points in the report , should make it possible to avoid crises in relations between the EU and the region , and to increase Europe 's energy security .
The Persian Gulf countries are extremely important players in the peace process .
I would therefore like to say how pleased I am that the report was adopted , and I hope that cooperation between the European Union and the Persian Gulf countries will be even more productive in many areas .
in writing . - I voted for this report , and particularly welcome the oral amendment adding a new paragraph 7a , which ' calls on all member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council to recognise a continuing popular movement for democratic reform within the wider region and calls for the full engagement with emerging civil society groups to promote a process of genuine peaceful democratic transition , within their own countries , with partners in the region and with the full support of the European Union ' .
Over the 20 years of trade negotiations between the European Union and the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) the context of the negotiations has changed profoundly and these relations must be able to reach a turning-point .
The conclusion of a free trade agreement remains both a political and a commercial priority .
The GCC 's geopolitical environment is characterised by the emergence of a series of security challenges with global and regional implications that means that a process to liberalise and diversify the basic economic structure of these countries needs to be started up .
These countries should be able to continue down the path of cooperation and multilateralism .
The European Union therefore has the task of developing a new strategic partnership that is capable of supporting the ongoing regional integration process .
Furthermore , it would be desirable for the European External Action Service to open new diplomatic missions in these countries .
It would therefore be a good idea for Parliament to encourage a more ambitious EU policy with regard to the GCC .
We should be able to step up relations in areas of cooperation , such as the field of scientific research and technology , while continuing to discuss issues such as the protection of religious minorities , the right to work and freedom of opinion .
Negotiations between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) have already been taking place for more than two decades , in an attempt to negotiate a free trade agreement .
This puts these among the longest-running non-conluded trade negotiations that the EU has undertaken .
Now , in the course of 20 years , the context of the negotiations has changed profoundly .
The GCC states have subtantial financial clout in the form of sovereign wealth funds , which amounted to more than USD 1 380 billion in 2009 , in other words over 35 % of the world total .
The GCC member states have become the economic powerhouse for the entire Middle East / North Africa region , representing more than 40 % of the national wealth generated in this area and holding 50 % of its official currency reserves , in other words USD 1 070 billion .

Given the massive financial and economic potential of these countries , we have to make use of the current context if the negotiations are to reach a successful conclusion .
in writing . - The EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council have been negotiating a free-trade agreement ( FTA ) for some 20 years : the longest-running non-concluded trade negotiations that the EU has undertaken .
The report underlines that concluding the FTA remains a priority .
However , it goes beyond trade relations and also includes the issues of energy , industry and raw materials , R & D and innovation and education .
I abstained from voting because the agreement should be drawn up in the context of a political response to the situation in the region .
There should be a separate approach to every single country .
Let us take Iran as an example .
It would be a mistake to include Ahmadinejad 's regime in the process of negotiations .
More precise geographical or economic clarifications are necessary .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this resolution on European Union relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council , because the Gulf region is seen today in terms of the emergence of a new global economic hub , whose geopolitical environment makes the Gulf a focus of security challenges that have global and regional implications .
Furthermore , the GCC is the EU 's sixth largest export market and the EU is currently the GCC 's main trading partner and it is necessary to develop and diversify mutual relations .
We must make every effort to ensure that cooperation is extended in various areas of economic and technical activity , and this includes enhancing the process of economic development .
In addition , strong economic interaction would provide more opportunities to strengthen the EU 's regional integration and would create more possibilities for the EU to contribute to increasing the stability of this strategically important region .
We must do our utmost to ensure that negotiations between these two regions are finally brought to a close and a free trade agreement is concluded which would guarantee new opportunities for technical cooperation and assistance .
in writing . - ( LT ) Right up until the breakthrough of the wave of democracy in the Arab countries , the European Parliament has constantly been calling on the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council to improve the situation as regards democracy , the rule of law , and human rights and freedoms .
Our Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats stressed in particular the need for reforms in social policy and the safeguarding of increased freedoms for unions .
We firmly opposed executions and the trampling of women 's rights .
By voting in favour of this report , I support the demonstrations for democracy and human rights in Bahrain and condemn the government 's violent response .
I support the rapporteur 's calls to share with the Gulf countries the EU Member States ' experience introducing technologies for extracting renewable energy sources .
I also spoke in favour of speeding up negotiations on a free trade agreement between the EU and the countries of the Gulf .
There is clear potential for cooperation between these two regions not just on the economy , but also on issues of international security , combating terrorism , diplomatic mediation in Middle Eastern conflicts , intercultural dialogue and global economic governance .
The report by Mr Baudis on European Union relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) relates to the negotiations for free trade between the EU and the countries of the Persian Gulf .
I think that an agreement that facilitates trade and therefore strengthens all the socio-political ties that reintegrate the region into the global context is fundamental for its future stability following the wars of past few years and recent events , as well as in commercial terms .
I therefore voted in favour of the report , hoping furthermore for the relationships to be intensified , as this would be of mutual benefit , including in view of a new global governance .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report , which constitutes an appeal by Parliament for the formulation of a more ambitious policy on a strategic partnership between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) and its member states .
The EU and the GCC have been trying to negotiate a free trade agreement for about 20 years .
These are among the longest-running non-concluded trade negotiations that the EU has undertaken .
However , in the course of 20 years , the context of these negotiations has changed profoundly .
In fact , the potential for cooperation between these two regions goes beyond the merely commercial sphere .
The two blocs share common interests such as international security , the fight against terrorism , diplomatic mediation in areas of tension in the Middle East , regional crisis management , intercultural dialogue and global economic governance .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report as I believe that Parliament 's appeal for the formulation of a more ambitious EU policy in relation to the GCC and its member states is very timely .
I hope that the political will that is needed on this matter is felt at the highest level .
in writing . - ( IT ) The free trade agreement between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) has been under discussion for around 20 years .

Over this period , the financial and geopolitical circumstances of the GCC have changed drastically : security challenges have emerged ( such as , Iraq , Iran , Yemen , Islamic terrorism , and piracy ) and new commercial players have appeared in the area .
At the same time , the GCC member states have become the economic powerhouse of the whole Middle East-North Africa region and are now the main investors in the EU 's southern Mediterranean neighbourhood area .
The two regions also have common interests on security , combating terrorism , managing the regional crisis and global economic governance .
That is why Parliament is today called to formulate a more ambitious cooperation policy with the countries of the GCC .
The EU has certain advantages to draw on in comparison with the new players operating in the Gulf , above all in terms of education , scientific research , energy and technology .
We cannot allow the opportunities offered by this particular moment in history - as world economic governance is defined and regional balances are reshaped - to pass unfulfilled .
The Gulf region is greatly important to the EU , and it is therefore vital to develop a strategy that is aimed at strengthening political , financial , economic , social and cultural ties with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) .
In view of this , the conclusion of the free trade agreement between the EU and the GCC is a priority .
The potential of this cooperation also extends to other areas , such as education , energy and scientific research .
I therefore support the appeal made in this House today for the formulation of a more ambitious EU policy in relation to the GCC and its member states , and I hope that the strengthening of dialogue and cooperation between the EU and the GCC will help to promote and consolidate progress with regard to respect for democratic principles and fundamental rights .
in writing . - Among the reasons to vote in favour of this text , one should mention the adoption of Amendment 7a ( new ) that states the following : ' Calls on all member states in the Gulf Cooperation Council to recognise a continuing popular movement for democratic reform within the wider region , and calls for the full engagement with emerging civil society groups to promote a process of genuine peaceful democratic transition , within their own countries , with partners in the region and with the full support of the EU .
The free trade agreement between the European Union and the Gulf region is a priority for both parties ' interests and will emphasise the importance of their mutual recognition .
The presence of the European Union in the region strengthens trade policy , contributing to the development of targeted and effective information on the EU in the Gulf countries .
Concluding the agreement in question makes it possible to facilitate increased visibility for the Union by following a strategy of opening new European diplomatic missions in the Gulf states which would encourage political dialogue and make Europe 's efforts more effective .
This also applies in terms of the EU 's energy needs , still largely met by fossil fuels , even though future oil demand will be influenced by a climate policy increasingly focussed on renewable sources .
The social and political developments that have taken place in recent years in most Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) member states encourage the promotion of human rights and the fight against all forms of discrimination , including those based on gender , sexual orientation or religion .
A reliable partnership between the EU and the GCC therefore needs to be built , which will favour open markets for goods and the removal of non-tariff barriers .
in writing . - The UK Conservative delegation and the ECR Group voted in favour of the Baudis Report on EU-GCC relations , including the extensive oral amendments submitted by the rapporteur today in plenary , as it is important to condemn any disproportionate use of force in Bahrain by the authorities , in particular allegations of the shooting of unarmed peaceful protestors .
We accept that the mainly majority Shia community protestors have themselves in some measure also resorted to unacceptable violence and we call on all sides to exercise maximum restraint .
Bahrain is a loyal western ally and home to the US Fleet and we welcome the offer of dialogue by the Crown Prince of Bahrain .
We accept that under the GCC rules the government of Bahrain is entitled to call in Saudi and Kuwaiti assistance in enforcing law and order , but again foreign forces in Bahrain should respect fundamental human rights , including the right to peaceful demonstration .
We hope an EU-FTA can be concluded as soon as possible as economic growth and job creation , particularly amongst the disadvantaged Shia community , will assist in stabilising the island state and reducing social tension .
I supported the motion for a resolution which sends a clear signal to our partners in the Arab peninsula .
Against the backdrop of extreme economic , social and geopolitical tensions , it was essential that this House reiterate its willingness to review our cooperation agreements in light of the events in the Arab world .
We are not suggesting abandoning historic links , but rather adjusting our relations to reflect the realities on the ground and the needs of the people , making respect for the values championed by the Union a prerequisite for developing economic and political links .
Dialogue with civil society will also be a key and indispensable feature of each partnership .
Whilst progress and reforms must be welcomed , a lot remains to be done in order to set these countries firmly on the road to democracy , respect for human rights and civil liberties .
Part of Europe 's destiny is being played out in the Near and Middle East .
Under the association agreements concluded between the Union and these countries , we now need to find a middle way that is fair to all sides , balancing the pursuit of economic and trade relations against promoting core values .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report on European Union relations with the Gulf Cooperation Council .
As thoroughly explained in the report , due to the many advantages for both contractual parties and after 20 years of negotiations , it is time that we made a targeted effort to push for the conclusion of a free trade agreement .
Above all , however , I support the main points of focus for the negotiations stated in the report , which take account of developments in the area of climate change and the obligation in terms of human rights .
I am in favour of this appointment because all the legal procedures have been carried out , including a rigorous Curriculum Vitae assessment .
The Executive Board of the European Central Bank requires a new member .
I have voted in favour of appointing the Belgian candidate , Mr Praet , in view of his acknowledged authority and professional experience in the field of monetary affairs and banking .
in writing . - ( PT ) I support the favourable result of the voting by the Council with regard to the appointment of Mr Praet as an Executive Board Member of the European Central Bank , on the basis of a positive assessment of his Curriculum Vitae and the written responses that he provided to the questionnaire given out to candidates for the post in question .
At a pivotal moment in the life of the European institutions , when the European Central Bank , in particular , is required to perform an especially careful and interventionist role in monitoring the sovereign debt crisis , the stability of the euro and economic recovery , I wish the newly appointed Mr Praet every success in his office , and I believe that he will perform the functions for which he has been appointed with dedication and competence .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because by letter of 18 February 2011 the European Council consulted the European Parliament on the appointment of Peter Praet as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank for a term of office of eight years with effect from 1 June 2011 .
Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs then proceeded to evaluate the credentials of the nominee , and in carrying out this evaluation , the committee received a CV from the candidate as well as his replies to the written questionnaire that was sent out to him .
The committee subsequently held a one-and-a-half-hour hearing with the nominee on 16 March 2011 , at which he made an opening statement and then responded to questions from the members of the committee .
A favourable opinion was delivered to the European Council on the Council recommendation to appoint Peter Praet as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
in writing . - I voted for this report which , on the basis of a recommendation from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , delivers a favourable opinion to the European Council on the Council recommendation to appoint Peter Praet as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
The European institutions have to be served by the very best .
In this instance , the newly appointed Mr Praet comes with an unblemished record and was approved with distinction at the hearing carried out by Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I wish him every success for the eight years of his term .
I am delighted that Mr Praet has been selected to become a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
As an expert on financial stability and on supervising financial infrastructures and payment systems and as a member of the Management Committee of the Belgian Banking , Finance and Insurance Commission ( CBFA ) , Mr Praet is highly regarded in economic and academic spheres .
He also has a wealth of experience that can now be put at the service of the European Union .
I voted in favour of the appointment of Dr Praet as an executive committee member of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) as he has shown that he is an excellent candidate .
During the hearing with the candidates held in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Dr Praet proved to be the most knowledgeable and competent candidate by a wide margin .
In recent years the European Central Bank has shown that it is an essential institution which was capable of managing the crisis and preventing even greater damage being caused .
Indeed , beginning with the collapse of Lehman Brothers , the role played by the ECB - independently and separately from national governments - ensured that the extremely serious consequences of the crisis were not devastating .
The ECB is and remains a bulwark in defence of the monetary union and the euro .
For this reason , it is crucial that the members of its executive committee are equipped with exceptional qualities and experience .
I voted in favour of the report on the appointment of Mr Praet to the post of Executive Board Member of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) for a term of eight years , to begin on 1 June 2011 .
All of the information presented for this option and which formed the basis for my own decision indicates that the criteria set out in Article 283 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union have been met , and show that there is a need for the ECB to be fully independent , in accordance with Article 130 of that treaty , and I therefore welcome the appointment of Mr Praet .

I voted in favour of this decision , under which Parliament gives its assent to the Council 's recommendation to appoint Mr Praet to the post of Executive Board Member of the European Central Bank .
I would like to wish him every success in performing the duties which are entrusted to him .
I am in favour of this appointment because all the legal procedures have been carried out , including a rigorous Curriculum Vitae assessment .
The purpose of the European Banking Authority , which came into being on 1 January 2011 under the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 , is to guarantee the stability of the financial system , transparency of financial products and markets , and to provide protection for savers and investors .
The European Banking Authority has nominated Adam Farkas , an economist from the Hungarian National Bank , to become its Executive Director .
The European Parliament has to approve the selection in order for it to be valid .
I have voted in favour of the appointment of Mr Farkas .
I support the appointment of Mr Farkas to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) , based on the answers that he gave to the Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority ( European Banking Authority ) .
If there were a lesson to be learnt from the recent crisis , it would be that we need to reform the institutional supervisory structure by creating European agencies and thus reformulate the entire concept of macro and micro-economic monitoring .
The European Banking Authority is the result of that .
Confidence in banks having been dealt a severe blow by the global financial crisis , it is important for the markets , and for Europeans in general , to start trusting the solidity and robustness of the banking institutions again and , in particular , regain confidence in the supervisory bodies .
That is why the role reserved for this new European Banking Authority is so crucial for the future .
Now that Parliament has approved the appointment of the Authority 's Executive Director , I hope that he will have an active , prudent and successful term .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because at its meeting of 17 March 2011 , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs heard the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) , and it was decided that Adam Farkas fulfils the criteria set out in Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1093 / 2010 ) , and the appointment of Adam Farkas as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) was also approved .

in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which approves the appointment of Adam Farkas as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Supervision models had a national perspective and did not adapt to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , where various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
I believe that the creation of the European Banking Authority is essential in order to achieve an effective supervision model .
However , many other steps need to be taken to prevent the truly immoral situations of the recent past , which have damaged economies , shareholders , depositors , taxpayers and the credibility of the system , from reoccurring .
I am therefore voting in favour of the choice of Mr Farkas as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority , and wish him a term of high quality in all respects .
in writing . - ( IT ) As a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) , I carefully followed the entire process leading to the creation of the European Banking Authority .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the appointment of Mr Farkas as its executive director .
The European Banking Authority must be put in a position to be able to start carrying out the tasks assigned to it by Parliament some months ago .
I sincerely hope that the Authority is provided with the human and economic resources it needs so as to ensure that its supervisory role is implemented seriously and precisely .
During the hearing held in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the new executive director convinced me and my colleagues of his competence and professionalism , as today 's vote shows .
An additional positive factor , which will benefit the process of European integration , is that the new executive director comes from a Member State that only recently acceded to the European Union .
I voted in favour of the report on the appointment of Mr Farkas to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) .
Mr Farkas was the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) and was heard , in accordance with the established procedures , by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
All of the data presented for this option , and on which my decision was based , indicates that the criteria laid down within Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1093 / 2010 were met , and so I am happy with the appointment of Mr Farkas .

Under this resolution , Parliament has approved the appointment of Mr Farkas to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Banking Authority ) .
I would like to wish him every success in performing the duties which are entrusted to him .
I am in favour of this appointment because all the legal procedures have been carried out , including a rigorous Curriculum Vitae assessment .
The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( EIOPA ) , which was created on 1 January 2011 under the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 , is tasked with promoting supervisory convergence and advising the European Union institutions on matters pertaining to the regulation and supervision of insurance , reinsurance and occupational pension schemes .
The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority has selected the Spaniard Carlos Montalvo , who worked as Acting Secretary General at the forerunner to the new authority , to be its first Executive Director .
The European Parliament has to approve the selection in order for it to be valid .
I have voted in favour of the appointment of Mr Montalvo .
I support the appointment of Mr Montalvo to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) , based on his selection by the Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority .
One of the lessons learned from the crisis was the need to create independent European agencies for monitoring the banks and insurance in the financial markets .
These agencies will not replace national supervisory agencies , but will work with them , exercising their mandate for prudence and systemic risk analysis in order to prevent a new crisis of the proportions of the one we are faced with at present from striking European states once more .
Now that Parliament has approved the appointment of the Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pension Authority ) , I wish him every success in the important role that he is taking on .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because at its meeting of 17 March 2011 , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs heard the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) , and it was decided that Carlos Montalvo fulfils the criteria set out in Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1094 / 2010 ) , and the appointment of Carlos Montalvo as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) was approved .

in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which approves the appointment of Carlos Montalvo as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) .
in writing . - ( PT ) The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Models of supervision have had a national perspective and have not adapted to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , in which various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
The creation of a European authority for the insurance and occupational pensions sector is therefore essential in order to achieve an effective supervision model , alongside many other monitoring mechanisms , to be decided on and implemented as a matter of true urgency .
I am therefore voting in favour of the choice of Mr Montalvo as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) , and I wish him every success in carrying out his office .
Today 's favourable vote sees us add another important piece to the European supervisory structure that Parliament has felt it so important to support since the start of the current legislature .
During the hearing held last week in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the new executive director demonstrated his competence and knowledge of the sector and the problems that he will have to deal with .
Additionally , I do not think that the fact that the top two positions at the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( EIOPA ) are being filled by people that had the same role in the preceding organisation will be a problem .
Indeed , I am confident that the new powers granted to EIOPA will ensure that its managers will be able to carry out their task as well as possible .
I voted in favour of the report on the appointment of Mr Montalvo to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) .
Mr Montalvo was the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) and was heard , in accordance with the established procedures , by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
All of the data presented for this option , and on which my decision was based , indicates that the criteria laid down within Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1094 / 2010 were met , and so I am happy with the appointment of Mr Montalvo .

Under this motion for a resolution , Parliament has approved the appointment of Mr Montalvo to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ) .
I would like to wish him every success in performing the duties which are entrusted to him .
I am in favour of this appointment because all the legal procedures have been carried out , including a rigorous Curriculum Vitae assessment .
The European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) , established on 1 January 2011 by the 24 November 2010 regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council , is designed to help maintain the stability of the financial system of the European Union by safeguarding the integrity , transparency , efficiency and orderly functioning of financial markets , and by strengthening investor protection .
ESMA has appointed Mrs Ross , a German former economist at the Bank of England , as its first Executive Director .
The European Parliament should vote in favour of this nomination in order for it to come into effect .
For my part , I voted in favour of Mrs Ross ' nomination .
Since the financial markets have been badly affected by the crisis , there is an urgent need to restore confidence .
To a large extent , this will depend on the role of the supervisory authorities , which will have to carry out their mandates competently and effectively so as to pass on the necessary confidence to investors and companies .
It is in this context that the European Securities and Markets Authority has been created , which , while not claiming to replace national supervisory agencies , will have an important part to play in the new European supervisory framework .
Therefore , it is important that this agency begins operation soon .
Now that Parliament has approved the appointment of the Authority 's Executive Director , I wish him a successful term .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because at its meeting of 17 March 2011 , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs heard the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) , and it was decided that Verena Ross fulfils the criteria set out in Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1095 / 2010 ) , and the appointment of Verena Ross as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) was also approved .

in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which approves the appointment of Verena Ross as Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) .
The recent financial crisis has highlighted major weaknesses in financial supervision , both in individual cases and in relation to the financial system as a whole .
Supervision models had a national perspective and did not adapt to the globalisation that has occurred within the financial system , where various financial groups conduct their operations across borders , with the systemic risks that this entails .
The creation of the European Financial Markets Authority is essential to achieving an effective supervision model .
However , many other steps need to be taken to prevent the truly immoral situations of the recent past , which have damaged economies , shareholders , depositors , taxpayers and the credibility of the system , from recurring .
I am therefore voting in favour of the choice of Mrs Ross as Executive Director of the European Securities and Markets Authority , and wish her a term of high quality in all respects .
I voted in favour of the appointment of Mrs Ross as Executive Director for a number of reasons .
The recent legislative acts we have adopted , or will be called to adopt , grant a huge range of powers in terms of supervision , analysis and evaluation .
Just think , for example , of the various technical standards that the authority is asked to evaluate and bring to the attention of the Commission for approval .
For this reason , it is important for the European Securities and Markets Authority ( ESMA ) to be capable of starting work as soon as possible in order to begin carrying out the mandate granted to it by Parliament last year .
Lastly , I applaud the fact that a woman has been appointed to one of the highest-profile roles , not only for gender reasons but because of her excellent curriculum vitae .
As with the other two authorities , I hope that this one is put in a position - in terms of budget , structures and human capital - to function as well as possible .
I voted in favour of the report on the appointment of Mrs Ross to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) .
Mrs Ross was the candidate selected by the Board of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) and was heard , in accordance with the established procedures , by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
All of the data presented for this option , and on which my decision was based , indicates that the criteria laid down within Article 51 ( 2 ) of Regulation ( EU ) No 1095 / 2010 were met , and so I am happy with the appointment of Mrs Ross .
Under this motion for a resolution , Parliament has approved the appointment of Mrs Ross to the post of Executive Director of the European Supervisory Authority ( European Securities and Markets Authority ) .
I would like to wish her every success in performing the duties which have been entrusted to her .
I am voting in favour as there is now greater commitment .
However , it is important to maintain the focus on the connection with the Europe 2020 objectives ; on an approach based on ' sustainability and responsibility ' , not simply ' austerity ' , as the Council is suggesting , and on the new needs arising from the Treaty of Lisbon , without putting existing , successful programmes at risk .
Above all , the EU 2012 budget should promote growth and high-quality employment , and help to implement the Europe 2020 Strategy .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on General guidelines for the preparation of 2012 budget because it believes that the Europe 2020 Strategy will pull Europe out of the economic downturn , when what the nations of Europe really need is to be freed from the dead hand of EU overregulation and overtaxation .
This 2020 Strategy is not a cure for the problems of the economies .
In addition , the report claims that European solidarity and economic development will be threatened by a reduction of the budget .
The European budget has become an expensive luxury that the citizens and taxpayers of Europe cannot afford .
Calling for a small increase or a freeze is derisory - that is why I voted against a freeze - when what is really needed is a sharp cut in the budget to give the taxpayer a break .
In the current financial , economic and social crisis , the European institutions are duty-bound to follow the example of Member States in adopting austerity measures .
That is why I voted in favour of this report which provides for a strict 2012 budget for the European Parliament .
This budget should still enable Parliament to achieve the objectives set by the EU while using ' the least possible resources ' .
This budget will be established within the context of Europe 2020 , a strategy that should help Europe come out of the crisis stronger .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The priority objectives set in the Europe 2020 Strategy ( promoting employment , improving public spending on innovation , research and development , meeting our climate change and energy objectives , improving education levels and promoting social inclusion ) should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
Some consistency must be ensured between achieving these objectives and the funding allocated to them at European and national level .
We must endow the EU with the necessary financial means to be able to respond adequately to growing global challenges and to defend and promote its common interests and ensure that the economies of the Member States enjoy a speedy recovery .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for Francesca Balzani 's report because , in line with this document , I think that the European Union 's 2012 budget must be drawn up with the aim of pursuing the Europe 2020 Strategy 's targets .
In spite of the current economic and financial crisis , it is now important for us to lay the foundations for sound , future economic growth through investments in education , research and development , innovation and SMEs .
These areas provide the basis for the EU 's progress and competitiveness and must be developed from the perspective of creating jobs and increasing territorial and social cohesion .
I want to stress that we must not reduce the funding in these areas and it is vital for us to monitor constantly that the available resources are being managed with the utmost efficiency .
I also believe that there is fundamental synergy between national budget priorities and the EU budget .
I wish to take this opportunity to welcome President Herman Van Rompuy 's efforts as part of the European Semester to tighten EU Member States ' discipline by promoting clear targets which are measurable and realistic for every country .
Parliament is the most democratic European institution , directly representing EU citizens ' interests .
This is why I insist that Parliament should be much more actively involved in the European Semester exercise .
in writing . - ( NL ) I cannot endorse the Balzani report .
The first reason is the call for the introduction of a type of EU tax .
The second reason concerns the economic crisis and the painful interventions being undertaken by Member States .
The EU , too , must make efforts to ensure that its budget does not continue to run out of control and that it carries out the necessary cuts .
With this in mind , I advocate a dynamic approach to tackling the ever growing gap between annual appropriations and the amounts being paid out .
Limiting appropriations would lead to payments and appropriations becoming more closely aligned .
I realise that multiannual programmes which are coming to an end because of the 2007-2013 Multiannual Framework will entail an increase in payments .
I propose in that regard that , where some increase in payments is inevitable , it is offset by significantly lower appropriations .
This also applies to budget lines for which implementation is lagging behind .
These measures provide a logical and persuasive step towards a more realistic budget in difficult economic times .
I would like to emphasise how important this report is as the European Union 's 2012 budget will help revitalise the European economy .
At the same time , next year 's EU budget must be the main instrument to bring about the European economy 's recovery , with great importance being attached to employment , economic governance and growth .
I think that the 2012 budget must help implement the EU 2020 Strategy 's five objectives : employment , innovation , research and development , climate change and energy , education and social integration .
The EU budget is a budget for investment and 2012 is the sixth year in the current ' financial outlook ' ( 2007-2013 ) , with projects rolling out at a regular rate , which results in an increase in payment levels as the work is carried out .
In my view , an increase in payment levels is predictable in 2012 .
I voted in favour of the general guidelines for preparing the 2012 budget .
I believe that the Community budget for 2012 should be one of the main tools in helping the EU to recover from the crisis and come out of it stronger , focusing on employment , economic governance and growth .
Employment , innovation , research and development , climate change and energy , and training and social inclusion are the five objectives that should guide the drafting of the EU 2012 budget .
This will allow Europe to experience intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on General guidelines for the preparation of 2012 budget because it believes that the Europe 2020 Strategy will pull Europe out of the economic downturn , when what the nations of Europe really need is to be freed from the dead hand of EU overregulation and overtaxation .
This 2020 Strategy is not a cure for the problems of the economies .
In addition the report claims that European solidarity and economic development will be threatened by a reduction of the budget .
The European budget has become an expensive luxury that the citizens and taxpayers of Europe cannot afford .
Calling for a small increase or a freeze is derisory - that is why I voted against a freeze - when what is really needed is a sharp cut in the budget to give the taxpayer a break .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on general guidelines for the preparation of 2012 budget because it believes that the Europe 2020 Strategy will pull Europe out of the economic downturn , when what the nations of Europe really need is to be freed from the dead hand of EU overregulation and overtaxation .
This 2020 Strategy is not a cure for the problems of the economies .
In addition , the report claims that European solidarity and economic development will be threatened by a reduction of the budget .
The European budget has become an expensive luxury that the citizens and taxpayers of Europe cannot afford .
Calling for a small increase or a freeze is derisory - that is why I voted against a freeze - when what is really needed is a sharp cut in the budget to give the taxpayer a break .
in writing . - ( SV ) We share the committee 's view that the difficult economic situation across the Union makes it more important than ever to ensure proper implementation of the EU budget , quality of spending and optimal use of existing Community financing .
We welcome the call for ambitious proposals for the EU 's own resources and believe that the focus should in general be placed on those budget appropriations that are important for achieving results within the Europe 2020 Strategy .
We also supported the amendment that called for every increase in a budget line to be matched by a reduction in another line .
However , as this amendment was not voted through and , moreover , the adopted text contains the statement that lowering the level of the EU budget could ' harm European solidarity ' , we have chosen to abstain in the final vote .
I voted in favour of the report on the drafting of the 2012 budget as I believe that , given the difficult economic situation throughout the EU , it has never been so important to ensure the proper performance and quality of the budget expenditure and optimal use of existing EU funding .
The Community budget should be one of the main tools in helping the EU to recover from the crisis and come out of it stronger , focusing on employment , economic governance and growth .
in writing . - I voted against the Balzani report on General guidelines for the preparation of 2012 budget because it believes that the Europe 2020 Strategy will pull Europe out of the economic downturn , when what the nations of Europe really need is to be freed from the dead hand of EU overregulation and overtaxation .
This 2020 Strategy is not a cure for the problems of the economies .
In addition the report threatens with the prejudice a reduction of the budget would have on European solidarity and economic development .
The European budget has become an expensive luxury that the citizens and taxpayers of Europe cannot afford .
Calling for a small increase or a freeze is derisory when what is really needed is a sharp cut in the budget to give the taxpayer a break .
This report sets out the priorities for Parliament to follow in preparing and discussing the 2012 budget , taking into account the start of the trialogue at the end of this month .
This report is groundbreaking , given its imminently political content : it seeks to highlight and step up the important discussions that are taking place in the European institutions and the Member States on all items in the economic governance package .
It is also aimed at drawing attention to the impact and importance that the 2012 budget may have in meeting the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy for growth and sustainable job creation across the EU .
Parliament is sending an important political message to the European institutions and the Member States about its firm commitment to strengthening economic governance and fulfilling the objectives set out for growth and employment .
in writing . - ( PT ) I agree with the EU 2020 Strategy as it advocates stronger economic governance and the provision of the funds needed to implement its seven key actions .
The EU 2020 objectives will only be achieved if there is strong governance and European coordination , and if the Member States make the investment needed to carry out their actions .
However , this strategy can only be fully achieved if there is a new multiannual financial framework .
This report neglects to mention the importance of cohesion policy even once .
It also omits any mention of agriculture .
However , about 80 % of the budget is for the cohesion policy and agriculture .
Young people do not get a single mention in the report either , which is incomprehensible .
This is the priority for the current budget proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ( PPE ) .
Moreover , young people feature in the five objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The objectives of reducing school dropout levels to below 10 % and ensuring that 40 % of young people aged between 30 and 34 have a university degree also pertain only to young people .
However , I hope that the 2012 budget will contribute to sustainable growth in the EU , enhance competitiveness and promote employment .
This is one of those times when the objective of economic and social cohesion should demand a completely different vision and content from the EU budget .
At a time when inequalities between the Member States are worsening , the Community budget should be at the service of real convergence .
It should promote economic growth , the creation of jobs with rights , the promotion of progress and social welfare , the eradication of poverty and social exclusion , and environmental preservation .
At the very least , this would require funds to be doubled , based on a greater contribution from countries with a higher GDP per capita .
This should be followed by a fair and balanced distribution of funds , focusing on countries with greater difficulties .
We disagree with a budget that focuses on supporting the reconstruction of monopolies and the growing militarisation of the EU , on the liberalisation in numerous sectors of economic activity and the lack of job security , as advocated by the EU 2020 Strategy .
This path will accentuate existing economic , social , regional and national differences , and will not resolve the problems of unemployment and poverty .
We therefore voted against .
Since the beginning of the year , the Committee on Budgets has been drafting the European Parliament 's priorities for the 2012 EU budget .
Parliament 's position , which is necessary for talks with the EU Council , will be formulated on the basis of these priorities .
It would appear that this year 's conciliation between Parliament and the Council will be even more challenging than was the case in 2010 .
The Council , which is opposed to any increase in the EU budget , has already announced its own savings plan , which is rather convenient , since it concerns budget lines which have not been fully exploited to date .
At the same time , Parliament is in favour of an increase in the 2012 budget , but only in line with the Eurostat inflation rate .
The latter is an objective rate which we cannot vote upon , as some people seem to believe .
How can the European Parliament justify the proposed increase ?
Firstly , implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy , including the twin goals of increasing education and employment levels .
Without adequate funding , these goals will remain defunct , and Europe 2020 will follow in the footsteps of the renowned and ineffective Lisbon Strategy .
Secondly , the EU budget is already bursting at the seams ; the European External Action Service , the Galileo system , the Solidarity Fund and the Globalisation Fund are generating expenditure which it was impossible to predict six years ago , when the current financial perspective was negotiated .
While on the subject of rational expenditure , I would also call upon Members of this House to take a critical look at the ' buildings policy ' , which we cannot afford .
One example of this would be the increase in office space announced for Brussels .
Here we are at the start of a difficult negotiation between Member States on the 2012 budget while , in the background , the debate is already underway on the post-2013 financial perspectives .
At this time of crisis , it will be necessary throughout the budgetary process to reiterate our expectations with regard to European policies .
Unlike some Council members who consider the EU to be an additional cost , an expense to be reduced at the risk of pitting current and future policies against each other , Parliament , through the resolution on general guidelines for the preparation of the 2012 budget , has reiterated its vision of the Union as a vector of added value and an ally of Member States in implementing ambitious policies .
Furthermore , I voted in favour of the resolution presented by Mrs Balzani because of its consistency and the clear political message it carries , calling for the adoption of a budget that is consistent with the objectives for employment and growth of the EU 2020 Strategy .
Finally , I took advantage of the debate in plenary to challenge the Commissioner for Financial Programming and the Budget on the urgent need for a communication on the implementation of new own resources , which , I hope , will carry this debate forward .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because under the auspices of enhanced European economic governance , the European Semester mechanism and Europe 2020 Objectives , the 2012 budget must boost growth and employment .
The Europe 2020 Strategy should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth based on the five EU headline targets , namely promoting employment , improving the conditions for - and public spending on - innovation , research and development , meeting our climate change and energy objectives , improving education levels and promoting social inclusion , in particular through the reduction of poverty .
The difficult economic situation across the Union makes it more important than ever to ensure proper implementation of the EU budget , quality of spending and optimal use of existing Community financing .
The EU budget has an instrumental role to play in helping the EU to exit the current economic and financial crisis through its capacity as a catalyst to boost investment , growth and jobs in Europe .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which is of the opinion that the EU budget brings added value to national public expenditure when initiating , supporting and complementing investments in those policy areas which are at the core of Europe 2020 .
The European Parliament believes , moreover , that the EU budget has an instrumental role to play in helping the EU to exit the current economic and financial crisis through its capacity as a catalyst to boost investment , growth and jobs in Europe ; takes the view that the EU budget could at least mitigate the effects of current restrictive national budgetary policies while supporting the efforts of national governments ; stresses also that , given its redistributive nature , lowering the level of the EU budget may harm European solidarity and have an adverse impact on the pace of economic development in many Member States ; believes that a purely ' net contributor ' / ' net beneficiary ' approach does not take due account of spill-over effects between EU countries and therefore undermines common EU policy goals .
In order to tackle the current economic and financial crisis it is essential to promote inclusive , sustainable European growth , aligning the European Union 's budget with its main objectives .
This report identifies a number of guidelines that will help to : promote employment ; improve public expenditure on innovation , research and development ; meet our climate change and energy objectives ; improve education levels ; and promote social integration .
The European Semester , a new mechanism to strengthen European economic governance , should provide the chance to determine the best way to achieve these goals .
It is essential to guarantee a certain level of coherence between the attainment of the results in question and the resources assigned to them at EU and national level , thereby improving synergies between European and domestic public investments .
The European budget represents real added value , thanks to its ability to function as a catalyst to boost investment , growth and employment .
The appropriations already planned must be kept at a suitable and flexible level of expenditure .
Otherwise , their reduction would lead to the failure of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
We call on the Commission to develop ambitious proposals for the provision of new own resources , based on a comprehensive impact assessment , in order to bolster competitiveness and economic growth .
I am in favour of the report by Mrs Balzani on the guidelines for the 2012 budget which , with the 2013 budget , will be consolidation budgets aimed at reflecting the Member States ' spending cutbacks and setting a benchmark for amounts that will be established in the next financial framework .
The contribution of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to the guidelines for the 2012 budget was based on the concept of responsibility , which means pursuing the aims of economy , efficiency and effectiveness using as little as possible of the available resources .
The 2020 Strategy is based on important priorities - namely research , innovation , development and growth - that were not initially contained in the report by Mrs Balzani , but which have been strongly emphasised by the PPE Group , as well as achieving the employment objectives initially set out .
The Union 's priorities in the budget require adequate financing and it is also important to ensure flexibility between the expenditure headings in order to more effectively counter the problems linked to the economic crisis , as well as to propose a budgetary framework that includes own resources .
The Community budget for 2012 is the main tool for the EU to recover from the crisis and come out of it stronger , focusing on employment , economic governance and growth .
The adoption of these general guidelines is an example of this .
Employment , innovation , research and development , climate change and energy , training , and social inclusion are the five objectives which should form the focus for the drafting of the EU 2012 budget .
Based on these five objectives , the Europe 2020 Strategy should help Europe to recover from the crisis and emerge from it stronger , through ' smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ' .
We must therefore oppose any attempt to limit the budget allocations for achieving the high-ranking objectives and flagship initiatives of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
in writing . - The key requirements for the draft resolution on the EU general budget for 2012 are ensuring sufficient resources for the implementation of the EU-2020 Strategy and enhanced cooperation between European and national budgets .
The 2012 EU budget should boost growth and high-quality employment , and start implementing the EU 2020 objectives .
The motto for deciding on the EU 2012 budget should therefore be ' sustainability and responsibility ' rather than ' austerity ' .
Although I voted ' for ' , I would like to stress that the budget should be distributed so that financial resources are used for the benefit of citizens in the Member States and not for the benefit of financial and political groups , as it is currently the case in Latvia , where officials distribute EU funds among their acquaintances and friends !
in writing . - ( DE ) The report on the 2012 budget refers to the Europe 2020 Strategy , which once again contains lofty goals that no one expects to meet .
The fact is that the precarious budgetary situation of some Member States that have lived it up in the past has become a financial millstone around the necks of the other Member States in connection with the rescue package .
It then often only needs something trivial to tighten the noose .
These fundamental requirements make it all the more important not only for the 2012 budget to be correctly executed - in which regard we must not overlook the fact that budgetary control still leaves a great deal to be desired - but also for us to manage our resources in an economical way .
The reference here to ' adequate financing ' of the Europe 2020 Strategy , when billions from the EU budget are still mysteriously disappearing and available opportunities for potential savings , for example in relation to the jungle of EU agencies or the locations for Parliament , are not utilised , represents a waste of European taxpayers ' money .
On the basis of this conviction , I voted against the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The current euro crisis underlines the central importance of a correct and economical budgetary policy .
The increase in funds on grounds that this is required for the Europe 2020 Strategy is something I reject , as for one thing the strategy is unachievable and for another it has inappropriate goals : for example the massive increase in the number of academics , when we actually have a shortage of specialist staff .
Instead , we should utilise the numerous potential opportunities for savings , whether in relation to the decentralised agencies , the two locations of the European Parliament or the pre-accession aid for Turkey .
I therefore voted against this report on the 2012 budget .
As every year , we , along with other institutions , will be asked to adopt the EU budget .
In view of this , I have voted in favour of the report on the general budget for 2012 because I agree with the main guidelines defined , namely : incentivising funds to promote growth and overcome the economic crisis by following the Europe 2020 Strategy ; giving greater consideration to the European Semester as the ideal instrument for coordinating economic policies ; not leaving room for differing availability in different sectors but using only the flexibility mechanisms of available funds by establishing a serious and rigorous management of the resources available for the allocation of funds .
I voted in favour of the report on general guidelines for the preparation of the 2012 budget .
The general principles and targets set out in the report are on the right lines , in emphasising that forthcoming EU budgets must focus on policies to boost employment and national economies ( the total EU budget for implementing flagship initiatives up to 2020 is estimated at EUR 1.8 trillion ) .
Nonetheless , it is important to point out at every opportunity that the sine qua non to achieving the targets set in the Europe 2020 Strategy is their endorsement by the Member States .
Unfortunately , according to the Commission 's findings , national plans to date do not safeguard basic priorities of the strategy , such as increasing employment to 75 % in 2020 from its current level of 69 % .
I voted in favour of this report on the general guidelines for preparing the 2012 budget .
This is a budget for 2012 under the auspices of stronger economic governance , the European semester mechanism and the Europe 2020 objectives to encourage employment .
Given that the Europe 2020 Strategy should help Europe to recover from the crisis and emerge from it strengthened through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , based on the EU 's five top objectives - namely by promoting employment ; improving conditions and expenditure for innovation , research and development ; meeting our targets in the areas of climate change and energy ; improving levels of education ; and promoting social inclusion , in particular by reducing poverty - I agree with the recommendations presented in this report , in order to fully attain these five objectives .
I also agree with the rapporteur that there must be consistency between the achievement of these goals and the funding allocated to them , and the new mechanism for enhanced economic governance in the EU should be an opportunity to study how best to accomplish these five objectives .
I voted in favour of this report , which sets out the general guidelines for the drafting of the 2012 budget , with a view to the trialogue on this subject , scheduled for 30 March 2011 .
On that matter , allow me to emphasise the need to properly assess the impact that the budget will have on the achievement of the EU 's objectives and the implementation of the EU 2020 Strategy , as well as the role that budgetary policy should play in the area of investment , growth and employment .
in writing . - ( DE ) It was not possible to give a roll-call vote on paragraph 29 , as I was actively prevented from doing so by the usher .
in writing . - A 2012 budget under the auspices of enhanced European economic governance , the European Semester mechanism and Europe 2020 objectives to boost growth and employment
1 .
Takes the view that the Europe 2020 Strategy should help Europe recover from the crisis and come out stronger , through smart , sustainable and inclusive growth based on the five EU headline targets , namely promoting employment , improving the conditions for - and public spending on - innovation , research and development , meeting our climate change and energy objectives , improving education levels and promoting social inclusion , in particular through the reduction of poverty ; recalls that the Member States themselves have fully endorsed these five targets ;
2 .
Points out that some consistency must be ensured between achieving these objectives and the funding allocated to them at European and national level ; insists that EU budgetary policy must be in line with this principle ; takes the view that the European Semester , as a new mechanism for enhanced European economic governance , should afford an opportunity to consider how best to deliver on these five headline targets ;
This report outlines the general guidelines of the European Parliament on the 2012 budget and I believe that the text promotes sustainable growth to help overcome the economic crisis .
Its redistributive approach consists of added value to the future public expenditure by Member States .
According to financial planning by the Commission , the amount of committed funds will reach the sum of EUR 147.88 billion .
In that regard , my country is in favour of strict management of resources in a context of expenditure restraint , especially in administrative costs , in line with the austerity policy implemented in its national budget .
I hope now that the redistribution of available resources aimed at optimising their allocation is carried through to the end , in order to counter the effects of the international crisis that we are all experiencing in our daily lives .
in writing . - On the budget vote for 2012 ( General Guidelines ) I voted to freeze the budget and against any indication of additional spending because of the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe the budget set to be adequate to the commitments set out under the Treaty as currently planned .
I am not in favour of this report as the final version with the votes on the amendments is manifestly unfair , as it allows migrant workers to remain legally unprotected in some important areas such as social security .
The EU should not allow this kind of treatment ; when it comes to human rights , the EU should be a model .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work .
This document establishes a single application procedure for third-country nationals who wish to be admitted to the territory of a Member State in order to work there , and offers them a secure legal status .
This will undoubtedly simplify the often complex administrative procedures for receiving economic migrants .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position that one of the best ways of combating illegal immigration and undeclared work is to develop balanced legal immigration channels which meet the needs of our labour markets .
Economic immigration is a reality on which we must impose order , but it is also a necessity in view of the demographic and economic challenges which the EU will face in the near future .
It is important to note that this proposal does not stipulate the conditions for admitting third-country nationals .
Member States retain the power to decide these conditions and to set the number of migrants that they wish to admit to their territory for employment purposes .
It is time for the European Union to legislate on economic immigration in order to establish an approach common to the 27 Member States .
The changes brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon have made this progress possible , and it is now up to us to make it a reality .
The European Union , a symbol of human rights around the world , must guarantee fair treatment of third-country nationals residing in its territory and establish an inclusive policy towards them .
It has therefore been necessary to harmonise Member States ' national laws relating to the admission and residence of those third-country nationals .
That is why I voted in favour of this text which should help simplify admission procedures , fight against the unfair competition that takes place at the expense of European workers , and establish better control in the fight against illegal immigration and undeclared work .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this text because I think that the European Union needs uniform administrative procedures for dealing with third-country immigrant workers .
Adopting this act will have a significant beneficial impact .
It will reduce public sector expenditure , discourage illegal immigration and ensure fair rights for third-country nationals wishing to work in the European Union .
Economic immigration is a necessity which must be encouraged in a controlled manner , given the demographic and economic challenges which the European Union is going to face .
Let us not forget that the progress made by countries such as the United States , Canada or Australia is due to immigrants .
They belong to an extremely dynamic social group which brings additional enthusiasm and a fresh outlook in their approach in their adoptive societies , making the latter more competitive .
In this respect , we must ensure that the conditions exist to allow them to work legally and that they have the chance to fulfil their dreams without being obstructed by pointless red tape .
I would also like to hope that in the very near future , the issue of access to the entire European Union labour market for citizens from the Member States of Romania and Bulgaria as well will be resolved once and for all .
Europe is facing the demographic problem of its aging population , and so it needs to look for manpower , which makes an important contribution to economic development , an increase in competitiveness and the vitality of the European economy .
Europe will have to respond to its current and future manpower needs and provide a means to combat the exploitation and discrimination that workers often suffer .
By creating a single application procedure for third country nationals who are seeking admission to the territory of a Member State in order to work there , and offering them a secure legal status , this draft directive responds to these needs and also simplifies the often complex administrative process .
The power to determine the number of migrants seeking admission to their territory for the purposes of paid employment and the conditions for this admission continue to be the responsibility of the individual Member States .
For all the above reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
We have been talking for years now about creating a single permit for nationals of third countries who wish to live and work in a Member State .
It was a commendable initiative at the beginning , but the text as it is contradicts the stated goals : it is both discriminatory , because the basic principle of equal treatment for all is not respected , and restrictive , since several categories of workers are excluded .
Despite the improvements made since December 2010 , there is a continued fear of social inequality among nationals of third countries .
What is more , by voting in favour of the proposed ' single permit ' for third-country nationals , the European right is voting for an immigration policy that is both discriminatory and restrictive .
The text as it stands does not provide for equal treatment for all workers in terms of working conditions and social rights .
It creates different categories of workers , by nationality and by type of contract , and this is simply unacceptable .
We cannot compromise on equal treatment .
We should say ' yes ' to a common immigration policy , and ' yes ' to a genuine single European permit , but we do not want a policy that is restrictive and therefore discriminatory .
in writing . - ( BG ) I voted in favour of the proposal for a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State because I think that the growing wave of immigration to the EU needs adequate regulation .
The administrative requirements for admitting third-country citizens to work in the EU are excessively complicated and vague .
Introducing a single-permit system will help improve the whole procedure , making it more efficient and far cheaper .
We should not forget either that creating a single document will make it easier for local authorities to carry out checks on citizens arriving in the EU .
Last but not least , I must say how pleased I am that the text voted on was supported by my fellow Members because it is designed to guarantee social and economic rights for immigrant workers , with the aim of avoiding social dumping or unfair competition inside the EU .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because the directive on a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work should be a general framework directive on rights for third-country workers , because only then will this European legislative act be able to contribute to the European Union goal of a common migration policy .
Unfortunately , the position adopted by the European Parliament today on the directive on a single permit to reside and work has not improved the Commission 's proposal for this directive .
It has not been accepted that immigrant workers from third countries , who arrive here legally and do the same work as European Union workers , should enjoy the same rights and working conditions as local workers .
It should be understood that legal migrant workers make a contribution to the EU economy through their work and the taxes and social security contributions they pay , therefore they must be guaranteed the same minimum rights and be treated in the same way in the labour market .
I would like to stress that it is impossible to create a two-tier labour market , either within the European Union itself or outside .
We cannot allow the creation of an underclass of workers in the EU labour market that faces discrimination and does not enjoy any rights or any guarantees , because this would lead to the erosion of all the social standards that have hitherto been won .
Adopting the directive on introducing a single procedure for third-country citizens to obtain a work permit for the EU will simplify considerably the system which is currently decided on by each Member State .
Two separate procedures entail a longer period for processing applications and higher administrative costs .
This one-stop shop system will make the administrative procedure simpler , less expensive and quicker .
In actual fact , issuing a single document will also make it easier to check on people admitted to a Member State and authorised to work there .
This document will have the residence permit format common to all Member States .
Member States will also be able to decide to introduce an additional document which will be of a purely informative nature .
This will help supplement the information contained in the single permit , thereby facilitating monitoring .
We are therefore dealing with advantages for every party involved - immigrants , employers and national administrations .
Establishing a single application procedure will simplify the often complex administrative procedures for admitting economic migrants .
This would provide an adequate response to the labour challenges which the EU is facing and will continue to face .
in writing . - ( CS ) The benefit of the approved directive lies in the fact that it creates a unified approach to handling applications from third country citizens for permits to live and work in a Member State , and provides workers from third countries who are legally residing in the EU with a common set of minimal rights .
The horizontal and framework character of the directive is unfortunately violated by the exemptions from the scope of the directive and variations regarding the rights of certain specific population groups .
There has been an undermining of the principle of equal treatment for all third country workers legally working in the Union compared to EU citizens .
This equality should be an expression of recognition of the benefit migrant workers bring to the EU economy through their work and also through their payment of taxes and social contributions .
The accompanying effect should be a restriction on unfair competition , making the practice of illegal employment more difficult and preventing third country workers from becoming victims of exploitation and social exclusion .
Contrary to the Commission proposal , it is therefore necessary to ensure that no specific group is excluded from the scope of the directive , and particularly not the group comprising temporary workers .
The directive must specify the conditions of entry into the EU and any concrete rights , but it must not create a barrier to a situation where all legal migrant workers can enjoy fair and equal treatment , but , on the contrary , should secure and guarantee such treatment .
This report marks a very important step for European Union legal migration legislation as it creates a single application procedure for third-country citizens .
I welcome that the text adopted today makes no mention at all of the possibility of a Member State being able to introduce additional documents required by a third-country national to obtain a work permit .
In addition , migrants will not become a burden on national social welfare systems because Member States will be able to decide that third-country citizens can have access to the social welfare system only after they have worked for a minimum of six months , while those who have come to study cannot claim these benefits .
The one point which must be welcomed in this report is that it defines a set of common measures relating to third-country workers ' rights , thereby facilitating the legal migration which the European Union needs .
I welcome the call for Member States to produce correlation tables as this will enable us to verify the directive 's proper transposition .
I voted in favour of this draft report which allows a single residence and work permit for legal immigrants , provides a ' single permit ' for third-country nationals and grants them rights similar to those of EU citizens .
I agree with this proposal , which is aimed at simplifying administrative procedures and ensuring equal treatment between EU and immigrant workers for a range of social rights , such as access to social security .
This measure will facilitate legal immigration when it is necessary in order to meet the needs of the European labour market .
I voted against the directive on a ' single permit ' , because it is inspired by the Bolkestein Directive , which adopted the principle of the country of origin , thereby permitting different treatment of workers in respect of wages , terms , working times , social protection and so forth .
The same approach is applied here to workers from ' third countries ' outside the European Union .
Different treatment has been adopted for European and non-European workers , thereby increasing competition between them and between foreign workers , depending on whether they are seconded or seasonal workers , students or residents .
All these differences do is to increase exploitation and uncertainty .
Despite moves by European trade unions and the progressive forces in Parliament to obtain full equality of rights for all workers , the text mainly reflects a compromise between the right and the socialists .
The future directive will not apply to seconded workers or to students , will allow discrimination based on criteria such as knowledge of the language and will refuse family benefits to families of seasonal workers .
Likewise , the call for the UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrants and Members of Their Families has been removed .
This proposal is aimed at responding to the concerns expressed in the Stockholm programme in order to create flexible immigration policies to support the development and economic performance of the EU .
It is thus aimed and simplifying and harmonising the existing standards in the Member States by creating a single application procedure leading to one combined title encompassing both residence and work permit .
This should make for a more efficient procedure and bring clear benefits for both employers and third-country nationals who want to immigrate to the territory of the Member States .
It will ensure that these migrants have rights and obligations comparable to those of citizens of the EU in terms of working conditions , training and education , recognition of diplomas , social benefits , and so on .
At the same time , it allows the lawfulness of their residence and employment to be monitored more easily .
I therefore voted in favour of the excellent report presented to us by Mrs Mathieu .
The European Parliament has voted in favour of the principle of creating a single work and residence permit for third-country nationals in a Member State .
This procedure provides a set of common rights for these workers , particularly with regard to working conditions , such as working time and holidays .
The text also sets out the principle of reimbursing pension contributions already made by workers who leave the EU , since they will be unable to receive their pensions after they retire .
This text is problematic , however , since it reinforces the ' country of origin ' principle for some categories of workers , a principle that was fought by the European left during the time of the famous ' Bolkestein ' Directive .
This principle creates a kind of two-speed labour market depending on the worker 's origin , and contributes to a form of social dumping .
There is a contradiction here : do we really want to protect the European social model , and should it exclude non-European workers , or should it take a universalist approach and stop discriminating against workers by giving them different rights ?
This text does not yet resolve this fundamental issue , which is why I decided to abstain from voting on the text .
in writing . - I voted against this report that seeks to establish unfair competition between EU workers and migrant workers coming to Europe .
The ' single permit ' directive , as amended today by Parliament at first reading , will apply to non-EU nationals seeking to reside and work in a Member State or who already reside legally in an EU country , with the exception of posted workers , seasonal workers , long-term residents and refugees , who will therefore not be covered by its anti-discriminatory provisions It is unacceptable that legal migrants coming to Europe to work are to endure worse working conditions than EU workers doing the same job .
Once a migrant enters the EU and starts working , he stops being a migrant and becomes a worker .
Therefore , he has the right to be treated as such , like any EU worker and regardless of his country of origin .
There can be no exceptions .
EU legislation must apply to all workers in the EU , regardless of their country of origin .
We have been talking for years now about creating a single permit for nationals of third countries who wish to live and work in a Member State .
It was a commendable initiative at the beginning , but the text as it is contradicts the stated goals : it is both discriminatory , because the basic principle of equal treatment for all is not respected , and restrictive , since several categories of workers are excluded .
In December 2010 , Members of the European Parliament rejected the text for the first time .
Despite the improvements made since then , there is a continued fear of social inequality among nationals of third countries .
The text as it stands does not provide for equal treatment for all workers in terms of working conditions and social rights .
It creates different categories of workers , by nationality and by type of contract , and this is simply unacceptable .
We therefore voted against the final draft .
We remain in favour of a single European permit , but we do not want a policy that is restrictive and therefore discriminatory .
The issue in question in this proposal is the introduction of a one-stage procedure to grant both employment and residency authorisation and the definition of a common set of rights to all nationals of non-EU countries who legally reside and work in the EU .
This presupposes the existence of rules which are common to all Member States , something which would put an end to the current differences in approach of the various EU countries and which would make the process of giving legal status to workers quicker , more uniform and more transparent throughout the Union .
While the legal migration of labour , and above all qualified labour , helps to fight clandestine working and can improve the competitiveness of the economy and overcome existing shortages , we cannot forget that , during a period of economic crisis and vulnerability where unemployment is growing , labour migration policy must be flexible , as argued by the Commission , but must also be sustainable and reasonable .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report addresses an issue which needs to be discussed with increasing urgency .
Indeed , the expected decrease in the number of Europeans making an active contribution requires the EU to open its borders to third-country nationals , so that they can live and work here ; otherwise the current social security systems will fail .
In 2004 , the Hague programme , which focused on the need to combat illegal migration , recognised that legal migration would play a vital role in the economic development of the EU .
The Stockholm programme adopted by the Council on 10 and 11 December 2009 acknowledged that the migration of labour can increase competitiveness and economic vitality .
I therefore agree with the position expressed in this report on the proposal for a directive of Parliament and the Council on the regulatory amendment which is aimed at implementing a single procedure in order to grant authorisation to third-country nationals legally resident in one of the Member States , taking into account the demographic challenges which Europe is starting to face .
Moreover , this is a process of simplification which is more efficient and economical .
The proposal for a directive on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State , hinting at alleged improvements in the situation of workers from these countries , may in fact represent an attack on the rights of workers in general .
Let us not forget that the proposal had its genesis in the country-of-origin principle established by the notorious Bolkestein Directive , which promoted the increase in inequalities between workers , particularly in terms of wages , and which was ultimately detrimental to all workers due to the pressure to level down working conditions .
By attempting to establish disparities and differences in treatment between European workers and third-country workers , this proposal for a directive increases the segregation of immigrant workers and further weakens the situation for all workers , forcing them into a situation of greater instability .
Basically , we may be facing an attempt to promote social dumping .
In our view it is necessary to strengthen the rights of all workers , including immigrants , seasonal workers and posted workers .
We therefore regret that restrictive measures are being insisted upon following the rejection of the first version of this report ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
The adoption of the report on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State may constitute an attack on the rights of workers in general .
The proposal has as its genesis the Bolkestein Directive , which established the country-of-origin principle , promoting an increase in divisions between workers , particularly in terms of wages , and which proved detrimental to all workers . By attempting to establish differences between European workers and third-country workers , this adds to the segregation of immigrant workers , widening differences in treatment and further weakening their living conditions through the vulnerability and instability of their working conditions .
This proposal for a directive may promote social dumping and make labour relations more unstable .
In view of this , it is necessary to strengthen the rights of all workers , including immigrants , seasonal workers and posted workers .
However , the struggle of the workers in many European countries , particularly in Portugal , meant that the proposal for a directive was rejected at the last plenary session of 2010 .
We regret the insistence on restrictive measures ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( DE ) Although overall it would be good if a residence permit and a work permit could be issued together , the following questions remain unanswered and the following remarks are necessary :
1 .
Application of the Posting of Workers Directive must take priority and the principle of the application of the social legislation of the country of employment must always be regarded as fundamental .
2 .
No worker must be employed as legal ' cheap ' labour under this measure , as this is damaging to our labour market and it is socially unjust .
3 .
The countries must carry out more checks in these areas .
After the report was initially rejected in plenary , the European right made mistakes in procedural manoeuvres , and has now shamefully contributed to the recognition of a two-speed job market that depends on the worker 's origin ; this will create social dumping and therefore exert a downward pressure on the level of protection of European workers , which is unacceptable .
I therefore voted against the report which is nothing but an attack against the European social model .
This text establishes exclusions and unequal treatment in social security , pensions and access to employment and training for legal migrant workers , which runs contrary to my values .
in writing . - ( LT ) The Hague Programme recognised that legal immigration would play an important role in economic development .
It was with this in mind that it called on the Commission to submit an action plan to enable the labour market to respond rapidly to the constantly changing demand for manpower from abroad .
The Stockholm Programme adopted by the European Council on 10 and 11 December 2009 expressed the view that labour immigration may increase competitiveness and economic vitality .
In view of the considerable demographic challenges which the European Union will face in future , with growing demand for manpower , this new multiannual programme calls on Member States to adopt flexible immigration policies in order to support the Union 's long-term economic development and performance .
The provisions in the proposal have the advantage of conferring better protection on workers from third countries than is currently the case on the basis of international conventions only ratified by certain Member States .
I abstained because the proposal does not state who may submit an application - the employer or the employee - and from which State an application may be made , and it was necessary to clarify this important issue .
It also failed to stress the requirements of legal certainty and transparency of decision making by national authorities .
These decisions have a strong impact on the lives of the people concerned and Member States , and they must therefore be taken in a way which is completely transparent .
Any rejection decision must be duly substantiated , transparent and objective .
The draft resolution voted in Parliament today on the provision for a single application procedure for the issuance of a permit that would allow third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of the Union represents a further step towards the harmonisation of national laws of Member States .
Establishing the same legal immigration measures in all EU countries , setting out common procedures for those who intend to apply for admission to the territory of a Member State for employment , will allow the EU to meet the needs for workers in domestic labour markets by providing , through the establishment of equal rights , a tool to fight exploitation and discrimination .
I believe , nevertheless , that Member States should be allowed , under certain conditions , to set limits to the capacity to accept citizens from non-EU countries and offer them a job in their area .
Obviously , the proposal has the aim of combating illegal immigration and clandestine employment , but it can and should be interpreted as a useful contribution to the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy , allowing also simpler border control .
It has been some 20 years since the European Union established the internal market envisaged by the founding fathers .
Its implementation has led to the increasingly advanced integration of a vast area of trade .
However , that area still experiences unequal treatment between nationals of a Member State and those from third countries .
This difference in treatment is a two-fold problem .
It both penalises migrant workers , who do have the high expectations usually brought about by the social rights of Member States , and harms European workers who , faced with unfair competition , suffer from social dumping .
The ' single permit ' resolution , presented by Mrs Mathieu , specifically targets migrant workers ' rights .
It simplifies procedures by establishing a single permit for residence and work , and gives foreign workers rights and obligations comparable to those of European workers .
The full establishment of the internal market is a powerful tool enabling Europe to return to growth , which is why I supported this text .
in writing . - I voted against this report because key paragraphs on posted workers , pension rights and social security were defeated .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of this report , which returns to the House for the second time , because I believe that it is a good response to the considerable demographic challenges that the European Union will face in the coming years , establishing a single application procedure for third-country nationals who wish to be admitted to the territory of a Member State for work purposes and offering them a secure legal status .
Economic immigration is a reality that must be organised , but it is also a necessity with regard to the democratic and economic challenges which will face the European Union in the near future .
Thus , immigration policy must be thought of as an instrument of adjustment regarding our workforce needs , thus contributing to the implementation of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
From a technical point of view , the exclusion of seasonal workers and workers transferred within their company is justified by the presentation by the Commission of proposals for specific directives for these workers .
However , as regards the exclusion of asylum seekers and persons benefiting from international protection , it is important to emphasise that the existing tools in these areas provide greater protection than the present proposal .
Now that this draft directive has been adopted , immigrant workers will have the same rights as national workers , at least in terms of remuneration and dismissal , health and safety in the workplace , working hours and holidays .
This proposal is aimed at introducing a procedure to give a single residence and work permit to legal immigrants , and to grant them a common set of rights throughout the EU .
It is thus possible to simplify the procedures so that the national authorities can grant a single residence and work permit for legal immigrants , so that they can benefit from a set of rights similar to those of the workers in the Member State where they are living .
However , the admission of immigrants for the purposes of work , and the number of admissions , should remain the responsibility of the individual Member State .
in writing . - ( HU ) We can best protect against illegal and irregular immigration if we try to prevent it .
We could lend support to people to find a livelihood and social security in their countries of origin , that is , we could eliminate the causes of their emigration .
If that is not feasible , we should create legal channels of immigration , which naturally also fulfil the needs of our own labour market .
Economic immigration is a real phenomenon these days , which , on the other hand , is also a necessity , since with its help we can more readily defend against demographic and economic challenges .
Consequently , we may consider immigration policy a regulatory means by which we can become able to control our labour needs .
Through it we give opportunities to third-country immigrants who can legally enter the territory of the EU for the purpose of finding employment .
The system of reception procedures would be significantly simplified by the creation of a merged procedure , which would confer the right of residence and employment at the same time .
For this reason I , too , voted in favour of this horizontal legislative framework being created as soon as possible .
By establishing a single application procedure for third-country nationals seeking to reside and work in the territory of a Member State , and by providing a secure legal status , this proposal for a directive will simplify the often complex administrative steps involved in receiving economic migrants .
The existence of a harmonised procedure for issuing a single document that authorises residence and access to the labour market constitutes a significant simplification of the admission system .
In addition , the proposal provides for treatment equal to that enjoyed by national workers and therefore has the advantage of giving better protection to third-country workers than they have at present .
This status will also help fight against the unfair competition that often results from the absence of a protective legal status for these workers .
The text adopted today also includes the two main priorities of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) : it removes any reference to additional documents and requests Member States to draw up ' correlation tables ' enabling the Commission to verify the transposition of the directive .
It is a clear sign of the willingness of the European Parliament to move towards a European legal framework for legal immigration .
in writing . - The purpose of this directive is to enable potential immigrants into an EU Member State to obtain work and residence permits via a single procedure .
Under the original proposal , non-EU workers would get equal treatment with EU nationals as regards pay and dismissal , health and safety at work and the right to join trade unions .
The Employment Committee wants to extend those rights to include equal working time and leave , while clarifying workers ' rights to social security and tax benefits .
Non-EU workers would also be able to receive their pensions when moving back to their home country on the same terms as nationals of the Member State concerned .
What is more , all EU Member States will issue single standard permission for residence and work .
I disagree with this because the EU still has an unemployment problem , and therefore voted ' against ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) The entry and residence of third-country nationals are an issue , but in the past the rights in relation to these have been extended more and more .
Thus , it is now the case that the autochthonous population quite rightly feels increasingly disadvantaged as a result of the access of third-country nationals to social services , specifically in the area of social housing .
In the area of economic migration , it is mainly well educated and badly needed workers that move to other States .
Whereas in the United States , for example , they do not burden the social system , and in some States they also have to leave once their job comes to an end , through the increasing level of equality with the resident population that they have been afforded in recent years , they constitute an ever greater burden for those States with traditionally well-developed social systems if they remain in the country permanently after losing their jobs and if , as a result of them bringing any family they have to join them , all the relatives have to be supported , too .
This proposal is another step in this direction and therefore is to be rejected in the strongest possible terms .
I wanted to express my vote against the report in relation to single residence permits for citizens of third countries because today , in the House , some amendments were voted to exclude the requirement for employment as being necessary in order to have access to benefits and social services .
It seems to me to be a dangerous lowering of the minimum required standards and it enables a third-country citizen , obviously with a valid residence permit in the EU , to have access to the same working and social conditions as an EU citizen .
If a European Union exists , it is to ensure , also , that the inhabitants of Member States that are its citizens can enjoy greater rights and guarantees than are called for in this report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this resolution because I think that non-EU workers should enjoy the same rights on work conditions as EU citizens , in accordance with the ' Single Permit ' Directive .
I would like to mention in particular at this point working time , leave and social insurance .
The aim of this draft bill is to cut red tape and simplify the procedures for applying for residence and work in an EU Member State , both for migrants and their employers , by means of a combined residence and work permit .
The proposal does not specify the conditions for admitting third-country nationals .
Member States retain their power to set these admission criteria and the number of migrants they wish to admit to their own country with a view to taking up employment .
The new rules will be applied to non-EU citizens already living legally in a Member State or wishing to do so .
I voted in favour of Mrs Mathieu 's proposal for a directive on the single application procedure for a residence and work permit for third-country nationals .
I did so because I think it is important for Europe to equip itself with EU-wide rules to manage the influx of manpower from third countries , both for economic and social reasons .
Labour immigration can increase the competitiveness and the vitality of the economy , helping Europe to tackle the future demographic challenge as well as possible .
The proposal for a directive calls on the Member States to adopt flexible immigration policies to support the long-term development of the Union .
In addition , it will simplify the often complex administrative procedures for receiving migrant workers , while also providing a tool to combat the exploitation and discrimination imposed on some categories of workers .
I voted in favour of this Parliament legislative resolution on a proposal for a directive of Parliament and the Council on a single application procedure for a single permit for third-country nationals to reside and work in the territory of a Member State , and a common set of rights for third-country workers who are legally resident in a Member State .
This matter is all the more relevant in the current economic and social situation .
Indeed , one of the best ways of combating illegal immigration and clandestine working is to develop balanced channels for legal migration which meet the needs of our labour markets , along with the social requirements of successful integration into the host society .
The Stockholm programme adopted by the European Council of 10 and 11 December 2009 calls on Member States to adopt immigration policies marked by flexible arrangements to support the development and economic performance of the Union .
With this proposal , Parliament wishes to contribute to the implementation of this programme .
It introduces , in particular , a single application procedure for third-country nationals wishing to be admitted to the territory of a Member State for employment , by : ( i ) simplifying the often complex administrative procedures for receiving migrants ; ( ii ) defining an instrument for the prevention of exploitation and discrimination in the workplace ; ( iii ) ensuring that labour markets of Member States will definitely be able to respond to the need for workers , now and in the future .
The Directive applies to all citizens admitted to the territory for work and those who were initially admitted for other reasons and who have subsequently obtained a work permit in accordance with the provisions of national or EU law .
This proposal , therefore , contributes to promoting a common approach from the 27 Member States with regard to economic migration , which is why I reiterate my vote in favour .
in writing . - ( RO ) Economic immigration is a reality on which we must impose order , but it is also a necessity in view of the demographic and economic challenges which the EU will face in the near future .
Immigration policy can be regarded as an instrument for regulating our labour needs , thereby helping to implement the Europe 2020 Strategy .
Having a single procedure enabling a single document to be issued authorising residence and access to the labour market marks a considerable simplification of the admission system .
The directive will apply not only to any third-country national admitted to the territory of a Member State for employment purposes , but also to all those who were originally admitted for other purposes but who have acquired the right to work there on the basis of national or Community law . Each Member State must lay down the conditions under which social security benefits are granted , as well as the amount of these benefits and the period for which they are granted .
I regret that seasonal workers and workers posted within their undertaking are excluded from this directive , but I call on the Commission to table a proposal on this soon .
Given the demographic challenges that Europe will face in the future , it is vital that the EU develops a balanced and flexible immigration policy which allows it to meet its labour needs and contribute to the competitiveness and vitality of the economy .
The adoption of this directive , which establishes a single application procedure for third-country nationals who wish to be admitted to the territory of a Member State in order to reside and work there , and grants them a common set of rights in areas linked to the work market , will address these concerns head-on , and so it deserves my vote .
in writing . - ( FR ) Today 's vote in favour of the directive on a single permit for third-country nationals seeking to reside and work in a Member State is a further step towards achieving a harmonised immigration policy at European level .
The idea of combining a residence permit and a work permit is good .
It shows that the Union is genuinely committed to promoting legal migration and is not the European fortress that some people believe it to be .
To achieve this , it was important for Parliament to support the idea of a single application procedure that is easier and faster for both the employer and the migrant .
The European Parliament has also made the right choice by excluding four categories of workers from the field of application : seasonal workers , workers posted within their undertaking , self-employed workers , and seafarers , all of whom are already or will soon be covered by specific directives .
Another positive point is the flexibility given to Member States as regards the effective rights of third-country workers .
The 27 capitals will have the final say in determining whether or not to grant or withhold unemployment benefits and family allowances , and on the non-allocation of public housing during the first three years of residence .
These are simple , common sense measures .
in writing . - The directive as it stands excludes a lot of categories such as seasonal workers , intra-corporate transferees , refugees and posted workers , etc .
I totally oppose the further segregation into categories of workers and the differential treatment granting some workers and their family members less rights than others .
Even if some of these categories are covered by other directives , the example of the Commission proposal on seasonal workers shows that these directives are not sufficient in terms of rights .
We should stand for a common framework for all workers , as it would unify the legislation in working places by avoiding fragmenting the workers ' situation with the risk of jeopardising the integration of migrants and the cohesion in the EU .
Even if very important issues such as the portability of pensions to third countries no longer being conditional on the existence of bilateral agreements have been won thanks to Jean , I cannot help thinking that we should advocate the equal treatment and non discrimination of all workers in the EU .
That is why I have abstained .
Today 's vote represents a step towards the adoption of a single application procedure for third-country nationals seeking to enter European territory and work there .
The European Union aims to simplify administrative procedures and to issue a single document for both residence and work permits .
I want to emphasise that today 's vote does not focus on indiscriminately attracting new workers to our territory , nor is its objective to combat illegal immigration .
Every non-EU worker wishing to settle in Europe will still have to get a residence permit first .
The proposal adopted today also confirms full observance of the principle of subsidiarity , by setting minimum standards on rights and obligations , but leaving Member States the flexibility and freedom regarding the introduction of procedures in their national legislation and their practical application .
The European Union cannot limit the power of Member States in the organisation of social security , and each state must be allowed to establish its own rules in this area .
in writing . - ( NL ) Although the directive on a single application procedure for a residence and work permit is far from being ideal or complete , I voted in favour of it nonetheless .
I regret the shortcomings concerning seasonal workers , posted workers , the right to change employer and the right to enter and re-enter , because these subgroups will be protected in other ( future ) legislation .
All in all , this directive is extremely important given that it is the first of its kind to grant a common set of minimum rights ( including salary rights , equal treatment at work , pension rights and access to health care ) to workers from third countries who are legally resident in Europe , which it does on the basis of equal treatment with national workers of Member States .
In addition , the directive provides for a system with a single simplified application procedure for a residence and work permit .
This scheme is far from a complete common immigration policy , but in view of increasing immigration flows , the constantly changing demand for foreign labour and the prevention of abuse and discrimination in this regard , this first form of protection is essential .
Third-country workers will now receive greater protection than has been the case .
Taken as a whole , this was the deciding factor for my ' yes ' vote .
in writing . - I voted against as I feel that it opens the door to unfair competition to EU workers and low-cost migrant workers coming to the EU .
This report is aimed at establishing a single residence and work permit for third-country nationals in a Member State , and thus speed up and make more uniform the admission process , while also reducing its bureaucratic and financial burden .
Economic migration is now a reality which should be analysed in view of the development of legal and balanced migration channels to meet the needs of European labour markets .
The economic and demographic challenges which Europe is facing mean that a common immigration policy needs to be drawn up for the 27 Member States .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has established a new legal basis on this matter , the codecision process , and so I believe that it is vital to establish a common and harmonised approach in order to reduce the differences between national laws .
Besides what has already been said , the proposal also provides for equal treatment for national workers , creating a secure and protective legal status , since the immigrants participate in the economic activity of the host country .
Decisions that have been dismissed should be properly justified and transparent , and the costs should be commensurate with the services that are actually provided .
The adoption of this report is a significant step forward in protecting the rights of third-country workers in the EU by granting them a single permit for residence and work .
This illustrates the EU 's willingness to enhance its attractiveness on the world stage by facilitating conditional access to the European labour market .
I am pleased that the procedure for obtaining this permit has been simplified through a one-stop shop system , which will ease administrative procedures for foreign workers .
The creation of a single working document represents significant progress in the control and regulation of migration flows from Member States and will enable legal immigration to be monitored more easily .
With this text , Parliament has stated that controlled , regulated immigration of workers is beneficial to all .
Establishing a common legal framework for European and foreign workers protects our citizens against all forms of unfair competition in the labour market .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I support the idea of a Europe that protects its workers while remaining faithful to the principle of free movement of individuals , which is a cornerstone of the European project .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on consumer rights , which merges four existing Community directives in a single legal instrument .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that the fragmentary nature of existing legislation deters consumers and undertakings alike from participating in cross-border trade .
However , we must be cautious , because due to the nature of this area , it is rather difficult to fully harmonise legislation in the realm of consumer rights , and moreover , this may reduce the level of protection of consumer rights in certain Member States .
In the face of recent digital developments , the EU should update consumer rights .
This draft directive aims to provide better protection for consumers in all Member States of the European Union by enabling them , in particular , to enjoy an adequate right of withdrawal .
Every citizen and consumer should be guaranteed the same rights within the Union .
We will thus promote a level of consumerism that satisfies our citizens , who will find it easier to make purchases in other Member States .
Furthermore , given that it preserves the vital acquis of French consumer law , such as the ' latent defect ' guarantee , and the fact that all methods of payment are free of charge , I believe this new directive to be a step forward .
I therefore supported it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report which will be reconsidered by the parliamentary committee responsible .
This directive is aimed at combining EU legislation regulating consumer rights , safeguarding a high level of consumer protection across all EU Member States and encouraging businesses to provide services and sell goods in other Member States .
Currently there remain obstacles to the smooth functioning of the market .
Companies are not inclined to trade in other Member States and consumers are unlikely to award contracts due to the different rules that apply to consumer contracts in the Member States .
Legislation in force until now set only minimum requirements for the protection of consumer rights , and the Member States were able to apply more stringent measures , thus leading to different legal regimes in the Community .
I believe that it is necessary to review this directive again and strengthen its provisions .
We must ensure that the same standards of consumer rights protection apply in all EU Member States , enabling us to avoid the inconsistency that currently exists in the internal market , strengthen consumer confidence in the internal market and encourage companies to trade in other Member States .
The proposal for a directive on consumer rights presented by the Commission combines four previous directives in a single legislative instrument .
It is the result of revision of the acquis related to the consumer , which started in 2004 with the aim of simplifying and completing the existing regulatory framework relating to consumer protection .
The current regulatory framework results in significant compliance costs for European companies that wish to operate across borders and have to comply with differing legislations .
I believe the fragmentation of legal rules acts as a deterrent both to companies and consumers from buying or selling across borders .
The report under discussion aims to achieve necessary balance between a high level of consumer protection and the competitiveness of companies in the insurance market , while at the same time respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Therefore I support the rapporteur 's proposals that tend towards a kind of targeted harmonisation , that is to say harmonisation limited to specific aspects of certain contracts such as , in particular , information obligations or the right of withdrawal in remote or off-premises contracts , while managing to maintain a high level of protection for European consumers .
I congratulate Mr Schwab for the work done so far .
I voted in favour because the Schwab report has the merit of protecting consumers in their cross-border purchases .
The text voted today , in fact , proposes guaranteeing a high level of protection for the consumers of the 27 Member States .
At the same time , it seeks to protect and support companies , regardless of their size , which can provide goods and services to consumers in Europe without encountering unnecessary legal barriers .
By bringing together four directives on this subject , we hope to harmonise the current rules in a more defined manner , avoiding the fragmentation of laws which is very often an obstacle for both consumers and businesses .
In this sense , the document could contribute to a better functioning of the internal market by increasing consumer confidence .
in writing . - ( CS ) The approved report sweeps away the fragmentary nature of existing regulations in the area of consumer protection , which ends up discouraging consumers and businesses from getting involved in cross-border trade .
Consumers in particular often complain that they cannot make full use of the advantages of the single market , especially in relation to trading over the Internet .
In my opinion , the correct response to these complaints is an approved set of common definitions , such as the concept of a consumer , a seller or a distance agreement .
Also beneficial is the creation of a list of basic information to be provided by the seller before any kind of consumer contract is concluded , and the unification of the deadline for withdrawing from a contract at 14 days in the case of distance or off-premises contracts , including the creation of a single form for withdrawal from a contract .
Unfortunately , in the case of this report we have seen how the left has , at the last minute , failed to support the compromise agreed with the rapporteur , and we have therefore had to put it to the vote .
However , that is no disaster in my opinion , and on the contrary it is perhaps an illustration of the fact that the European Parliament works as a political body in which an open and genuine ideological conflict between the European right and the left unfolds .
It would be useful if Parliament were presented in this way more often .
In October 2008 , the Commission submitted a proposal for a directive aimed at bringing together in one text the acquis on consumer protection , which covers four directives on unfair contract terms , certain aspects of sales and guarantees on consumer goods , consumer protection in distance sales and consumer protection in contracts concluded away from business premises .
It is worth noting that these directives , which have been subject to revision , provide for minimal harmonisation clauses , which has led many Member States to maintain or adopt stricter rules on consumer protection , creating a fragmented regulatory framework throughout the Community with consequences in terms of the internal market , particularly for businesses and consumers in cross-border transactions .
I believe that this legislative text , which was voted upon today , strengthens consumer protection while taking into account the characteristics of the sector , in which complete harmonisation may not always be feasible .
I welcome the proposal for the creation of a mutual evaluation system , whereby the Member States must detail why diverging provisions of national law are essential and how they conform with the principle of proportionality and effectiveness .
I voted in favour of this report .
The objective is very ambitious : it means to create a complete reform of consumer legal protection which addresses the entire subject of contracts and which brings into play the 27 national laws that provide different levels of protection .
About a year ago , Prof. Monti said in his report to President Barroso : ' ... the legislator should find without delay an agreement on the draft directive on consumer rights , in order to ensure a high level of protection for consumers in an integrated retail market ' .
I fully agree with Prof. Monti .
The absence of common rules in various Member States has given way to fragmentation of legal frameworks which is harmful for both consumers and manufacturers and in fact prevents the realisation of a common market .
At a time of crisis like the one we are living through globally , Europe cannot afford to let its manufacturers lag behind and its consumers be insufficiently protected .
It is therefore a matter of urgency that we come to an equitable common denominator in order to harmonise laws throughout Europe .
We must all make an effort to reach an agreement with the Council , even at first reading .
Consumer rights are one of the main pillars of the internal market .
Their protection and security are vital to greater security in driving the acquisition of goods on a day-to-day basis for cross-border trade and , as a result , for the competitiveness of businesses .
In this sense , a balance between consumer rights and the cost that these may impose on businesses is crucial .
Moreover , it is important to bear in mind the different national characteristics and the protection that is offered , with due respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
I therefore believe that this is an area where , on the one hand , maximum harmonisation may be useful , but , on the other , minimum harmonisation may also be adopted according to the type of contract , as being more appropriate .
in writing . - ( PT ) This draft directive on consumer rights merges the four Community directives in force into a single legislative instrument .
On the one hand , it is aimed at ensuring that consumers in all of the 27 Member States have confidence in a high level of consumer protection , and , on the other hand , that businesses , whether large or small , can provide goods and services without unnecessary legal obstacles to consumers in the 27 EU Member States .
As for the consumers , this proposal aims to ensure that , no matter where in the EU they make their purchases , they have access to clear information about prices and additional charges before signing a contract .
It strengthens consumer protection against late or non-delivery , giving consumers rights in relation to cooling-off periods , returns , refunds , repairs , guarantees and unfair contract terms .
On all contracts concluded with consumers , the dealer is required to provide clear information that allows an informed choice .
I am pleased with the exemption of the requirement to provide information for contracts that involve ' day-to-day transactions and in which the trader has to deliver the good or provide the service immediately when the contract is concluded ' , as this avoids an unreasonable administrative burden .
This is yet another proposal by the Commission in which the promotion of cross-border trade appears to be the main motivation for exercising legislative initiative .
In this case , and due to the fact that this is an unoriginal proposal for ' protecting the interests of consumers ' , it goes back to arguing that free trade is the be-all and end-all of consumer interests , thus making , once again , a profession of faith in the virtues of the free market .
In truth , it is more relevant to the rights and interests of businesses than to those of the consumer .
The Commission is advocating a total harmonisation of the rules laid down for consumers .
If this harmonisation is not brought about by progress and by taking into account the legislation that is already in place in each country , in practice it could lead to the loss of consumer rights in some Member States where the legislation is more advanced in this field .
As this is a first reading , and given that in the course of the debate in the committee it was possible to improve upon the Commission 's initial proposal , we hope that it will be able to go even further in defending the rights of consumers .
We are at the stage of the first reading of the draft directive on consumer rights , submitted by the Commission .
This is focused on the promotion of cross-border trade , based on the principle that free competition is what best serves the interests of consumers .
In fact , however , it gives more attention to the rights of corporations than to the rights of consumers .
Moreover , the Commission advocated the total harmonisation of the established rules on consumers , without taking into account the legislation that is already in place in each country .
This could lead to the loss of consumer rights in some Member States .
There has been an intense discussion in Parliament 's internal market committee , and it was possible to reach a broad consensus that allowed the initial proposal tabled by the Commission to be changed substantially .
However , the conditions seem to be in place to go even further in protecting consumer rights by seeking to influence the negotiations with the Council in a positive way .
We therefore agree with the rapporteur 's request to return this report to Parliament 's internal market committee .
in writing . - ( DE ) Facilitation of cross-border trade by means of uniform rules and at the same time a strengthening of consumer rights , above all in connection with purchasing goods in another Member State , are the reasons why I expressly welcome the ' new ' Consumer Protection Directive .
The current uncertainty that still remains with regard to the applicable consumer rights deters companies from offering their goods across borders and consumers from ordering these goods , as there is a lack of clarity over what happens in the possible event of withdrawal .
A European single market expressly requires the removal of such barriers .
The uniform definitions proposed in this report , which among other things harmonise the withdrawal right and rules relating to unfair contract terms in contracts , will create legal certainty and thus increase the appeal of cross-border trade for companies , which will ultimately benefit consumers .
Chapter V was not adopted and therefore consumer protection will be applied throughout Europe according to the highest criteria .
Referral back to committee is therefore necessary in order to negotiate with the Commission once again .
Faced with a text that was more than questionable at the outset , I am delighted that some major progress has been made by the European left .
It was indeed absurd to impose on Member States legislation that goes against consumer rights and to force them to revoke some of their national laws that were considered too protective in relation to the directive .
However , I voted in favour of deferring the final vote in order to strengthen consumer protection against certain abusive practices , for which the chosen level of protection remains insufficient .
In any event , I will not vote in favour of a text that violates the most basic consumer rights .
in writing . - ( SV ) The amendments tabled by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection are , unfortunately , of poor quality from a purely legislative perspective , and Chapters II , IV and V are superfluous .
Amendment 141 is unreasonable for small and medium-sized enterprises .
In the compromise proposals ( block II ) , the restrictions on distance and direct selling are unreasonable and unacceptable .
in writing . - The Commission 's original proposal for a consumer rights directive was an unwelcome , unnecessary attempt to enforce maximum harmonisation for no apparent reason other that to satisfy those who believe that cultural and legal diversity runs counter to the EU 's principles .
The proposal would have led to a reduction in consumer rights in various European countries and there was no evidence it would have benefitted the market .
The compromise package agreed in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is far from perfect but marks a significant improvement and a base upon which we can build in negotiations with the other institutions .
in writing . - ( DA ) I am pleased that , after more than two years of negotiations in Parliament , we have succeeded in agreeing on a position which both strengthens consumer rights in the EU and makes it easier for enterprises to operate on the internal market .
On account of the decision to vote on the amendments in blocks , many of us are unhappy about the fact that we were not able to vote against certain amendments .
Allow me to highlight the following cases .
Chapters 4 and 5 : I would have liked a compromise , with Chapters 4 and 5 being completely removed from the proposal .
I know that the Council in particular , but also the European Consumers ' Organisation ( BEUC ) and the Danish Consumer Council , would have preferred that to the compromise we currently have with regard to these two chapters .
In this connection , we have to smile at the fact that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have chosen to ignore the recommendations of the consumer organisations .
Article 22a : I would also have liked to delete the much-criticised Article 22a .
It does not make things particularly easy for small and medium-sized enterprises .
However , I am more confident than my fellow Liberal Members from Germany that we will probably succeed in amending this provision during the negotiations with the Council .
One idea was to bring this article into line with Article 20 of the Services Directive , which would also reduce the risk of contradictory legislation .
in writing . - ( RO ) According to the EU 2020 Strategy , high-quality and environmentally sustainable production is one of the EU 's competitive advantages .
A high level of consumer protection guarantees high-quality products and improves consumer confidence , thereby making the internal market more effective .
I welcome the proposals tabled by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on a new consumer rights directive as they strive to ensure transparency for companies , with the aim of unlocking the potential of cross-border trade in the EU .
The new consumer rights regulations include almost every type of sales , in stores , via telephone or online .
They reinforce in particular the provisions on international sales , based on the proposals made in the report drafted by my colleague Andreas Schwab .
Unlike the four existing consumer protection directives , I think that the new legislation provides added value because it stipulates what kind of information the purchaser must receive from the seller , the delivery terms and the rules applied when the risk lies with the purchaser , not to mention the latter 's right to cancel or refuse purchases or the right to have an item repaired or replaced .
in writing . - I voted to send this report back to committee because the Commission 's response to Parliament 's amendments was woefully inadequate .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Commission 's proposal aims to improve the functioning of the internal market by reducing trade barriers across borders , but poses problems for both consumers and manufacturers .
It should support all efforts aimed at making the internal market more effective and encourage cross-border trade , but Article 38 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights requires that EU policies ensure a high level of consumer protection .
It is therefore necessary to aim to increase the minimum level of current harmonisation by applying available best practices .
It will be appropriate to develop a European system of liability in the event of non-compliance to improve consumer protection and confidence in the markets .
In line with the Europe 2020 Strategy , their high level of protection ensures quality products and at the same time fosters the performance of the internal market .
Regarding the rights of consumers , the current minimum regulations allow Member States to adapt European regulations to national principles : we should proceed further in this direction .
Unfortunately however , we note that the proposed directive does not take into account new products on the market due to changes taking place in development and innovation , as in the case of digital products .
I cast my vote in favour of the report on consumer rights by Mr Schwab because I see the need to simplify and complete the existing legal framework relating to consumer protection .
It is essential that consumers of the 27 Member States can rely on a high level of protection and that manufacturers , regardless of their size , can provide their goods and services to consumers in the 27 Member States without having to deal with unnecessary legal barriers .
Parliament 's action is necessary both to strengthen consumer confidence and to encourage and support manufacturers wishing to engage in cross-border trade .
The diversification of rules on consumer rights in Europe is a serious deterrent to manufacturers even in their buying and selling of goods and services across borders .
In particular , e-commerce is an area where consumers cannot benefit from the internal market nor from their consumer rights , which is due to the fact that manufacturers in a given sector are reluctant to comply with different rules as they enter a new market and thus run the risk of being sued in another Member State .
I voted in favour of the report on consumer rights .
The text replaces four existing directives with one , with a view to simplifying and improving the regulation of consumer protection .
The added value of the European Union must translate into a clear benefit for consumers by facilitating cross-border online transactions in particular .
The proposal for a directive thus seeks to address issues raised by consumer protection rules that differ from one country to the next .
Specifically , the text proposes a model withdrawal form for distance contracts and off-premises contracts , and the period of the right of withdrawal is harmonised at 14 days .
Similarly , the rules contained in the text would enable consumer rights to be strengthened with regard to information and delivery .
in writing . - ( DE ) In today 's vote on the text of the directive on consumer rights , some members of the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) in the European Parliament abstained .
The compromise adopted undoubtedly contains many improvements on the original draft from the European Commission .
For example , we have succeeded in ensuring that small businesses are not affected by most of the new rules or burdened with additional bureaucracy .
However , the text adopted today also contains rules that would heavily burden companies without increasing consumer protection .
Article 5 , for example , will mean that a company will have to provide very extensive pre-contractual information even when goods are purchased in store .
This will hardly benefit consumers , as they can assess the product directly in the shop .
Article 22a places companies under obligation , in the case of distance contracts , to supply their goods to customers in any Member State .
Such an obligation contradicts the freedom of contract and exposes small and medium-sized enterprises in particular to considerable legal and financial risks .
Furthermore , the FDP was unable to succeed in its core demand for the complete deletion of Chapters IV and V of the directive .
The FDP calls for these provisions to be amended during the trilogue negotiations with the Council and Commission .
This proposal involves the replacement of the four directives currently in force on contracts concluded away from business premises , unfair terms , distance contracts and the sale and guaranteeing of consumer goods into a single piece of legislation .
The aim of this draft directive is to increase the confidence and protection of consumers in the purchases that they make in shops or on the Internet , and to reduce the reluctance of businesses to sell in other EU countries .
The draft directive on consumer rights is aimed at ensuring that , no matter where in the EU they make a purchase , consumers have access to clear information about prices and additional charges before signing a contract .
In general , all contracts are covered , whether a purchase is made in a shop or at a distance , or away from the business premises .
This directive will strengthen the internal market .
in writing . - The aim is to increase the confidence of shoppers and provide transparency for businesses so as to unleash the potential for growth in cross-border commerce within the EU .
The new rules will cover almost all sales made in shops , by phone or online but will particularly strengthen the rules on cross-border transactions .
Buyers will know what information they are entitled to receive from the seller , and rules on deliveries will be spelt out .
There will also be clear rules on precisely when risk is passed on to consumers as well as on customers ' rights to cancel a purchase , change their minds or have a product repaired or replaced .
I would like to add that public transport and air transport tickets should be covered by rules on consumer rights .
For example , I could cite the case of airBaltic where passengers ' rights are being ignored and the company refuses to accept responsibility for poor-quality service .
in writing . - ( DE ) There are indeed a few points that speak in favour of the directive on consumer protection , such as improvement of the obligations to provide information , extension of the withdrawal period and also the increased obligations for sellers to provide protection in the case of online shops .
Consumer protection must be increased even more in order to create a foundation of trust between seller and consumer .
There are a few reasons why I abstained in the vote , namely that in my opinion inadequate sanctions are provided for , no right of withdrawal is planned in the case of Internet auctions and , above all , the definition of doorstep selling is very vague .
in writing . - ( DE ) This report concerns the bringing together of four different directives on consumer protection and thus contains the acquis communautaire since 2004 .
In some areas there are simplifications and additions .
It is important that any higher standards of protection in the Member States are able to be retained .
On the other hand , the bringing together of the directives results in more extensive harmonisation .
Therefore , I have abstained from voting .
I have voted in favour of the report by Mr Schwab as I believe that the report represents a fair balance between protecting consumers on the one hand , who must be protected from fraud and unorthodox behaviour by manufacturers and third parties , and , on the other , avoiding regulations that are too stringent for manufacturers , by imposing obligations which , given the size of their business and turnover , they sometimes cannot put up with .
Take the case of a craftsman who , in theory , can work outside business premises : he cannot be subjected to the same requirements as a large multinational company which manages and concludes thousands of contracts every day .
Harmonisation that is focused and balanced , taking into account the peculiarities of the European manufacturing base while preserving consumer protection , is therefore the way forward .
I voted in favour because I believe that the codification of consumer rights in a single document is a positive step .
It is worth highlighting the reduction of barriers to cross-border trade and commending the attempt to make the internal market more effective and promote cross-border trade through a combination of four directives that are now consolidated into one .
The draft directive does contain aspects that can and should be improved , but it is a very positive development in this area nonetheless .
The Commission 's proposal concerning consumer rights , filed on 8 October 2008 , aims to unite the four previous directives in a single instrument on the basis of the principle of ' full harmonisation ' .
The fragmentation of rules is , in fact , considered a deterrent for both consumers and businesses who buy or sell across borders .
Given the situation regarding the consumer acquis , the approach in favour of complete harmonisation in this proposal is not practicable at present .
Therefore , it is necessary to correct its scope by making a structural change .
In line with the resolution of Parliament and with the statement made in the working document of the Committee for Internal Markets and Consumer Protection in 2009 , a new approach based on full harmonisation is preferred , that is to say harmonisation limited to specific aspects of certain contracts while maintaining a high level of consumer protection .
Based on the above , I hereby give my favourable vote to ensure ever greater protection of consumer rights .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am pleased with today 's decision on consumer protection .
We have taken an important decision for Europe 's citizens , enterprises and the single market .
It is heartening that it was possible to find a sensible approach for a partial standardisation of the multitude of European systems of law .
Nevertheless , from an Austrian viewpoint there are a few problematic points which now urgently need to be discussed and clarified in the trilogue negotiations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission : ( 1 ) The ' procurement element ' must be included in the text .
Procurement element means , for example , that if someone asks a beautician to come to his or her house in order to utilise the beautician 's services ( in other words the person procures the business connection him- or herself ) , the right of withdrawal should no longer apply .
( 2 ) We need to ensure that no additional burdens for SMEs arise , provided that adequate consumer protection is ensured .
Ultimately , additional financial and administrative burdens on SMEs would be passed on to customers .
( 3 ) Chapters IV and V ( liability and unfair terms ) should be deleted , because even after lengthy negotiations it was not possible to achieve the desired full harmonisation .
Deletion would avoid a standstill and open up the way for new possibilities in the trilogue negotiations .
( 4 ) With regard to the welcome rule on Internet scams , a few adjustments still need to be made in order to ensure a balance between consumer protection and the burdening of businesses .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the compromise package on consumer rights negotiated between the groups , because it was possible to introduce some improvements to the directive compared with the Commission 's proposal .
It is important that the basis of the directive is once again minimum harmonisation and services like those in the health or social sphere are removed from the directive .
There was also an improvement in the area of distance selling , where the withdrawal period for consumers has up to now been a week , but under the European Parliament 's amendments two weeks would now be provided for .
Purchases at trade fairs are now also classed as direct selling .
In Austria , a purchase at a trade fair has up to now been treated , from a legal point of view , in the same way as a purchase in a shop .
However , some important points still need to be improved .
The highest priority in this regard is Chapter V of the directive , with which the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is completely dissatisfied .
We must prevent the list of unfair contract terms from being exhaustive - the Member States should not be prevented from extended their level of consumer protection .
Many consumers in Member States with a long tradition of consumer protection would otherwise find their protection worsening .
I have therefore also voted for referral back to committee , so that these essential points can also be resolved and improved .
in writing . - ( FR ) A well-protected consumer is a citizen at ease and a sign of maturity in our modern democracies .
It is this that makes the directive adopted today important .
Not a day passes in which the European consumer , when choosing to make an online purchase or accepting an amendment to a subscription on the telephone , is not faced with a question as to the conformity of the contract he has signed or approved .
It is in response to the often unequal relations between professionals and consumers that the European Parliament has opted for a right of withdrawal set at 14 days .
This is a clear signal for the same rights to be exercised throughout the Union .
It is true enough that the adoption of the Schwab report does not fully satisfy either consumer groups opposed to the principle of full harmonisation or the representatives of small and medium-sized enterprises and chambers of commerce who wanted the legislation to be restricted to boosting e-commerce .
The European Parliament has opted for compromise and has not yielded to the siren voices of alarmists .
It can take comfort in this choice from the recent European survey , which has shown that 79 % of traders surveyed consider that the legislation that has been adopted will have little impact on their foreign sales .
in writing . - We , the Greens / EFA , wanted to ensure minimum harmonisation for all EU consumers .
This would allow Member States to introduce or maintain higher levels of protection than the EU ' average ' .
In addition , we wanted to ensure a high level of protection for all consumers .
We were of the opinion that a good legislative proposal would be a good example to show citizens that the EU has their interests at its heart .
Following much hard negotiation and misunderstanding , we made good improvements to the text , notably the inclusion of digital content , the exclusion of health and social services , the inclusion of legal as well as natural persons and good provisions for withdrawal rights and passing of risk .
However , we voted against in IMCO as the flaws remaining were too large .
We could not accept a text that would mean a reduction in consumer protection for any EU citizen .
The text was not fully subject to minimum harmonisation , and the text of individual Articles was neither clear nor good enough to ensure that there would be no reduction in consumer protection for some EU citizens .
After today 's vote in the EP , the text is back with the Commission .
Europe 's task is to protect the interests of citizens and consumers in Europe and today the House finally recognises the just protection of these rights .
Until now , consumers have all too often risked being the victim of the market 's deceit and fraud , particularly due to their limited knowledge of their rights .
With the adoption of this resolution Europe expects all consumers to have clear and precise information , which will enable them to make informed and targeted choices .
Greater protection will be given , especially for online sales , and all citizens who have purchased a product which turns out to be different from what they wanted can request a replacement , a price reduction or cancellation of the contract .
All contract conditions deemed unfair will be listed in a proper ' black list ' and may not be used in any type of contract .
Historically , Europe bases its foundation on the single European market .
Establishing common guidelines appears , now more than ever , to be a priority for our institutions : only then can you guarantee increasingly freer trade for all European citizens .
in writing . - I welcome the implementation of rule 57 with the report returning to the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection as this will ensure greater consumer protection .
The Commission is seeking to simplify and complete the regulatory framework on consumer rights , and it is therefore proposing the fusion of the four existing directives into a single legislative instrument .
On the one hand , this proposal envisages giving consumers throughout the 27 Member States a high level of confidence in the protection of their rights , and , on the other hand , envisages that the entities that provide goods and services will reduce the legal and administrative obstacles to cross-border sales .
The adoption of this report is another step towards the full achievement of the internal market , since the existing legal fragmentation is a deterrent for both consumers and businesses when they want to conduct cross-border trade .
The proposal allows for full harmonisation , aimed at contracts signed away from business premises and distance contracts , particularly transactions carried out online .
At the same time , the rapporteur includes flexibility clauses that allow the Member States to maintain a high level of consumer protection .
The application of a set of rights and duties for consumers and businesses under a single legal framework will enable a simplified network for the growth of internal market transaction .
in writing . - ( LT ) The new rules intended to renew current EU legislation on consumer rights need to cover all types of purchases , whether they are made over the telephone , online , in a shop or at home .
The amendments should boost consumers ' confidence when making purchases in other countries and ensure the same conditions for companies , thus fully exploiting the potential of the common market .
On the other hand , the new rules must be balanced in such a way that they do not become an intolerable burden for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Consumer protection is very important .
Only by taking levels of consumer protection seriously , will it be possible to achieve full harmonisation .
It is also important for citizens to know their rights .
This is a problem throughout Europe , but particularly in my own country .
According to data from the Eurobarometer poll , initiated by the European Commission , the vast majority of Lithuanians would like to learn more about their rights as consumers .
According to the poll , two-thirds of Lithuanians ( 66 % ) believe that the Lithuanian legal system does not provide adequate protection by issuing penalties to companies which deceived or defrauded them .
The message is clear . We cannot ignore it .
Statistics also demonstrated that people have little confidence in the government and EU information offices - less than 7 % of Lithuanians trust these institutions which provide them with correct information and advice on consumer rights .
We cannot leave things as they are .
The EU must act now .
I support this report because communications , infrastructure and electronic services are essential in today 's society , and because the European Network and Information Security Agency has done important work , still underway , particularly on cybersecurity .
Extending its mandate and responsibilities therefore makes sense .
The European Network and Information Security Agency plays a specific role in supporting Member States in their efforts to cooperate in this area at EU level .
Information and communications technologies have become key elements in our economy and society as a whole .
They are vulnerable to threats which no longer respect national borders , as a result of their interconnection with and interdependency on other infrastructures and the inability to guarantee their security and resilience based on purely national approaches .
The report focuses on protecting Europe against cyber attacks and disruptions to IT systems by increasing the level of preparation , security and resilience .
I voted for this report as it aims to develop an IT network and data security culture which will benefit citizens , businesses and public sector organisations in the European Union .
I believe that the European Network and Information Security Agency 's mandate is needed to enable the European Union , Member States and stakeholders to develop a level of preparation and the capacity to prevent and detect network and data security problems , and to respond to them more effectively .
Even though the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) expires on 13 March 2012 , the European Union must still take measures in this area .
It was therefore necessary to adopt an extension of the Agency 's mandate , which would guarantee coherence and continuity on the issue of network and information security .
This explains why I voted in favour of this text .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report extending the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) until the adoption of a new regulation on this agency 's revised provisions and principles at work .
ENISA was established in 2004 for an initial period of five years , with the main goal of ensuring a high and effective level of network and information security within the Union , thus contributing to the smooth functioning of the internal market .
Recent cyber attacks in the Member States are making us rethink and reformulate the Agency 's mandate to attain a more flexible response capability and to bolster the Agency 's operational efficiency .
Giving all EU citizens the opportunity to use digital technology , and ensuring confidence in the Internet and its security , is one of the key objectives of the Digital Agenda for Europe .
Once ENISA has been modernised , the latest information will be gathered from European countries , there will be encouragement to share best practices and the European Union and the Member States will be better prepared to prevent , detect and respond more effectively to network and information security problems .
in writing . - ( BG ) I supported Giles Chichester 's report on establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency as regards its duration because I think that information and communications technology ( ICT ) has become the backbone of the European economy and society as a whole .
ICT is vulnerable to threats which come from outside national borders and change as the technologies and market evolve .
Since ICT is global , interconnected and dependent on another infrastructure , its security and resilience cannot be guaranteed based on purely national and uncoordinated approaches .
At the same time , the challenges associated with network and information systems are rapidly evolving .
Network and information systems must have effective protection against any kind of intrusion and outages , including attacks carried out by people .
I voted in favour of this report since I agree with the need to extend the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency .
This body , established by the European Union in 2004 for a five-year term , now needs a further extension in order to make it relevant to present-day needs and security risks .
Indeed , the increasingly heavy use of computer communication facilitates the work of many , but is often also a danger , especially for children .
Precise rules are needed to protect users .
However , changes to the regulation require more time , and this is why it is necessary to extend the mandate of the Agency .
I decided to vote for this report as I feel it is necessary to extend the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency until 2013 .
This agency was set up for a period of five years in March 2004 , which was then extended until March 2012 .
The main objective was to guarantee effective security for the EU 's IT networks .
Since we are living in a world which has become increasingly dependent on the Internet , we must increase our awareness of the problem of Internet security as cybercrime is not merely virtual , but has a real impact on our lives .
This issue also features on NATO 's agenda , resulting in an EU-US working group being set up to tackle IT crime and security , which marks a very important step in protecting the IT infrastructure .
I truly believe that we still need the European Network and Information Security Agency .
in writing . - I was delighted to vote in favour of the extension of the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) until September 2013 .
This agency was established in 2002 for an initial period of five years .
ENISA 's mandate is important as it was set by the EU to carry out very specific technical and scientific tasks in the field of information security .
It is important to have such an agency in place in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market that concretely affects the daily lives of the citizens and business alike , using broadband , online banking , e-commerce and mobile phones .
Given the fact that attacks on information systems are constantly increasing , it is a critical time to have effective security measures in place in order to protect the integrity of Europe 's information systems .
A top-down EU approach is required to protect the information society sector .
Member States cannot do this sufficiently by themselves .
It is estimated that the necessary funding for the extension of ENISA 's current mandate would be EUR 12.698 million in commitments .
Network and information security is a growing concern not only for political decision makers , but for all those who increasingly use it to interact with each other and with the state authorities .
The same care and attention that once guided public efforts to prosecute violation of correspondence should now be required for the security of the new forms of communication .
These are more sophisticated , and so they need to be monitored constantly and updated continuously .
I agree with extending the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency by 18 months , as proposed by the Commission and voted upon by the parliamentary committee , so as to allow a rich and fruitful discussion between the European institutions , involving the people , about the challenges , priorities and responsibilities of the agency , and at the same time to avoid the legal vacuum that would be caused if the mandate were not extended .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report focuses on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 460 / 2004 , which established the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) .
ENISA was created in 2004 with an initial period of five years , and was aimed at supporting the functioning of the internal market by controlling network security and ensuring the flow of information within the EU .
With widespread access to computer facilities and the streamlining and flexibility of networks came the first attacks by so-called hackers , jeopardising the security of networks and information .
Recently , the world has been shocked by the revelations made by the Wikileaks website .
In March 2009 , the Commission asked ENISA to support the Member States in their protection against cyber-attacks and disturbances .
In July of the same year , the Member States supported the extension of ENISA 's mandate .
Given that issues linked to network security and the flow of information have a key role in the Digital Agenda for Europe ( Europe 2020 ) , I would like to express my agreement with the extension of ENISA 's mandate by another 18 months .
We recognise the importance of network and information security in the many areas of activity in which these are socially relevant today .
However , the mechanisms that ensure this security cannot be decoupled from the political and social context in which they are developed and implemented .
In particular , we cannot ignore the fact that the inherent approach for enhancing security and monitoring cyberspace have not always properly ensured that there is respect for the rights , freedoms and guarantees of the public .
We believe that it is particularly significant that the EU is funding research programmes of large multinationals which dominate the technologies that allow governments to spy on Internet users , while creating and developing agencies such as ENISA , which will pay for the use of these same technologies .
As the Internet is acknowledged to be one of the most important public spaces in the 21st century , it is important to make the most of it , rather than opening the way for the appropriation of this space for economic power , and thus using the benefit of the few , at the expense of the vast majority and its use in the advancement of social progress .
The extension of the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) and the strengthening of its resources , supposedly in the interests of a higher level of security for information networks within the EU , is part of an approach towards enhancing security which does not always properly respect the rights , freedoms and guarantees of the public .
We must beware that a tool for oppressing and repressing the people is not created in the name of greater monitoring of cyberspace .
The Internet and its various tools are not in themselves oppressive .
The issue that arises is the political and social context in which they are used .
In view of this , it is particularly significant that the EU is funding research programmes of the large multinationals which dominate the technologies that allow governments to spy on Internet users , while creating and developing agencies such as ENISA , which will pay for the use of these same technologies .
The Internet is recognised as being one of the most important public spaces in the 21st century .
However , all this care is not enough to prevent the appropriation of this space , which was created by human knowledge , from serving policies that are subject to economic power and facilitating its private use ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - It is appropriate that we vote on Mr Chichester 's report on a day when we have learned that the EU 's institutions have been subjected a large-scale cyber attack .
Information security is of increasing importance to all our citizens and I was happy to vote in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because the European Union Presidency 's Conference Conclusions at the Ministerial Conference on Critical Information Infrastructure Protection held in Tallinn stress that in order to address new and long-term problems in the future , we need to rethink and reformulate the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) , to attain a more flexible response capability , to develop skills and competences , and to bolster the Agency 's operational efficiency and overall impact .
This would render ENISA a permanent asset for each Member State and the European Union at large .
The Commission is proposing a Regulation extending the current mandate of the Agency for 18 months to allow sufficient time for debate on a review of the Agency 's new provisions .
ENISA was established in March 2004 for an initial period of five years by Regulation ( EC ) No 460 / 2004 [ 1 ] , with the main goal of ensuring a high and effective level of network and information security within the European Union , and in order to develop a culture of network and information security for the benefit of the citizens , consumers , enterprises and public sector organisations of the European Union , thus contributing to the smooth functioning of the internal market .
Regulation ( EC ) No 1007 / 2008 [ 2 ] extended ENISA 's mandate until March 2012 .
The proposed amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 460 / 2004 which established the ENISA ( European Network and Information Security Agency ) and its duration , can only have my absolute support .
I voted in favour of this proposal because I am convinced of the importance of its work regarding the safety of communications , and of putting in place the jurisdiction assigned to it for the fight against cybercrime , as provided by the amendment .
In fact , extending its duration will , in my opinion , avoid the risk of a dangerous gap in the law .
Well aware that the work carried out by ENISA has significant community interest , I hope it will receive increased resources .
in writing . - I voted for this Report on the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 460 / 2004 establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency as regards its duration .
I welcome the first reading agreement .
in writing . - ( IT ) Information and communication technology ( ICT ) is now an integral part the economy and society of the European Union .
Today , due to the continuing evolution of media and information systems , ICT is increasingly exposed to threats that cannot be addressed effectively at a national level alone .
Therefore , let us welcome favourably the Commission 's proposal for a radical reform of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) and the extension of its mandate for another 18 months , which will allow us to overcome the risk of a dangerous legal vacuum .
There is no doubt that the proliferation of security requirements involve costs for companies that are active within the EU , resulting in extensive fragmentation and lack of competitiveness in the internal European market .
On the other hand , while the dependence on networks and information systems increases , the ability to respond to problems still seems inadequate .
ENISA needs , therefore , to carry forward its commitments by adopting strategies designed to identify risks and vulnerabilities related to network and information security , enabling us to identify and deal with the challenges that we will have to face in the near future .
The extension of the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) by 18 months , as proposed by the Commission , makes perfect sense , as it allows the necessary discussions to be carried out within the European institutions , involving all stakeholders , including the public , about the challenges , priorities and responsibilities of the Agency , and thus avoiding the legal vacuum that would be caused if the mandate were not extended .
The security of information networks is a priority for all those who use them .
In terms of security , we have to maintain the same attention that was given to communications in the past ; these have more advanced technology , so they require extra care .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) was founded back in 2004 .
Its job is to ensure network and information security within the EU .
It is also tasked with developing a culture of network and information security among citizens , consumers , businesses and public organisations in the European Union .
In the context of exercises , as recently carried out against cyber crime , it must be possible to guarantee security in the event an emergency situation .
However , the extent to which this is actually feasible in practice is not absolutely clear in my view .
I did not vote in favour of the report , as there is a danger that additional costs will be incurred by citizens without there being any tangible benefits .
in writing . - ( DE ) Despite financial crises , the EU has indulged , and continues to do so , in the creation of additional authorities - for every issue and every problem a new agency is set up .
Between 2005 and 2009 , the budget for the EU agencies more than doubled and the number of employees rose by 65 % .
The added value they provide is highly questionable , however .
The results leave something to be desired and the monitoring of them is inadequate .
On average , taxpayers have to pay EUR 579 million per year for the EU agencies .
I am very much against the establishment of new agencies .
It is unacceptable for taxpayers to finance the officials of the Member States with very cushy jobs in pointless agencies .
I therefore voted against the report on establishing the European Network and Information Security Agency .
The Commission has more than enough trained officials to take on this task .
Europe needs a system that protects computer and information networks ; this protection is guaranteed by ENISA , the European Agency for Network and Information Security .
Mr Chichester 's report is nothing other than a compromise between European institutions , which aims to extend its mandate and increase staff , with greater resources , and to give more importance to the fight against cybercrime so as to ensure better protection of information systems .
It is precisely because I think it is important to ensure safety in this area , since we are in the digital age , that I have voted in favour of the regulation .
I agree with this amendment to the mandate of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) .
The Agency 's legislative reform process , which is underway , still needs to be discussed at length , so the Agency 's mandate , which expires on 13 March 2010 , needs to be extended .
In fact , it is necessary to approve an extension that gives enough time for Parliament and the Council to hold a discussion , so that the Agency 's work maintains its consistency and continuity .
In view of this , I voted in favour of this amendment , which states that the Agency 's mandate should be extended until 13 September 2013 .
The strengthening of networks and information is a matter of great importance .
It is therefore vital to ensure that there is enough time for the discussions that form part of the legislative reform process of the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) to be carried out thoroughly , so I voted in favour of the extension of the Agency 's mandate until 13 September 2013 .
in writing . - Following the Ordinary legislative procedure : ( first reading )
The European Parliament ,
having regard to the Commission proposal to Parliament and the Council ,
having regard to Article 294 ( 2 ) and Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , pursuant to which the Commission submitted the proposal to Parliament ( C7-0297 / 2010 ) ,
having regard to Article 294 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ,
having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee of 8 December 2010 ( 1 ) ,
having regard to Rule 55 of its Rules of Procedure ,
having regard to the report of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ,
1 . Adopts its position at first reading , taking over the Commission proposal ;
2 . Calls on the Commission to refer the matter to Parliament again if it intends to amend its proposal substantially or replace it with another text ;
3 . Instructs its President to forward its position to the Council , the Commission and the national parliaments .
The increasing amount of private information circulating in computer networks around the world daily constitutes a potential threat if it is violated .
For this reason , I believe that the text adopted today would help increase the protection of sensitive information , which we need .
ENISA , the European Agency responsible for information security , must be given a stronger role in fighting cybercrime , which must go hand in hand with a simplification of administrative procedures .
I conclude by reiterating that this is also the position in my country , which wishes to strengthen the resources allocated to the Agency .
in writing . - ( DE ) In 2004 , the European Network and Information Security Agency was set up for a period of five years .
Its 57 members of staff are concerned with the development of network and information security for citizens , consumers and businesses , and also for public organisations in the European Union .
Its tasks included both risk analyses and preventative measures .
On account of the continual and constantly faster pace of development of information and communications technologies and their fundamental importance for society and industry , it has been found that there is a need for this agency in future , too .
However , for some time I have been calling for a business-based review of the EU agencies .
There are already initiatives in place for the review of the system as a whole and I will not vote in favour of extending this agency until a review of this kind has been completed .
On 11 March , Japan was struck by one of the most terrible earthquakes it has ever experienced , causing thousands of deaths and disappearances , significant material damage and a nuclear accident of extreme seriousness , affecting the Fukushima power station , which in its turn represents a new threat .
The European Union must therefore take steps to supply all the humanitarian , technical and financial aid and support necessary to Japan and the affected regions .
That is why I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this motion for a resolution .
Japan has been struck by a natural disaster on a massive scale which also caused a major nuclear accident , the true scale of which has so far been impossible to assess and which will have consequences for people 's health and the environment for decades to come .
The European Union immediately activated its Civil Protection Mechanism to coordinate its humanitarian , technical and financial aid .
This disaster should be seen as a starting point for thoroughly assessing and reconsidering issues surrounding the safety of nuclear energy .
With nuclear energy there is not only the issue of the operation of power plants themselves , there is also the question of the storage of waste nuclear fuel that will last for centuries .
During the earthquake in Japan , underground facilities for storing waste nuclear fuel were damaged , which would lead us to believe that the hitherto prevalent view that burial is the safest means of neutralising waste is not at all proven , and that waste storage facilities may become a great danger to people 's health and the environment .
I believe that it is essential to begin active discussions within the EU and at international level to make it possible to ensure the highest standard of waste storage in nuclear power plants already in operation and to seriously consider the benefits of the planned nuclear power plants and assess possible dangers .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because it expresses the solidarity of the people of Europe with Japan .
Parliament is highlighting the courage of the Japanese in this crisis , the most serious since the Second World War , which has so severely affected their country .
Among Japan 's friends , Europeans have immediately reported themselves for duty to lend a helping hand to the people afflicted .
However , the archipelago is faced with a nuclear problem that is of extreme concern and requires our full attention .
It suits Europe to provide all its assistance and expertise to the Japanese authorities in order to prevent a catastrophe of the devastating consequences of which we are unfortunately all too well aware .
As a Basque , I would like to express my sympathy for the people of Japan ; to say to them that their attitude in the face of disaster , the way they deal with the present and the dignity with which they look to the future are all proof of their greatness .
I should like to express my condolences to the families of all those who have died or disappeared .
Europe must also continue to lend them all the human and material aid that is needed after they disappear from the news headlines , so that they may once again become what they always were : a great country and a great people .
in writing . - ( BG ) I voted for the motion for a resolution on Japan as I think that it is our duty to show our solidarity with a people which has been hit with a triple misfortune and lost many of its citizens .
Unfortunately , the outcome of this tragedy is still unknown .
On the other hand , the disaster in Japan , especially the incident at Fukushima and the emergency situation following it , has brought back to the agenda the issue about the need for nuclear energy and its consequences .
At the same time , I strongly believe that we should not overdramatise what has happened and abandon nuclear energy in the heat of the emotion .
In my view , Europe needs nuclear energy , and a pragmatic approach must be adopted to the issue rather than us rashly deciding to shut down power stations .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because I would firstly like to express my condolences and solidarity with the Japanese people following the natural disaster that claimed many lives and the catastrophe at Fukushima nuclear power plant .
Devastated , Japan and its regions need all types of aid and support - humanitarian , financial and technical .
I welcome the fact that the European Union immediately activated its Civil Protection Mechanism to coordinate its emergency aid .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that the disaster at Fukushima nuclear power plant is forcing us to consider the situation and future as regards European nuclear energy .
In the European Parliament we should also discuss and assess the risk posed by nuclear power plants near the European Union 's external borders .
All European Union Member States should reflect and take action as regards nuclear power plants in their own countries , because of the possible threat radiation poses to the whole of Europe .
Immediately following the events in Japan , for instance , Germany shut down its nuclear reactors built before 1980 and , taking into account specialists ' research and expertise , is negotiating new alternatives to nuclear energy .
I would like to express my solidarity with the Japanese people following the earthquake and the tsunami that occurred in March in northeast Japan .
Serious flaws in the operation of nuclear power plants are raising fears of a nuclear disaster and forcing us to rethink nuclear safety standards in Europe .
I would like to call for a serious discussion about the need for safe nuclear energy in Europe and about the fact that Europe needs this source of energy .
Japan is overwhelmed today .
One nuclear accident after another is coming on top of a natural disaster .
This crisis is the most serious crisis that Japan has experienced since the Second World War .
The victims number tens of thousands , and the material damage is considerable and still difficult to quantify .
The European Union must deliver a response equal to the seriousness of the crisis .
Japan has urgent need of aid .
We urge the Commission to drive and coordinate the European solidarity effort .
Europe 's action must be clear , rapid and efficient in the short and long term .
As regards the Fukushima power station , European unease is legitimate .
The European executive must respond to this by asking for a series of crash tests to be carried out in an independent and transparent way on all of Europe 's nuclear infrastructure .
Finally , we cannot pass by without a collective reflection on our energy policy .
On energy saving , renewable energy sources , the energy efficiency criterion , we expect ambitious and conclusive decisions from Europe , as we do on European research , often well below 3 % of GDP .
I voted for this motion for a resolution as I think that the European Parliament and European Union as a whole must show their solidarity in response to the tragic events which have occurred in Japan .
The EU and its Member States must respond promptly in giving the humanitarian aid needed to help the Japanese population overcome the impact of the earthquake .
I also believe that it is paramount that the particularly serious nuclear accident caused by this natural disaster is investigated properly so as to avoid the possibility of such incidents occurring in the future .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , which shows solidarity with the victims of the earthquake , the tsunami and the nuclear accident that have devastated Japan , and which calls upon the EU and its Member States to extend all possible aid and support needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level to the regions affected , as a matter of urgency .
On 11 March , Japan was hit by a massive earthquake , followed by a tsunami that has caused the greatest nuclear crisis in the country 's history , with the Fukushima nuclear plant suffering serious structural damage , and since then having been in imminent danger of triggering a nuclear disaster of major proportions .
This disaster has caused thousands of deaths and is the greatest tragedy to take place in Japan since World War II .
At this time I would like to join with this House in passing a vote of complete solidarity with the Japanese people , and I would like to express my condolences to the families of the victims and all those who were affected by this disaster of unimaginable proportions .
in writing . - ( PT ) The recent unprecedented natural disaster in Japan has left the international community deeply saddened , and has moved the European institutions not only to an expression of solidarity , but also offers of technical and humanitarian aid .
The problems that have occurred at the Fukushima nuclear plant have put the discussion of energy issues at the top of the agenda once again .
Indeed , 30 % of the energy consumed by the EU is of nuclear origin ; there are countries where domestic production is at 80 % , such as France , and countries without any nuclear plants , such as Portugal and Austria .

Parliament has discussed this issue on several occasions and has concluded that there is a need , despite environmental issues , for the EU and its Member States to encourage and support the generation of so-called ' green energy ' .
I therefore wholeheartedly support this resolution , which seeks , firstly , to develop a plan for verifying the security of all European nuclear power plants , and , on the other , to significantly increase energy production from renewable sources so that it becomes the main source of energy in the EU .
We should also stress the need for energy efficiency and the fulfilment of the EU 2020 objectives .
The motion for a resolution is focused on what we believe to be essential at this time : expressing complete solidarity with the Japanese people , especially the victims of the disaster that has struck the country , and their families .
The EU should express this solidarity in a concrete way by making available forms of aid which are deemed necessary in the appropriate areas , to be defined and implemented in conjunction with the Japanese authorities .
We therefore supported the resolution and voted in favour .
Alongside this resolution there are issues relating to nuclear safety , and the lessons to be learnt from what has happened at the Fukushima plant , a subject which we were able to address during the debate .
In particular , there is a need to review and , if necessary , adjust redundancies in the security systems in the existing plants in EU Member States .
There is also a need to undertake a broad discussion as a society about the energy issue , our present and future needs , and how these can be met .
This should be done in a lucid way , with information about the impact , potential and limitations of each of the different types of energy .
We voted in favour of solidarity with the Japanese Government following its threefold disaster - the earthquake , the tsunami and the nuclear accident - which has struck the country .
In a joint resolution submitted by all of the political groups , Parliament asks the EU and its Member States to extend all possible aid and support needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level to Japan .
The devastating earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan on 11 March caused thousands of deaths and missing persons , along with considerable material damage .
The disaster also caused an extremely serious nuclear accident which is affecting the Fukushima nuclear plant and constitutes a new threat .
We would therefore like to express our complete solidarity with the victims of this threefold disaster , at a time when the level of human losses and material damage has not yet been fully assessed .
By the same token , we would like to highlight the ' mobilisation , courage and determination ' of the Japanese people in the face of this disaster , and call upon the EU and its Member States to extend all possible aid and support needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level to Japan and the regions affected , as a priority .
The composure and decorum of the population of Japan is the only consolation in the apocalyptic vision and the media have shown this to the whole world .
An endless tragedy in which man 's limitations are made most apparent and surprisingly relevant when confronted with the relentless force of nature .
Global solidarity and concrete assistance , generously provided , are the right and dutiful response of the international community .
Each of us will remember the heroic example of those volunteers - mostly retired firemen - who offered their lives to help put out the fires in the reactors at Fukushima .
It represents an example for Japan and for us all , while underlining the need for Europe to adopt a strategy for natural and man-made disasters .
As explained , I support the resolution on Japan with conviction .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because the devastating earthquake and the tsunami which struck Japan and the Pacific region on 11 March this year resulted in the death or disappearance of thousands of people and caused considerable material damage .
The disaster also caused an extremely serious nuclear accident , which is affecting Fukushima nuclear power plant and constitutes a fresh threat .
The Prime Minister of Japan , Naoto Kan , has stated that the country is facing its most serious crisis in 65 years , since the Second World War .
At the same time I would like to offer the Japanese people my sympathy and support following this natural disaster and catastrophe which claimed many lives .
I am pleased that the European Parliament also expresses its most complete solidarity with the Japanese people and government and presents its sincere condolences to the victims of this threefold disaster , bearing in mind that the human losses and material damage have not yet been fully assessed .
It also welcomes the mobilisation , courage and determination of the Japanese people and of the authorities in response to this disaster , and calls on the Union and its Member States , as a priority , to give Japan and the disaster regions all necessary humanitarian , technical and financial aid and support .
It is good that the Union immediately activated its Civil Protection Mechanism to coordinate its emergency aid .
However , it is becoming clear that the disaster in Japan is forcing us to fundamentally reconsider the issue of nuclear security , and we must strengthen nuclear safety throughout the entire European Union .
Today 's motion for a resolution to give support to Japan has been voted in unanimously by all political groups in Parliament in order to express our closeness to Japan , the protagonist of the tragic events of 11 March 2011 .
I supported the resolution because , despite the economic and financial downturn and the instability in North African countries , European institutions should not and cannot fail to support Japan both economically and in terms of humanitarian aid .
What occurred has produced and will continue to produce inevitable economic and financial difficulties , creating unavoidable repercussions in the European and world markets .
The meeting between the EU and Japan , scheduled for May here in Brussels , can represent the beginning of the collaboration and support which the EU must guarantee in setting itself up as a key partner for reconstruction , helping Japan whether it be with technical assistance in the energy sector or strengthening business relationships aimed at quickly rebuilding this great world power .
Moreover , I consider it fitting that the European Ministers of Energy have decided to give priority to safety in European nuclear plants , emphasising the importance of greater European coordination during the modernisation of nuclear facilities .
For two weeks now , one of the most serious nuclear accidents in history has been played out in Japan .
It is still too early to gauge the full extent of the disaster , but it is evident that , apart from Chernobyl , no place on Earth has yet been stricken by civil nuclear technology .
The situation at Fukushima arouses dread and compassion in all of us , and asks questions of our own system for producing nuclear energy .
For all that , I find it particularly scandalous that legitimate concerns aroused by this period of crisis should be exploited for partisan ends .
It is not a question of banning the debate on nuclear power .
As with any issue , and particularly for those of such strategic importance , democratic debate must enable wise solutions to be adopted .
Since I do not believe that emotion is a good counsellor , I supported the emergency resolution of the European Parliament .
It sends a message of firm support to our Japanese friends without permitting the intrusion of domestic concerns that would not respect the period of decency that is both necessary and indispensable .
We should pay the utmost attention and respond urgently to the situation in Japan in the aftermath of the terrible disaster , and provide not only moral , but also economic , humanitarian and political support .
We should acknowledge the way in which the Japanese people have conducted themselves and the actions of the rescue and prevention services .
Other parts of the world , including Europe , should learn lessons from this disaster .
We have areas of seismic activity .
Lisbon suffered a great deal of damage as a result of a tsunami centuries ago , as did Messina at a later date and Skopje due to an earthquake 50 years ago .
We have been working for years on an early-warning system , and yet we still do not have anything substantial to show for it .
We should accelerate work dramatically on this project .
Early warnings may prevent unnecessary deaths , and even many thousands of such deaths .
in writing . - One of course has to agree with the joint resolution tabled on behalf of the political groups on the triple tragedies in Japan of earthquake , tsunami and nuclear accident and join in expressing Europe 's condolences for those who lost their lives in these awful events .
However , Japan 's appreciation of our sincerity behind this resolution will , I am sure , be tempered - when it is adopted almost unanimously tomorrow - by the actions of Member States that have either at best overreacted and threatened public panic or at worst used the opportunity to impose protectionist measures .
The Spanish Government has urged that goods from Japan should be checked carefully for radiation , the Netherlands has cautioned dock workers to handle all containers from Japan with care , France is demanding a check on all goods before being exported from Japan and German customs is demanding random checks for radiation on all goods , including cars , imported from Japan .
Most of these restrictions have been imposed on goods that had been produced and left Japanese ports weeks if not months before the earthquake !
So much for solidarity !
in writing . - ( IT ) The disaster which has hit Japan owing to an earthquake and a tsunami of surprising proportions has left us all with a sense of profound sorrow at the immense loss of life and substantial damage to property .
Let us then , as MEPs , express all our sincere sympathy to the people and government of Japan .
Our thoughts and those of all European citizens go out to the thousands of people who will now have to rebuild their lives and their communities .
At the same time , we are impressed by the rapid and decisive action of local authorities and emergency services and by the exemplary courage and determination of the Japanese people .
Although the EU has already activated its Civil Protection Mechanism by sending experts from Europe to coordinate emergency aid , we also urge Member States , as a priority , to support disaster areas with all the humanitarian , technical and financial help and support they need .
Recalling the strong friendship and close political and economic relations that bind the EU to Japan , we are determined to support this country struggling to overcome the challenges it faces , including the threat of a real nuclear catastrophe .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution expressing the solidarity of members of the European Parliament with the Japanese people and their government after the striking events of recent days .
We wish to see the Union and the Member States supply all the humanitarian , technical and financial aid and support necessary to Japan and the affected regions .
It is the duty of Parliament to express its solidarity with the Japanese government following its threefold disaster - the earthquake , the tsunami and the nuclear accident - which has struck the country .
In this joint resolution submitted by all of the political groups , we call upon the EU and its Member States to extend all possible aid and support needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level to Japan .
The devastating earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan on 11 March caused thousands of deaths and missing persons , along with considerable material damage .
The disaster also caused an extremely serious nuclear accident which is affecting the Fukushima nuclear plant and itself constitutes a serious threat .
It is also our duty to express our complete solidarity with the Japanese people and their government , and to send our condolences to the victims of this threefold disaster .
Faced with the extent of the tsunami and the magnitude of the earthquake on 11 March , I must express my complete solidarity with the victims ' families and the people and government of Japan .
I should also like to express my full support and my complete admiration to the rescuers and the staff of the Fukushima power station .
Fortunately , the European Union was in a position to respond rapidly to the Japanese request , in particular by deploying its ' Civil Protection Mechanism ' , which is designed to coordinate the actions of the 27 Member States in emergencies at the national , European and international level .
By the same token , the Union is ready to provide all its technical expertise in the nuclear arena in order to help Japanese and international experts to take control of the situation in the proximity and in the very heart of the Fukushima power plant .
in writing . - ( DE ) The devastating earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan and the Pacific region on 11 March 2011 resulted in the deaths or disappearance of thousands of people as well as considerable material damage , destroying the livelihoods of many people .
This subsequently led to an extremely serious nuclear accident in the Fukushima nuclear power station .
According to the statement given by the Japanese Prime Minister , Naoto Kan , the country is facing its most serious crisis in 65 years , since the Second World War .
In this motion for a resolution , the European Parliament expresses its solidarity with the Japanese people and presents its sincere condolences to the victims of the disaster .
I have therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution and very much hope that the situation in Japan can be brought under control and that there will be a global rethink with regard to nuclear energy .
in writing . - ( LT ) We have watched Japan suffer a series of horrific disasters , the likes of which no other country has ever experienced together .
An earthquake , a tsunami , an accident in a nuclear power plant - any one of these catastrophes would be a major challenge on their own , but together they have placed an unbearable burden on the shoulders of the country and its citizens .
Once the fire that continues to smoulder at Fukushima nuclear power plant has gone out , many questions will need to be answered - could certain disasters have been avoided , and what safety improvements should other nuclear power plants carry out , so that natural disasters do not cause nuclear accidents ?
All countries using nuclear power should check the safety of their nuclear power plants .
Those planning to construct new power stations should examine more closely the dangers they pose .
However , at present it is most important for the European Union to show solidarity with the ordinary people of Japan .
The resolution on the situation in Japan is therefore crucial .
We must provide all the necessary humanitarian , technical and financial support to help people survive now and to reconstruct affected regions in the future as soon as possible .
The disastrous earthquake that struck Japan on 11 March cannot pass unnoticed in the eyes of the world ; it must be our cue to reflect on the political and socio-economic aspects of the disastrous consequences of the tsunami .
Like all my colleagues , in approving this motion for a resolution I express my deepest sympathy to the Japanese people who , with a great sense of civil responsibility , are reacting as best they can to the disaster .
I hope and request that the EU will take action to provide humanitarian aid , through its own civil protection services , and propose suitable projects to solve the problem of nuclear contamination through a joint project with the Japanese authorities to try , as far as possible , to restore the situation to normal .
On 11 March , Japan and the Pacific region were hit by a devastating earthquake , followed by a tsunami which caused thousands of deaths and missing persons , along with considerable material damage .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which expresses solidarity with the victims of the earthquake , the tsunami and the nuclear accident , and I hope that Parliament 's call for the EU and its Member States to extend all possible aid and support needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level to the regions affected , will be heeded with the utmost urgency .
At a time when Japan is facing its worst crisis since World War II , following the earthquake and tsunami that devastated the country on 11 March , I would like to join the expression of complete solidarity with the Japanese people and Parliament 's call for the EU and its Member States to extend to the affected regions all the help and aid needed at a humanitarian , technical and financial level , as a matter of urgency .
The earthquake and the tsunami that struck Japan on 11 March have led to the deaths of many thousands of people ( the current count exceeds 27 000 dead and missing ) , and have caused considerable material damage .
Under these conditions , Japan must now deal with a nuclear accident of extreme seriousness .
As Japan has not experienced such a crisis since the Second World War , I fully support the resolution of the European Parliament on the situation in that country .
I also call upon the EU to provide Japan with all the humanitarian , technical and financial assistance possible , including medical supplies , mattresses , tents , food , experts and specialists in radioactivity and nuclear energy ...
I also wish to put on record my fullest solidarity with the Japanese people .
I congratulate them on their mobilisation , their courage and their determination in the face of such a disaster .
Moreover , given the gravity of the situation in the Fukushima power station , I call on the Japanese Government to demonstrate the fullest transparency and on the Member States of the EU to organise a broad public debate on energy , one that is not solely restricted to nuclear .
in writing . - I very much support this resolution that states : ' 1 .
Expresses its most complete solidarity with the Japanese people and government and presents its sincere condolences to the victims of this threefold disaster , bearing in mind that the human losses and material damage have not yet been fully assessed ; welcomes the mobilisation , courage and determination of the Japanese people and of the authorities in response to this disaster ; 2 .
Calls on the Union and its Member States , as a priority , to give Japan and the disaster regions a